AD-758  136 


- 


Some  Biological  Effects  of 
Microwave  Irradiation  in  the  Rat 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


MARCH  1973 


Distributed  By: 

NTIS 

National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OP  COMMERCE 


THIS  DOCUMENT  IS  BEST 
QUALITY  AVAILABLE.  THE  COPY 
FURNISHED  TO  DTIC  CONTAINED 
A  SIGNIFICANT  NUMBER  OF 
PAGES  WHICH  DO  NOT 
REPRODUCE  LEGIBLY. 


SOME  BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS  OF  MICROWAVE 
IRRADIATION  IN  THE  RAT 


T.  Daryl  Hawkins 
H.  Mark  Grove 
Thomas  W.  Heiple 
John  Schrol 


March  1973 


Department  of  Microwave  Research 
Walter. Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


U.  S.  Army  Mobility  Equipment  Research 
and  Development  Center 
Fort  Belvoir ,  Va.  22060 
Inter  Army  Order  1247  and  2544 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


((•produced  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 


U  S  Deportment  of  Commerce 
Springfield  VA  22151 


mr*-? 


Unclarsificd 


?«•**»:»  •  v  l 


ooc;.y*'-iJT  cowmigl  d/.ta  -  ■:  *  d 

,  jrru'itr  t  jj*  *f»«  k.'T^n  of  fr.V.  »  -rr  .  i  #•?  •  ?*«.«  f  .•*.-*  mViir,;  u  »n».*-*ri*  ..  r  u*l  .  *  *■.;»«  *♦-*#  r  * .  -»  :;.r  i- 

«.  1,'J'C/K  I  SI.  CO 


cl 


Ca!ti>!MA  tl».i  A«.'  l'.V!  •>  ,  ftttnnm  t 

Department  of  M'crowavc  Research 
Walter  Reed  Amiy  lnslilulc  of  Rehear*. h 


r  i  a vii i  «c* i lo’j 
Unclassified 


’"b.  •*  *«  j  v  "  ^ 


W/«  rhin» Inn _ IX 


fill  C‘JT  TITLl 


20012 


KA 


J 


Some  Biological  Effects  of  Microwave  Irradiation  in  The  Rat 


[  4-  OC5C*i.P1IVIi  MOTf  S  f7 VpJ  oi  rrpott  Ct'd  inr/||.*»|  Vt*  t:*lc») 

i  Julv  1971  -  January  1  “73 


f  S-  A<  ThOKiH  jfi/t!  r..ic.c.  ir.itm*,  /«>*-.  I 

t 


/  T.  Daryl  Ha\vk*ns,  II.  Mark  Grove,  Thornas  W,  Iiniple.  John  Schroi 


t?  HI  POI;  1  DM  L 

March  1“73 

7*.  TO  1  A»  ?:o.  OP  P/.6CS 

34 

'/<».  NO-  a  t.bi  ^  J 

5  \ 

«■ M .  CONTRACT  OHCKiUI  NO. 

b\0  1247  and  LAO  2544 

b.  PWOJLC  T  WO. 

1J662712AJ21 

c. 

f. 

•i«.  OBIOi'J*  ff-i.'S  HE.-i-Fi  1  f-  w.xutr-.lij 

NA 

* 

vi.  oTHih'.  hc.pomT  ncu)  i"-.,  otnor  nrnt •■+ 1/.  thf.i  r ••  y  /•*  *r  r>*,y  *u  ». 

thi-Jf  c<  p-'Tt)  * 

j 

.  ..  .  i 

!  0.  L’.ST  -'l,?liT  ION  -f*T  fWFh  “  , 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited.  i 

I 

t 

t,.  ?.nP«M  iprtiT Nt*TLS 

2.  srOlirORlMC  MILITARY  ACTIVITY 

and  Devclop?r»ont  Center 
For.  Belvoir,  Vo.  22  0 (< 0 


r  •  3  /.DSTKACT 


This  report  describes  two  major  experimental  efforts  performed  by  the 
Microwave  Research  Department,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research, 

Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center.  The  first  study  examines  the  lethal  effects 
of  3000  MHz  exposures  in  rat.  The  second  study,  which  was  performed  con¬ 
currently  with  the  first,  examined  behavioral  performance  decrements  in  rat  as 
a  function  of  b  »th  wavelength  and  power  density.  The  lethality  study  indicated 
that  more  total  energy  is  required  to  produce  lethal  effects  with  low  power 
densities  than  .vilh  higher  ones,  The  behavioral  experiment  indicated  a  substantial 
frequency  dependent  effect  of  microwave  irradiation.  The  results  raise  the 
possibility  of  similar  frequency  dependent  effects  in  other  species. 


U  7W»  a  .tr  "•’t-.’T'ViT’TV  ?!T.  '  • 

•  •  NOV  «b  i>  *-/ 


*  •  »*-.•*»  •  -nwi  nafftwnn  utrjnvnNK  iww— mo  mm 

v‘  ..*.££•)  u'>  KO  I*?  »•  *.;.  1  jit!  U,  WHICH  IP 
E»*uUr.T|.  POf*  AP.MY  US  1C. 


PCjr  -rarsm+w  *  jooni 


Lvcurity  Classification 


ITnc'la  ssifiod 

Strunltf  t'!a if i ratio*? 


klv  rtonos 


Microwaves 
Radiofrcqucncy  waves 
Electromagnetic  waves 
Operant  Conditioning 
Behavior 
Performance 
Lethality 


I.  LL'llIAL  EFFECTS  OF  3000  121  x  IRRADIATION  Li  THE  RAT 


Intiw  ’action 

A  dearth  of  careful  puraiititric  investigations  of  the  lethal 
effects  of  microwave  irradiation  exists  in  the  world  literature. 

A  notable  exception  in  this  relative  void  is  the  work  of  Susskind 
(1961).  With  mice  exposed  at  9270  KHz,  he  found  that  the  average 

time  to  death  was  directly  related  to  the  power  density,  through 

.  2 
a  fairly  wide  range  of  power  levels  (68-380  irw/cm  ).  The  highest 

power  .level  resulted  in  the  shortest  time  to  death.  Progressively 

lower  power  levels  yielded  increasing  times  to  death.  A  threshold 

2 

for  lethal  effects  appeared  to  be  between  58  and  68  nw/ cm'. 

The  present  experiment  is  similar  to  Susskind1 s  in  that  we 
examined  the  lethal  effects  of  microwave  irradiation  in  rats 
across  a  wide  range  of  microwave  parameters.  The  emphasis  was 
in  determining  the  relation  between  the  duration  of  ndcrowave 
exposure  aid  the  lethal  energy  density  (LD50),  defined  as  the 
estimated  energy  density  at  which  50  percent  of  the  subjects 
survived  for  five  minutes  following  exposure. 

Method 

One  hundred  aid  seventy-four  mule  Wistur  rats  from  the  Walter 
Reed  colony  served  as  subjects.  For  several  weeks  prior  to  experi¬ 
mentation,  each  rat  was  raised  in  an  individual  cage  at  an  ambient 
temperature  of  76  i  2°F  anc  under  continuous  lighting.  The  rats  were 


V 


\ 


J 


weighed  doily,  five  days  per  week,  at  approximately  0730  hours.  When 
on  individual  rat  had  grown  to  within  the  selected  body-weight  range 
of  180  to  210  grams,  it  was  scheduled  for  a  single  microwave  exposure, 
between  0900  and  1200  hours. 

Each  rat  was  assigned  to  one  of  four  durations  of  exposure 
(0.5,  1,  2,  and  4  minutes),  providing  four  major  groups  of  animals. 

Each  group  was  further  divided  into  subgroups  of  7  to  14  rats  assigned 
to  different  energy  density  levels. 

A  chamber,  anechoic  for  microwave  signals  and  maintained  at 
70  ±  1°F,  was  used  for  the  exposures.  Power  at  3000  KHz  was  trans¬ 
mitted  by  an  ellipsoidal  antenna  six  feet  in  diameter.  The  focal 
points  of  the  reflector  were  at  32.848  and  74.848  inches  from  the 
vertex  of  the  antenna.  The  antenna  feed  consisted  of  an  oversized 
circular  choke  groove  in  a  circular  flange  mounted  flush  to  this  end 
of  the  exciting  waveguide.  At  the  frequency  employed,  WR284  guide 
was  used.  Ihe  phase  center  of  this  choked  feed  was  positioned  at 
the  32.848  inch  focus.  Polarization  was  vertical.  The  relative  phase 
and  amplitude  distributions  at  the  second  focus  are  shown  in  Figures  1 
and  2  for  the  E  and  H  planes,  respectively.  Since  the  phase  was  uniform, 
the  characteristics  of  the  microwave  energy  at  the  focal  plane  mimiced 
those  experienced  in  i  Fraunhofer  or  far-field  situation.  As  one 
departs  from  the  focus,  there  is  a  deviation  from  the  plane-wave 
characterization,  that  is  for  d  <  ^fQCUS  the  wavefront  is  converging 
and  for  d  >  dfocus  it  is  diverging.  Ihe  on-axis  behavior  is  shewn  in 
Figure  3  as  a  function  of  z  =  d  -  d^ocus»  where  d  is  the  axial  distance 
from  the  reflector  vertex. 


2 


E-PLRNE  PURSE 


!  • 


Y-DISTf)NCE,  INCHES 


4.00 


E-PLRNE  RMPLITUDE 


•2.00  0.00  2.00  4.09 

Y-DISTfiNCE.  INCHES 

FIGURE  1  y 


POWER  DENSITY.  DB  PURSE,  DEGREES 

co.oc  -to.  00  -?0.03  0-00  ,-10.00  O-C'J  10.00  so  *00 


B’TGURC  2 


V 


For'  the  3000  MHz  case,  the  axial  power  ^naity  at  the  focus  was 
2 

5.1  rrw/ciT  per  watt  into  the  antenna  system.  The  source  transmitter 

(.vide  infra)  had  a  maximum  CW  generation  capability  of  2.0  kw  so  that 

2 

a  maximum  power  density  of  10.2  watts /cm  could  be  achieved.  The 
antenna  was  calibrated  cn  the  Scientific-Atlanta  XYZ  positioner  and 
phase-amplitude  recorder  at  the  Georgia  Institute  of  Technology.  Point 
verifications  were  undertaken  using  a  calibrated  sleeve  dipole  on-site 
at  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research.  The  power  density  levels 
quoted  are  felt  to  be  accurate  within  1  db  absolute,  and  consistent 
across  the  experiment  to  considerably  better  than  that  on  a  relative 
basis . 

The  transmitter  consisted  of  a  sweep-frequency  generator  (in  this 
case  operated  in  the  CW  mode)  and  2  kw  klystron  amplifier.  The  klystron 
output  was  monitored  by  a  calibrated  directional  coupler  and  a  leveling 
loop  was  established  to  maintain  a  constant  transmitted  power.  The 
coupler  was  calibrated  cn  a  Hewlett-Packard  8542A  Automatic  Network 
Analyzer  to  an  accuracy  of  0.67  db,  mean,  indirectly  traceable  to  NBS. 

A  block  diagram  of  the  transmitter  is  given  in  Figure  4. 

The  rats  were  exposed  one  at  a  time  in  one  of  several  identical 
styrofoam  boxes,  which  ware  designed  to  minimize  head  and  body  move¬ 
ments.  The  interior  surfaces  of  these  boxes  formed  a  rectangular 
compartment  (1-5/8  x  1-5/8  x  6  inches)  when  a  square  rear  plug  was  in 
position.  The  inner'  edges  of  the  front  plug  formed  a  hood  which 
enclosed  the  rat's  head.  The  top  of  the  hood  was  canted  45°  forcing 
the  head  into  an  inclined  position.  The  sides  of  the  hood  were  1/4 
inch  thick,  restricting  lateral  movement.  Holes  with  a  diameter  of 


6 


one 


1/4  inch  wore  drilled  through  the  box  to  facilitate  breathing, 
through  the  center  of  the  front  plug  and  twelve  through  each  sice  and 
top  surface. 

Individual  exposures  were  conducted  in  the  following  manner:  • 

The  rat  was  permitted  to  crawl  into  the  styrofoam  restraining  box. 

The  front  and  rear  plugs  were  inserted  ar.d  held  in  place  with  rubber 
bands.  The  box  was  then  placed  on  a  styrofoam  platform  with  the  rat’s 
head  directly  facing  the  center  of  the  dish  artenna  and  aligned  with 
the  longitudinal  axis  of  the  antenna.  In  this  exposure  position,  the 
focal  point  of  the  field  fell  approximately  cne-inch  posterior  to  the 
interaural  line.  Each  rat  was  exposed  for  Hie  preselected  duration 
and  then  immediately  removed  from  the  box.  A  lethal  effect  was  defined 
as  the  absence  of  respiration  five-minutes  post  exposure. 

Results 

With  each  exposure  duration  the  percent  mortality  increased  with 
increasing  energy  density  levels.  There  were  also  systematic  differ¬ 
ences  from  the  shortest  duration  of  exposure  to  the  longest  duration. 
These  relationships  are  depicted  in  Figure  5.  The  plotted  points  on 
the  respective  curves  represent  the  percent  mortality  within  the  sub¬ 
groups  assigned  to  different  energy  densities.  Numerical  data  corre¬ 
sponding  to  the  plotted  points  and  the  number  of  subjects  for  each  sub¬ 
group  are  also  presented  in  Table  1. 

It  is  evident  from  the  family  of  curves  depicted  in  Figure  5  that 
the  lethal  energy  density  (LD50)  increases  with  increasing  exposure 
durations,  since  the  respective  curves  cross  the  50-percent  mortality 
level  at  progressively  increasing  points  on  the  abscissa.  In  fact, 


LM0TJ3 


tiie  increase  in  LD5C  values  was  dene  to  a  3  inear  function  of  the  expo¬ 
sure  duration.  Figure  6  illustrates  Idas  relaticr-ship  tore  clearly 
than  Figure  5.  The  plotted  points  in  Figure  6  rcjirccent  the  LD50 
estimates  determined  by  linear  exrrapolaticr  using,  the  data  from  the 
two  aijivxDS  at  each  duration  which  fell  the  clce.est  to  the  50-percent 
mortality  level. 
rfscussicn 

The  increase  in  energy  required  to  produce  a  lethal  effect  at 
4.0  minutes  as  compared  to  0.5  minutes  was  substantial,  amounting  to 
approximately  40  percent.  Until  determined  otherwise,  these  differences 
should  probably  be  attributed  to  heat  loss  from  the  subjects  by  acti  ve 
heat  transport,  by  simple  conduction ,  or  both.  It.  seems  reasonable  to 
expect  that  the  longer  the  duration  of  exposure,  the  more  heat  will  be 
eliminated,  serving  to  protect  the  subject  to  some  degree. 

The  present  data  with  rats  are  similar  to  the  mouse  data  reported 
by  Susskind  (1961).  A  comparison  of  the  two  studies  is  facilitated  by 
converting  the  present  lethal  energy  estimates  to  lethal  power  estimates. 
This  is  dene  by  dividing  the  respective  lethal  energy  values  by  the 
duration  of  exposure  employed.  The  letlial  power  densities  were  a 
decreasing  monotonic  function  of  the  exposure  duration.  This  relation 
is  depicted  in  Figure  7.  The  general  shape  of  this  curve  resembles  the 
curve  reported  by  Susskind,  although  the  power  levels  employed  in  the 
two  studies  differed  markedly. 

Although  there  are  some  similarities  between  the  present  study 

and  Susskind* s  study,  the  data  from  the  two  studies  are  far  from  identical 

2 

Our  lowest  lethal  power  (417  nw/an  ),  Which  was  found  with  a  four-minute 


ENERGY  DENSITY  (W-11  IN/SO  CM) 


LETHAL  ENERGY  DENSITY 


40.00  BO. 00  120.00  150.00  200.00 

•  EXPOSURE  DURATION  (SEC) 


240.00 


Estimated  lethal  energy  density  as  a  function  of  exposure  duration 
at  30C0  MHz. 


itw»m 


iff 


200.00 


2«.oq 


igure  7 


EXPOSURE 


120.00  160.00 

DURATION  ( SEC ) 


Estimated  power  densities  required  to  produce  a  lethal  effect 
(LD50)  with  four  different  exposure  durations  at  3000  MHz. 


13 


exposure  durations,  is  within  10  percent  of  the  highest  power  level 

2  2 

which  Susskind  used  (380  mw/cm  ).  With  380  mw/cm  Sussktnd  found  an 
approximate  lethal  duration  of  only  2.2  minutes,  considerably  less 
than  the  4.0  minutes  necessary  in  our  study.  At  this  time,  there  is 
no  firm  explanation  for  this  difference,  other  than  citing  sane  of  the 
obvious  procudure  differences,  e.g.,  species,  body  size  of  the  subjects, 
microwave  variables,  exposure  apparatus,  etc.  A  considerable  para¬ 
metric  effort  will  be  required  to  examine  the  general  relevance  of 
each  of  the  above  differences. 


14 


II.  BEHAVIORAL  EFFECTS 


IntxvJ.net.  .lea 

The  absence  of  system -tie  evaluation  of  the  lethal  effects  of 
microwave  irradiation  stands  as  no  exception  in  the  biological  effects 
literature.  There  have  also  been  few  studies  which  have  carefully 
examinee  behavioral  parf  omnia?  measures  arid  an  even  fewer  number  in 
which  standard  live-operant  techniques  have  been  enployed.  Justesen  and 
King  (1969)  have,  however,  rv:pv  led  that  performance  reinforced  with 
sucrose  solutions  shows  piugivsnive  decrements  as  power  levels  are 
increased  in  a  cloned-:  pace ,  mult  i-mn!',  exposure  apparatus. 

The  present:  study  n#p.lvyi.  mujv  n nv iitional  procedures.  This 
portion  of  the  study  •-x.imia  •<!  ■:!.  rf  t«vtn  of  microwave  exposure  on 


perfoniunec  r.itlirtkiiwd  by  Jo.!  j * •  1 !  Both  power  density  level 
and  wave  length  wujo  nyntriiut  iml  ly  evaluated  to  determine  the 
.relative  effects  of  cadi  variable  during  exposures  in  a  "five- space" 


situation. 


Method 

The  subjects  were  three  nule  and  three  female  Wistar  rats  obtained 
from  the  Walter  Reed  colony.  All  animals  were  approximately  one-year 
old  at  the  outset  of  this  study.  Prior  to  training,  tie  rat's  weights 
were  reduced  by  food  restriction  to  an  experimental  weight  approximately 
seventy  percent  of  free-feeding  weight.  Experimental  weight  for  males 
was  300  grams,  for  females,  200  grams.  The  rats  were  individually 
housed  in  a  temperature  controlled  chamber,  maintained  at  76  ±  2° , 
under  constant  illumination.  Prior  to  the  formal  experiment,  the  rales 
had  experienced  40-training  sessions,  but  had  never  been  exposed  to 


microwaves .  The  three  females  had  been  trained  for  120  sessions  ana 
had  received  numerous  exposures. 

The  training  box  was  made  of  1/4"  clear  plexiglass  and  measured 
12"  long,  12"  high,  and  10"  wide.  A  plexiglass  feeder  cup  was  mounted 
in  the  center  of  the  .12"  x  10"  front  wall,  3/8"  from  the  floor.  A 
plastic  tube  (Tygon,  5/8"  diameter)  connected  the  feeder  to  the  pellet 
dispenser.  The  response  bar  was  positioned  to  the  right  of  the  feeder 
cup  and  was  made  of  1/2"  plexiglass.  This  bar  was  mounted  to  a  re¬ 
tracting  device  by  two  small  metal  pins  which  extended  into  the  box. 

A  1-1/8"  thick  piece  of  absorber  (L’ccosorb,  Type  AN,  IT:  mere  on  and 
Curming)  separated  the  bar  retractor  from  the  wall  through  which  the 
bar  moved. 

At  approximately  the  same  time  each  day,  seven  days  per  week,  each 
rat  received  a  15-minute  training  session  on  an  FR  10  schedule.  With 
this  schedule  every  ten  presses  on  the  response  bar  automatically  pro¬ 
duced  one  food  pellet.  Solid  state  circuitry  controlled  the  contingen¬ 
cies  and  recorded  response  output. 

When  an  exposure  session  was  scheduled,  irradic  :ion  began  with  the 
onset  of  the  third  one-minute  interval  of  the  session  and  was  automatical¬ 
ly  terminated  with  the  offset  of  the  first  one-minute  interval  during 
which  fewer  than  ten  responses  had  occurred.  If  the  rat  responded 
throughout  the  cession,  irradiation  ceased  at  the  end  of  the  15-minute 
session,  resulting  in  a  maximum  exposure  duration  of  13-minutes.  The 
response  bar  was  retracted  at  the  end  of  the  session  or  when  the  irradia¬ 
tion  ceased.  The  primary  measure  or  performance  was  the  tine  to  work 
stoppage  which  was  defined  as  the  time  elapsed  from  the  onset  of  irradia¬ 
tion  to  the  point  where  the  ret  received  the  last  food  pellet . 


16 


During  an  exposure  series  tne  training  box  was  placed  cn  a  styro¬ 
foam  pedestal ,  front  of  the  antenna,  in  an  anccroic  chamber  iraintained 
at  70  ±  1° V.  Relative  to  the  antenna,  the  bar  and  feeder  cup  were  on 
the  right  wall  of  the  box.  The  bar  retractor  and  pel. let  dispenser  were 
located  to  tire  right  of  this  wall  and  were  shielded,  witlr  ceramic  absorber 
(Eccosorb,  lype  H— T ,  Emmerson  and  Curm.iing) . 

The  irau'.ini.ttiiig  antenna:;  employed  were  Seiont* if  iw-Aflanta  Series  12 
standard  g^iin  homs.  'fire  antennas  were  calibrated  using  tire  identical 
horn  technique.  A  sleeve  dipole  transfer  standard  was  then  calibrated 
against  the  measured  gain  of  the  Scientific -Atlanta  horn  ard  this  third 
antenna  was  used  to  establish  the  axial  power  density  in  the  experimen¬ 
tal  situation.  At  2450  If  Is  a  NAEDA  Model  8100  cosine  ter  was  used  as  a 
further  dreck  an  tire  exposure  level.  This  device  vets  also  standardized 
against  the  Scicntific-Atlanta  horns  as  mentioned  above .  The  trans¬ 
mitter  employed  was  as  described  earlier.  A  family  of  klystron  ampli¬ 
fiers  was  employed  appropriate  to  the  frequency  of  interest. 

The  axial  distance  from  the  center  of  the  antenna  horizontally 
to  the  point  at  which  calibrations  were  made  was  approximately  four  feet. 
The  training  box  was  positioned  so  that  this  calibration  point  was  located 
three  inches  above  the  floor  of  the  box  and  two  inches  into  the  box  from 
the  side  nearest  the  antenna.  As  a  rat  pressed  the  response  bar,  it  was 
typically  oriented  lateral  to  the  antenna  with  the  calibration  point 
falling  in  the  center  of  the  rat  at  shoulder  level.  Polarization  was 
vertical. 

Tne  microwave  exposure  parameters  were  as  follows:  Both  frequency 
and  power  were  varied  systematically.  At  a  particular1  frequency, 


17 


each  rat  received  a  set  of  six  succesi  ive  microwave  sessions ,  one  per 

o 

day,  at  each  of  five  power  levels  (25,  50,  75,  100,  150  nw/cm  ).  Each 

2 

rat  received  100  nw/cm  on  the  first  and  last  sessions  within  the  set. 

Hie  sequence  for  the  remaining  four  paver  levels  was  mixed  and  differed 
for  each  rat. 

Sets  of  observations  at  each  power  level  were  made  at  four  differ¬ 
ent  frequencies.  Ln  sequence,  the  frequencies  used  were  1700,  3000, 

2450,  750,  and  1700  KHz.  The  1700  KHz  observations  were  repeated  at  all 
power  levels  to  assess  the  possibility  that  the  extreme  effects  observed 
were  due  to  that  frequency  being  tested  first.  Typically,  at  least  seven 
daily  training  sessions  elapsed  between  sets  of  power  observations. 

This  was  required  to  allow  sufficient  time  for  transmitter  tube  and 
antenna  changes  and  recalibrations. 

Results 

Frequency  and  power  density  level  both  proved  to  be  of  major  impor¬ 
tance  in  determing  performance  alterations  obtained  during  exposure.  At 
each  frequency,  higher  power  levels  resulted  in  shorter  times  to  stoppage. 
Tne  effect  of  frequency  was  more  complex  in  that  a  non-monotonic  func¬ 
tion  resulted.  At  all  paver  levels  which  resulted  in  a  complete  cessa¬ 
tion  of  performance,  1700  KHz  produced  the  shortest  stoppage  tines.  Both 
higher  and  lower  frequencies  had  progressively  less  influence.  These 
frequency  and  power  effects  are  illustrated  in  Figure  8.  The  plotted 
points  represent  the  mean  scores  for  the  data  of  all  six  subjects  com¬ 
bined.  Scores  for  the  males  and  females  were  combined  since  no  major 
differences  were  found  between  them. 


18 


PPRGE 


The  U-shaped  curves  in  Figure  8  which  represent  the  mean  scores 
for  the  subjects  as  a  group  are  quite  representative  of  what  appears 
to  be  a  general  frequency  phenomenon,  since  the  respective  scores  for 
each  of  the  individual  rats  exhibited  very  similar  trends.  Data  for 
each  of  the  individual  subjects  are  presented  .in  Figures  9a  through  9f. 

The  effects  of  paver  density  appeared  quite  typical,  with  lower 
pavers  resulting  in  longer  times  to  response  termination.  However, 
this  relationship  was  by  no  means  linear.  Figure  .10  shows  these  power 
effects  somewhat  more  clearly  than  Figure  8.  Substantial,  curvature  is 
re  aled  in  two  of  the  plots,  particularly  for  the  1700  MHz  function. 
Since  only  two  points  were  obtained  for  the  other  frequencies ,  the  shape 
of  the  curve  is  indeterminate.  More  than  likely  curvilinear  trends 
would  have  been  revealed  at  the  other  frequencies  as  well  had  a  longer 
session  length  been  employed. 

Energy  density'  levels  which  were  required  to  produce  a  termination 
of  responding  (effective  energy  density)  were  a  decreasing  function  of 
the  power  density  levels.  This  relation  appeared  to  hold  for  each  fre¬ 
quency  although  fewer  representative  daia  ;x>ints  were  obtained  for  the 
least  effective  frequencies  because  of  the  fixed  time  limit  for  the 
exposures.  Figure  11  illustrates  the  effective  energy  densities  for 
different  power  levels  and  different  signal  frequencies .  The  most 

extreme  differences  between  two  power  levels  is  that  between  50  and  150 
2 

rw/cm  at  1700  MHz.  As  canpared  to  the  effective  energy  density  at 
2 

150  nw/cm  an  increase  in  energy  of  approximately  80  percent  war  re- 

O 

quired  to  produce  response  termination  with  50  nw/cm'". 


20 


MICROWAVE  FREQUENCY  (GHZ) 


Figure  9a.  Performance  scores  for  RAT  470  (female). 


X-il 


ijg 


;JS  2-SZ  Z-SE 

RICRSkSVE  FRE2JEXCY  i 

Sc.  SVrSarczaae  scats  far  SC  %TI  if esaLeJ. 


GHZ  I 


1 


3.09 


3.30 


Hgae  5d- 


T 


- 1 - i - 1 

1 43  {.CO  Z. SO 

MICROKP.YE  FREQUENCY  (GHZ) 


itofoegace  scares  fee*  *.91  (sale). 


-?y 


R A T  493 


i 

■ 

i 

i 


o  J 
°  { 

—i 

M  ■ 

! 

i 

i 

If 

o  i 

o  s 

£»  S 


O  | 


o 

o 

D 


0.53 


1.00 


— 1 — 
1.50 


MICROWAVE 


i  i - 1 — 

2 -CO  2.50  3.00 

FREQUENCY  (GHZ) 


Figure  9e.  Performance  scores  for  RAT  493  (male). 


JS 


ou 


OPPRGE  (MIN) 

!l  9.00 


Figure  9f.  Performance  scores  for  RAT  484  (male). 


§  FREQUENCY  X  POWER  SERIES 
*1 


o 

o 

CO 

\ 


o 

o 

o 

w 


o 

o 


V.  O  I 


CO 


UJ 

Qg 

C£  ° 

LU 

ISC 

o 

Q. 


75C  MHz 
3000  KHz 
2450  MHz 

1700  MHz 


O 

o 


5*°0  7.00  9. CO 

EXPOSURE  TIME  (MIN) 


11.00 


13.00 


Figure  10. 


The  relationship  between  power  density  and  exposure  tire 
work  cessation  at  four  microwave  frequencies.  Note,  the 
levels  were  fixed  and  exposure  time  was  determined  by  the  1 

been 'excluded?  n°  St0ppage  00 


power 


J  1 


EFFECTIVE  ENERGY  DENSITY 


1700  MHz 


) 


) 

) 

> 


2S.00 


- 1 - 1 - 1 - T - 1 

.  50.00  75.00  100.00  125.00  150.00 

POWER  DENSITY  ( MW/SQ  CM) 


Figure  11.  Effective  energy  density  levels  as  a  function  of  power 
density  at  four  ndcrowave  frequencies.  Effective  energy 
.  density  was  defined  as  the  energy  density  (power,  x  tire) 
required  to  produce  a  termination  of  performance . 


Discussion 

The  present  behavioral  study  provides  substantial  evidence  that 
rats  are  selectively  sensitive  to  intermediate  microwave  frequencies 
within  the  range  of  750  to  3000  MHz.  This  resiilt  was  quite  unexpected, 
with  the  exception  of  our  own  pilot  work  which  suggested  such  an  effect. 
While  the  present  study  was  in  progress  an  interesting  report  was  pub¬ 
lished  which  may  be  valuable  in  interpreting  the  present  results 
(Kritikos  and  Schwan ,  1972). 

Using  mathematical  irodelling  techniques,  Kritikos  and  Schwan  pre¬ 
dicted  the  distribution  of  the  heating  potential  generated  by  an  inci¬ 
dent  electromagnetic  plane  wave  on  different  size  spheres  having  electri 
cal  characteristics  similar  to  those  of  biologic  tissues.  Their  model 
suggests  that  intense  hot  spots  occur  inside  spheres  with  a  radius  of 
5  cm.  Maximal  heating  potentials  are  predicted  for  a  frequency  of  300 
KHz,  with  lesser  effects  predicted  for1  both  higher  and  lower  frequencies 

If  one  assumes  that  the  frequency  effects  observed  in  the  present 
study  wore  due  to  differential  generation  of  "hot  spots"  which  in  turn 
inhibited  the  performance,  a  general  predictive  value  can  be  attributed 
to  the  model  presented  by  Kritikos  and  Schwan.  The  extent  to  which  such 
assumptions  are  warranted,  however,  needs  careful  examination .  Where 
are  the  predicted  hot  spots  located?  Do  they  occur  in  the  rat  trunk,  in 
the  brain,  or  in  both?  If  such  hot  spots  occur  at  all  in  rats,  how  do 
they  combine  with  surface  heating  to  produce  biological  effects,  in 
particular,  behavioral  effects?  What  would  be  the  distribution  of 
these  hot  spots  in  moving  animals?  The  answers  to  these  questions  must 


29 


bo  obtained  in  order  to  evaluate  whether  or  not  the  correspondence 
between  the  present  behavioral  data  and  a  irode^  of  heating  potential 
is  anything  other  than  a  mere  coincidence. 

The  close  similarity  in  performance  effects  which  obtained  from 
one  rat  to  the  next  is  interesting,  especially  since  the  tales  and 
fatales  were  quite  different  in  body  weight.  This  suggests  that  body 
nass,  within  ranges  employed  here,  nay  not  be  a  particularly  influen¬ 
tial  variable  when  dealing  with  microwave  effects.  Michaelson  (1961) 
has  reported  similar  observations  with  dogs.  However,  it  should  be 
noted  in  passing,  that  such  a  conclusion  runs  counter  to  theoretical 
work  by  Hoeft  (1965). 

An  additional  interesting  feature  of  the  data  concerns  the  rela¬ 
tively  severe  effects  of  fairly  low  powers.  At  the  1700  MHz  frequency, 

2 

a  power  of  only  50  nw/ern  produced  a  complete  cessation  of  bar-press 

2 

responding  within  a  ten-minute  exposure  period.  A  level  of  50  mw/em  , 

.  .  2 
of  course,  is  relatively  close  to  the  safety  level  of  10  rrw/cm  estab¬ 
lished  for  humans  exposed  to  microwave  fields.  The  fact  that  microwave 
effects  are  found  at  power  levels  not  far  above  the  established  safety 
level  points  to  the  necessity  for  additional,  careful,  and  comprehensive 
examinations  of  the  biological  effects  of  microwaves,  with  a  variety  of 
species. 

It  is  possible  that  not  only  the  rat,  but  other  species  as  well, 
nay  exhibit  enhanced  sensitivity  to  certain  microwave  frequencies.  It 
is  equally  possible  that  a  frequency  dependency  is  not  idiosyncratic 
of  behavioral  performance  but  obtains  with  a  variety  biological  measures 


30 


such  as  lethality  and  thermal  allonges  in  the  gut,  brain,  eyes  and' 
testicles.  All  of  these  possibilities  will  of  course  not  be  realized, 
but  to  the  extent  that  at  least  sene  are ,  we  will  have  come  closer  to¬ 
ward  the  goal  of  gaining  an  understanding  of  the  biological  effects  of 


microwaves. 


REFERENCES 


boeft,  L.O.  Microwave  Heating:  A  Study  of  the  Critical  Variables  for 
Man  and  Experimental  Animals.  Aerospace  Medicine,  IS 65,  38,  621-622. 

Justesen,  D.R.  and  King,  N.W.  Behavioral  Effects  of  Low-Level  Microwave 
Irradiation  in  the  Closed- Space  Situation.  Symposium  Proceedings ,  j.969. 
Bureau  of  Radiological  Health,  (BRH-IDBE  73-2),  154-179. 

Kritikos,  II.  N.  and  Schwan,  H.P.  Hot  Spots  Generated  in  Conducting  Spheres 
by  Electromagnetic  Waves  and  Biological  Implications.  IEEE  Transactions 
on  Biomedical  Engineering,  1972,  BME-19,  53-53. 

Mdchaelson,  S.M.  Biological  Effects  of  Microwave  Exposure .  Symposium 
Proceedings,  1969,  Bureau  of  Radiological  Health,  (BRH/'DBE  70-2),  35-58. 

Susskind,  C.  Longevity  Study  of  the  Effects  of  3-CM  Microwave  Radiation 
on  Mice.  Institute  of  Engineering  Research,  1951,  Series  60,  Issue  382, 
(AD  269  385). 


32 


