ADA038320 


t 


f 


AD 


RCS  MEDDH  • 288  ( Rl 


RESEARCH  IN  BIOLOGICAL  AND  MEDICAL  SCIENCES 

Including 


BIOCHEMISTRY,  COMMUNICABLE  DISEASE  AND  IMMUNOLOGY, 
INTERNAL  MEDICINE,  NUCLEAR  MEDICINE,  PHYSIOLOGY, 
PSYCHIATRY,  SURGERY,  AND  VETERINARY  MEDICINE 


ANNUAL  PROGRESS  REPORT 
I July  - 30  Jiiih*  1976 


VOLUME  II 


WALTER  REED  ARMY  INSTITUTE  OP  RESEARCH 
WALTER  REED  ARMY  MEDICAL  CENTER 
WASHINGTON,  D.C.  20012 


O. 

O 


f > 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 

Destroy  this  report  when  no  longer  needed.  Do  not  return  It  to  the  originator. 


[Pll  Redacted] 

r.  - ' .. 


UNCLASSIFIED 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  Of  THIS  PAGE  (Whan  Dala  F.nffi) 

1 REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


ft  REPORT  NUMSER 


2.  GOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 


RCS  MEDDH-288  (HI) 


14.  TITLE  (and  Subtitle) 


CAL  SCIENCES,  INCLUDINC;  BIOCHEMIST RY.  COM- 
MUNICABLE DISEASE  S.  IMMUNOLOGY,  INTERNAL 


READ  INSTRUCTIONS 

BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

3 RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 


5.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  A PERIOD  COVERED 

Annual  Progress  Report-Vol  II  , 
1 July  1975  - 30  June  1976 

A PERFORMING  ORG.  REPORT  NUMBER 


[7.  Author^) 


Listed  at  beginning  of  each  work  unit  report 


8 CONTRACT  OR  GRANT  NUMBER!*) 

NA 


9.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

Walter  Reed  Armv  Medical  Centers 

Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

II  CONTROLLING  OFFICE  NAME  AND  ADDRESS 

U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  & Development  Command 
Washington,  D.  C.  20.314 

TJ  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  A ADOR ES i(ll  dilltmrnt  h'r.  ling  Olllri) 


16  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (a!  IM.  Rapori; 

Approved  for  public  iclease;  distribution  unlimited. 


M7.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ot  the  ebetrmet  entered  In  Block  20,  It  dilie rent  trom  Report) 


10.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  * WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

Listed  at  l>eginning  of  each 
report 

12  REPORT  DATE 

July  1976 

"33  NUMBER  OF  PAGES  7 

852 

"7s  SECURITY  CLASS  (of  INI.  ..port} 

UNCLASSIFIED 


15a.  DECLASSIFICATION  DOWNGRADING 
SCHEDULE 


IB  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 


I 19  KEY  WOROS  fConfmu*  on  reveree  aid • II  mcfiivy  and  Idantlly  by  block  number) 


BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES 
MEDICAL  SCIENCES 
BIOCHEMISTRY 
COMMUNICABLE  DISEASES 


IMMUNOLOGY 
INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
NUCLEAR  MEDICINE 
PHYSIOLOGY 


120  ABSTRACT  ( Continue  on  reveree  aide  If  naceammry  end  Identity  by  block  number ) 


The  various  subjects  covered  in  this  report  are  listed  in  the  Table  of  Contents.  Ab- 
stracts of  the  individual  investigations  arc  included  on  the  DD  Form  1498  introducing 
each  work  unit  report. 


EDITION  OF  I NOV  At  IS  OBSOLETE 


UNCI  ASSIE1ED 


RCS  MEDDH  - 288  (Rl) 


RESEARCH  IN  BIOLOGICAL  AND  MEDICAL  SCIENCES 


INCLUDING 


BIOCHEMISTRY,  COMMUNICABLE JPISEASE  AND  JMMUNOLOGY, 

^INTERNAL  MEDICINE,  NUCLEAR  .MEDICINE,  PHYSIOLOGY,  I _ 

' PSYCHIATRY,  SURGERY,  AND  VETERINARY  MEDICINE  t YO  » Ul  r,  C,  I II 


(Projects,  tasks,  and  work  units  [ 

are  listed  in  Table  of  Contents) 


& "7T 

I Annual  Progress  Report. 

/ 1 Julf  p75-3;0fjun*  »76, 


C I II 

l 


(A/  U>1  'A 

l * 

L 

Q¥Wb.\ 


Volume  II 


Walter  Reed  Army  institute  of  Research 
Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


Approved  for  public  reiease;  distribution  unlimited 

Destroy  this  report  when  no  longer  needed.  Do  not  return  it  lo  the  originator. 

The  findings  in  this  report  are  not  to  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of 
the  Army  position  unless  so  designated  by  other  authorized  documents. 

The  FY  7T  report  will  be  included  in  the  FY  1977  Annual  Progress  Report. 


FOREWORD 


In  conducting  the  research  described  in  this  report,  the  investigators  adhered 
to  the  "Guide  for  Laboratory  Animal  Facilities  and  Care,"  as  promulgated  by 
the  Committee  on  the  Guide  for  Laboratory  Animal  Facilities  and  Care  of  the 
Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal  Resources,  National  Academy  of  Sciences  - 
National  Research  Council. 


The  various  subjects  covered  in  this  report  are  listed  in  the  Table  of  Contents. 
Abstracts  of  the  individual  investigations  are  included  on  the  DD  Form  1498  in- 
troducing each  work  unit  report,  and  names  of  investigators  are  given  at  the  be 
ginning  of  each  report. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


VOLUME  II 


3A762760A806  MILITARY  PREVENTIVE  MEDICINE 


^ Mi 


00  ^Military  Preventive  Medicine' 


034  Epidemiologic  studies  of  military  diseases 


3A162110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 


00  Combat  Surgery 


121  Gastrointestinal  responses  to  shock  and 
trauma 

124  Pathophysiology  of  systemic  responses  to 
shock  and  trauma 

125  Control  mechanisms  of  regional  circulation 


3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


01  ^ Military  Internal  Medicine-  v 


120  Metabolic  response  to  disease  and  injury 

121  Pathogenesis  of  enteric  diseases 

123  Histopathologic  manifestations  of  military 
diseases  and  injuries 

126  Infectious  hepatitis 

128  Biochemical  methodology  and  laboratory  auto- 
mation 

129  Epidemiology  of  hepatitis  in  the  military 

130  Gastrointestinal  diseases  of  military  impor- 
tance 


3A762658A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 


00  Military  Psychiatry' 


030  Military  psychiatry 


. 


3A762758A824 

02 

3A762759A829 

00 


3A762759A831 

00 


031  Military  performance  and  stress:  Factors  lead 
ing  to  decrements  of  pci  lormance  and  disease 

033  Anatomical  and  physiological  correlates  of 
brain  function  in  stress  and  disease 

034  Influence  of  stress  on  hormone  response,  per- 
formance and  emotional  breakdown  in  military 
personnel 

RADIATION  INJURY  AND  PROTECTION 

Microwave  Radiation' 

o 

057  Biological  effects  and  hazards  of  microwave 
radiation 

\ 

MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
^ Malaria  Investigations  . , 

308  Biological  evaluation  of  antimalarial  drugs 

309  Determination  of  pharmacological  effects  of 
antimalarial  drugs 

315  Blood  level  assays  for  antimalarial  drugs 

318  Biological  studies  of  insect  infection  and  di- 
sease transmission 

324  Host  responses  to  malaria 

336  Field  studies  on  drug  resistant  malaria 

337  Syntheses  of  antimalaria  drugs 

338  Protective  immunity  in  malaria 

339  Studies  of  malaria  parasitic  metabolism  and 
drug  action 

TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
^Tropical  Medicine*  ' „ 

070  Antischistosomal  drug  development 

071  Field  studies  of  rickettsiae  and  othei  tropical 
diseases 

073  Disease  transmission  in  tropical  populations 


Page 

934 

958 

965 


979 

992 

996 

1066 

1073 

1097 

1112 

1144 

1150 

1156 

1161 

1166 

1214 


ii 


Page 


3A762758A833 

(XO 


074  Tropical  and  subtropical  diseases  in  military 
medicine 

075  Rickettsial  diseases  of  military  personnel 
BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse  "*  <a  ^ N 

101  Assay  methodology  for  drugs  of  abuse 

102  Military  performance  and  drug  abuse 

103  Drug  abuse  prevention  in  military  personnel 

105  Cellular  aspects  of  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of 
abuse 

106  Clinical  and  demographic  studies  of  military 
drug  abusers 

109  Neurophysiological  localization  of  sites  of 
actions  of  drugs  of  abuse 

110  Biorhythm  studies  in  drug  abuse 

111  Neuroendocrinology  and  neurochemistry  of 
drugs  of  abuse 

113  Metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 

114  Pharmacokinetics  of  drugs  of  abuse 

3A762760A837  MILITARY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT 


0C'-^  Military  Animal  Resources  Development  r N 

055  Development  and  evaluation  if  improve^  bio- 
logical sensor  systems 

056  Diseases  of  military  animals 


1374 

1499 


1527 

1531 

1546 

1553 

1560 

1562 

1566 

1568 

1576 

1581 


1589 

1596 


DISTRIBUTION  LIST 


1633 


aRR 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMART 


l OAT  f RRIV 

75  07  01 


10  NO  cooc*  * 


« KINO  or  lUMNANY 


D.  Change 


H NO  GRAM  ILIMNT 


fc.  CON  TRIlUT  I NO 


•■mm** 


62760A 


CARDS,  1141. 


» iunnarmctT 


a Nona  •ecuiwtv' 


1 TITLE  ml*  |M Hlf  CiiMlitWIlM 


PROJECT  NUHHR 


3A762760A806 


DA  OB  6489 


> MflOWAORNO* 

NA 


14  ONE*  INSTH'N 


inmanv^" 

76  07  01 


««po*r  comrwoL  trmmoL 

DD  DH*EtAR)6J6 


TAW  AHfA  NUMIIR 


JKL 


iiL_ 


•NECIRIC  DATA- 
COM  T NA C TON  ACCEtl 

□ «0 


* LEVEL  or  MM 


SL 


•ORA  UNIT  NUWMW 


m. 


(U)  Epidemiologic  Studies  of  Ml H f ary  Diseases 

ICIflNTiriC  AMO  TECMNOLOOtC AL  ANBAI* 


| IClENTiriC  AND  TECMNOLOOtC< 

003500  Clinical  Medicine 


1 ITANT  6 A Y E 


72  07 


IT  CON  T MAC  T GRANT 
A O A TEt/t  r r EC  TIVE;  NA 


TTUT 

CONT 


t Tv»B 

t KINO  or  AOANO: 


CafNNATAON 


4 AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


If  NCtNONMOLE  OOO  ON«AMI|ATH>M 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
»■><>•<■»•  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


i SI  OLE  INDIVIDUAL 


Joy,  COL  Robert  J.T. 
tiLOKom:  202-576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


m nl n 


1 RUNCHN0  AOENl 


IP- 


DA 


« NSSOUNCBS  ESTIMATE 
TIJTBI 


rise  al 

TEAM 


"6 


77 


M rERTORMNC  % r AMI  j a 


*4  WEnr^MMANCfl  ME  Two 0 

C.  In  House 


A rworSMtOMAL  MAN  VMS 


L 


4 ru*  os  f|»  AmibAj 


19 


■**»*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Researcl 
Division  of  Preventive  Medicine 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PMMCIPAL  ' «YtlTI«ATO»  ffmmlak  Hm  11  V l. 

iw  Fegal,  Herbert  E.,  LTC,  MC 
TtLl^KOMfl  '02-5 76-2480 

SOCIAL  SECUMIT  ACCOUNT  NUMHR  | 

ASSOCIATE  iNVESriOATOMS 

•Mi  Caydos,  Joel  C.,  LTC,  MC 
■mm,  Hodder,  Richard  A.,  LTC,  MC 


II-  KIVVONO*  tr**'—  BACK  l«M,e  £•*, 

(U)  Epidemiology;  (U)  Infectious  Disease;  (U)  Congenital  Malformation;  (U)  Renal  Disease 


II  TECHNICAL  OOJBCTIV 


• |«  AM  MHO  ACM,  IS  N NOONS  M fHw»"lNA  ImNrfEMI  MnlNIll  Sr  " 


ri»i»N  •»  ««*  vtO  Srctrirr  cimr'Esa'Ikm  C«Or  > 

23.  (U ) To  identify,  define,  and  study  known  and  potential  causes  of  disability  in 
military  populations  using  relevant,  existing  epidemiologic  techniques  and  developing 
appropriate  new  methodology.  To  apply  this  information  to  the  prevention  and  control 
of  disability  in  military  populations. 

24.  (U)  Contemporary  epidemiologic  methods  are  applied  to  causes  of  disability  in 
military  populations.  Multidisciplinary  collaborative  approaches  are  utilized  and  new 
methods  developed  a3  required. 

25.  (U)  75  07-76  06  Analyses  of  data  from  investigations  of  salmonellosis  and  Group  B 
streptococcus  outbreaks  at  Fort  Polk  were  completed.  Analysis  of  data  from  an  investi- 
gation of  an  A/swine  Influenza  outbreak  at  Fort  Dix  is  in  progress.  Analysis  of  data 
from  an  Adenovirus  antibody  prevalence  study  is  in  progress.  (Influenza  and  Adenovirus 
studies  are  complementary  to  work  described  under  DA  OA  6441,  Work  Unit  166,  entitled 

Virus  Infections  of  Man.")  Computation  of  congenital  malformation  rates  by  time  and 
post  and  correlation  of  these  rates  with  demographic  variables  are  in  progress. 
Retrieval  of  renal  disease  admissions  data  has  been  requested.  For  technical  reports 
see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Report  1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $2,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period 
1 Jul- 30  Sep  76. 


DD 

^M|  MAH  M 


Project  3A762760A806  MILITARY  PREVENTIVE  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Military  Preventive  Medicine 

Work  Unit  034  Epidemiologic  studies  of  military  diseases 
Investigators : 

Principal:  LTC  Herbert  E.  Segal,  MC 

Associate:  COL  Taras  Nowosiwsky,  MC;  COL  Franklin  H. 

Top,  Jr.,  MC;  LTC  Joel  C.  Gaydos,  MC; 

LTC  Richard  A.  Hodder,  MC;  MAJ  Michael  W. 
Benenson , MC;  MAJ  Richard  G.  Kirchdoerf er , 

MC;  CPT  Virginia  D.  Soden,  ANC;  SSG  Michael 
C.  Cailahan;  L.  Charlene  Evans 

1 . Salmonella  newport  Outbreak  Related  to  Milk  Consumption 

In  early  August  1975,  the  Fort  Polk  MEDDAC  personnel 
noted  an  upsurge  of  salmonella  isolations  among  pediatric 
patients.  England  AFB  began  to  experience  a similar  i? crease. 
By  mid-August,  one  to  three  cases  were  diagnosed  daily  at 
each  installation  as  either  Salmonella  group  C-2  or,  more 
specifically,  as  S.  newport.  The  source  for  these  infections 
was  not  apparent.  An  Air  Force  epidemiology  team  (USAFSAM- 
EP)  was  first  alerted  to  investigate  the  outbreak  at  England 
AFB  with  an  invitation  to  conduct  a similar  inguiry  at  Fort 
Polk  one  or  two  days  later.  Because  no  obvious  sedation  was 
apparent  and  Fort  Polk  was  having  the  majority  of  cases,  an 
EPICON  team  joined  the  investigation. 

The  initial  investigation  disclosed  23  culture  confirmed 
cases  of  S.  newport  (or  Salmonella  C-2,  partially  typed)  at 
Fort  Polk  and  13  confirmed  cases  at  England  AFB  (the  final 
counts  were  25  and  17,  respectively).  There  were  no  cases 
reported  from  the  two  adjacent  civilian  communities.  All 
identified  cases  occurred  in  military  families  with  children; 
unaccompanied  service  members  and  trainees  were  spared.  There 
was  no  apparent  association  of  cases  by  housing  area,  water 
or  sanitary  system,  nor  was  there  history  of  common  social 
or  recreational  contacts.  The  initial  case  interviews 
failed  to  disclose  an  association  between  disease  and  usage 
of  a typical  salmonella  vehicle. 


Lx* 


The  clinical  picture  in  reported  cases  was  a febrile, 
diarrheal  illness  of  several  days  duration.  In  general, 
the  illness  was  relatively  uncomplicated  and  antibiotic  or 
inpatient  therapy  was  seldom  necessary.  Clinical  findings 
are  summarized  for  children  and  adults  in  table  1.  Of  note 


782 


*7S.  ■ \ *. 


S-VT** 


is  the  50%  incidence  of  bloody  stool  and  low  occurrence 
of  dehydration. 

Table  1 

Signs  and  Symptoms  in  Culture  Confirmed  Cases 
Fort  Polk,  S.  Newport 


Adult 

(N  = 6) 

Children 

(N  = 17 

Fever 

3 

(50%) 

14 

(82%) 

Diarrhea 

6 

(100%) 

16 

(94%) 

Cramps* 

6 

(100%) 

7 

(41%) 

Nausea* 

4 

(67%) 

6 

(35%) 

Vomiting 

3 

(50%) 

8 

(47%) 

Dehydration 

0 

2 

(12%) 

Bloody  stool 

3 

(50%) 

9 

(53%) 

* Childhood  cases  difficult  to  interpret  due  to 
the  subjective  nature  of  the  symptom.  Infants 
are  included. 

The  information  obtained  during  the  early  phase  of  the 
investigation  suggested  this  to  be  a food-borne  outbreak 
propagated  through  a commissary-distributed  food  vehicle 
(both  commissaries  utilized  the  same  procurement  system) . 
Initially,  the  contaminated  food  was  sought  by  crude  but 
time  saving  methods.  When  this  approach  failed,  a more 
tedious  but  precise  and  systematic  search  was  instituted. 

First,  a more  accurate  definition  of  the  outbreak  as 
to  time,  place  and  person  was  needed.  Cases  were  reinter- 
viewed to  confirm  onset  dates  and  define  contacts  with 
other  cases.  Family  contacts  were  cultured.  Although  no 
disease  was  reported  in  civilians  or  basic  trainees,  the 
evidence  to  support  this  was  tenuous.  Therefore,  troop 
records  were  screened  and  dispensary  personnel  interviewed 
for  a change  in  the  incidence  or  severity  of  gastrointesti- 
nal complaints.  The  pediatric  clinic,  emergency  room  and 
troop  dispensaries  were  requested  to  culture  anyone  with 
diarrhea.  The  State  Epidemiologist,  Louisiana  Health  and 
Human  Resources  Administration,  Division  of  Health,  was 
notified  of  the  outbreak  and  was  requested  to  intensify 


783 


disease  surveillance  in  the  nearby  civilian  communities. 
Concurrently,  preparations  were  made  to  conduct  a food 
preference  survey.  The  first  step  was  to  reduce  the  quantity 
of  separate  line  items  handled  by  the  two  commissaries 
(over  5,000).  By  excluding  those  items  not  common  to  both 
a 10%  reduction  was  achieved.  A third  commissary  within  the 
same  procurement  chain  located  at  Barksdale  AFB  (no  Salmo- 
nella cases),  near  Shrevesport,  LA  was  used  to  eliminate 
all  line  items  that  were  common  to  all  three.  In  this 
manner  #it  was  possible  to  reduce  the  list  of  "suspect" 
foods  to  below  100.  From  it,  approximately  20  items  were 
chosen  for  more  intensive  scrutiny.  These  included  foods 
which  were  believed  to  best  fit  the  age  and  place  charac- 
teristics of  the  outbreak.  ’articular  weight  was  given  to 
baby  foods. 

The  food  preference  survey  was  conducted  by  phone.  Pre- 
printed questionnaires,  scoring  sheets  and  detailed  instruct- 
ions for  the  survey  were  available  to  each  interviewer. 

Only  "primary"  cases  and  controls  were  interviewed.  A 
"primary"  case  was  defined  as  the  family's  sole  or  index 
case  who  had  no  history  of  close  contact  with  prior  cases. 

The  control  group  was  selected  randomly,  by  computer  (last 
two  digits  of  SSAN  - 08,  15,  32,  36,  45,  64,  75,  91),  and 
was  matched  to  cases  by  age  and  family  size. 

The  initial  preventive  measures  taken  were  those  which 
would  reduce  the  risk  of  person-to-person  transmission. 
Children  coming  to  the  post  nursery  were  screened  for  fever 
or  a history  of  recent  diarrhea  and  were  refused  admission 
if  these  symptoms  were  present.  Primary  medical  care 
providers  at  dispensaries,  clinics  and  the  emergency  room 
were  asked  to  culture  potential  cases  and  exclude  any 
symptomatic  food  handlers  from  duty  until  proven  negative 
by  culture. 

Figure  1 shows  the  epidemic  curve  for  culture  positive 
cases  at  both  installations.  Noteworthy  are  the  rather 
well  cercumscribed  temporal  limits  of  the  outbreak  over  the 
period  27  July  to  16  August.  This  is  consistent  with  a 
continuous,  common  source  exposure  over  a one  to  two  week 
time  interval.  Some  limited  person-to-person  spread 
probably  had  occurred,  mainly  within  families.  Cases  ceased 
after  16  August  and  as  of  1 October,  there  were  still  no 
further  S.  newport  isolations.  Although  contact  interviews 
and  increased  surveillance  disclosed  many  other  cases  of 
gastroenteritis,  none  were  positive  for  salmonella.  Of  the 
twenty-five  (25)  total  cases,  twelve  (12)  were  in  children 
less  than  2 years  old  and  no  cases  were  in  infants  below 
the  age  of  5 months.  Only  a few  cases  were  scattered 


AUGUST 


through  the  adult  years. 

Fort  Polk  cases  were  scattered  randomly  over  several 
housing  areas  and  were  not  linked  through  common  social, 
recreational  or  occupational  factors.  The  use  of  the  post 
nursery  or  common  babysitters  were  rare.  In  this  setting, 
the  striking  predominance  of  young  children  as  cases  and 
the  exclusion  of  troops  and  unaccompanied  members  from  the 
illness  provided  strong  presumptive  evidence  for  a commissa- 
ry food  item  as  the  source.  The  apparent  sparing  of  the 
local  community  strengthened  this  possibility.  A pediatri- 
cian at  Fort  Polk  was  interviewed  about  the  feeding  patterns 
of  young  children.  Infants  were  changed  from  formula  to 
milk  at  about  the  age  of  6 months.  The  addition  of  baby 
foods  and  table  foods  was  much  more  variable,  the  former 
was  usually  earlier  than  6 months  while  the  latter  was 
usually  later. 

The  distribution  pattern  of  milk  from  the  WR  Dairy  fit 
exactly  the  geographic  distribution  of  cases.  In  addition, 
time,  place  and  person  characteristics  of  the  outbreak 
were  consistent  with  a milk  vehicle.  As  the  investigation 
progressed,  it  was  noted  that  disease  cases  were  associated 
with  the  WR  brand  of  whole  milk  but  only  when  it  came  in 
one  gallon  plastic  containers  (as  opposed  to  WR  whole  milk 
in  one  half  gallon  cartons) . A special  phone  interview 
was  initiated  to  test  this  hypothesis.  To  assure  minimum 
observer  variance,  only  the  two  investigators  interviewed 
at  Fort  Polk.  Cases  and  the  same  controls  used  for  the 
food  preference  survey  were  re-contacted  and  asked  to 
specify  the  type  (whole,  skim,  low-fat,  etc.)  brand  and 
container  size  of  milk  they  bought.  Only  after  the  indivi- 
dual expressed  another  brand  and/or  container  preference 
were  they  asked  specifically  about  the  use  of  WR  brand  of 
milk  and  the  type  of  container.  In  only  one  instance  did 
specific  questioning  disclose  a WR  milk  user  who  would  have 
been  called  a non-user.  The  family,  a devotee  of  another 
brand  came  back  from  vacation  and  borrowed  a one  gallon 
container  of  WR  milk  on  2 August.  Their  child  became  ill 
the  next  day.  All  other  cases  counted  as  "users"  regularly 
bought  WR  milk  in  the  one  gallon  containers. 

Milk  preference  in  cases  at  Fort  Polk  is  tabulated  in 
Table  2.  Thirteen  of  16  cases  were  positive  for  the  use 
of  WR  milk  while  only  eight  out  of  25  controls  could  be 
said  to  be  users  of  WR  milk. 


786 


Table  2 


The  Association  of  One  Gallon  WR  Milk  Use 
and  S.  newport  Gastroenteritis  at  Fort  Polk,  LA 


S.  newport  Gastroenteritis 


Use  of  one 

YES 

NO 

gallon  WR 
milk 

YES 

13 

8 

21 

NO 

3 

17 

20 

16 

25 

41 

Chi-square 

p = .006 

(Yates) 

= 7.6 

The  food  preference  survey  did  not  identify  an  alter- 
nate suspect  for  the  outbreak.  Although  the  p value  was 
significant  for  several  items,  either  the  item  was  actually 
"protective"  or  of  such  low  usage  level  as  to  be  easily 
rejected.  Of  note,  there  was  no  difference  in  milk  usage 
between  the  controls  and  the  cases.  Since  the  survey  did 
not  specifically  ask  for  milk  brands  (or  container  sizes) , 
the  WR  milk  hypothesis  could  not  be  tested.  The  major 
value  of  the  survey  was  as  a "pertinent  negative"  and  a 
broad  review  of  all  other  potential  food  vehicles. 

The  commissary  was  checked  for  containers  of  milk 
from  the  suspect  period.  There  were  three  (3)  soured  1 
gallon  containers  and  five  (5)  1/2  gallon  containers 
spanning  the  time  period  from  26  July  until  7 August. 
Samples  for  culture  were  provided  the  laboratories  at  Fort 
Polk,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  Texas  and  the  USAFSAM.  Remaining 
milk  samples  were  transmitted  to  the  Enteric  Disease 
Section,  CDC  for  culture  «nd  fluorescent  antibody  studies. 
All  test  results  were  negative. 

2.  Group  B Beta  Hemolytic  Streptococcal  (GBBHS)  Disease 

Out.break  in  a Nursery 

During  the  period  Feb  to  Oct  75  an  increase  in  the 
GBBHS  disease  in  the  newborn  nursery  at  Fort  Polk  was 
noted.  Six  of  527  liveborn  infants  in  1975  were  thought 
to  have  had  serious  disease  due  to  Lancefield  GBBHS.  One 
infant  had  early  onset  disease  and  his  mother  had  GBBHS 


787 


isolated  from  the  birth  canal.  The  remaining  five  cases 
had  late  onset,  two  had  septic  arthritis,  one  multiple 
brain  abcess , one  meningitis,  and  one  breast  abcess. 
Additionally  there  were  three  other  infants  in  the  nursery 
with  isolates  of  Beta  Hemolytic  Streptococci  not  groups  A 
or  D,  one  from  an  endotracheal  tube,  one  an  umbilical 
catheter  tip,  and  the  other  from  surface  cultures.  Six 
cases  of  GBBHS  disease  in  527  births  represent  a rate  of 
11.4  per  1000  live  births.  This  is  significantly  more  than 
expected  given  the  rate  of  2-3  per  1000  reported  from  other 
areas.  In  order  to  determine  infant  colonization  rates  in 
the  nursery,  all  newborns  from  17  November  to  16  December 
were  cultured.  Using  non-selective  media  a colonization 
rate  of  26%,  (14  of  53  infants)  was  obtained.  An  attempt 
was  made  to  (retrospectively)  culture  the  mothers  of  those 
infants  that  wel^e  found  to  be  positive.  These  data  did  not 
allow  differentiation  between  vertical  and  nosocomial 
transmission . 

Two  EPICON  investigators  arrived  at  Ft.  Polk  and,  in 
order  to  define  the  problem,  interviewed  involved  personnel 
and  examined  available  data  sources.  Personnel  interviewed 
included  the  Nursery  Pediatrician,  the  Head  Nurses  in  the 
Nursery  and  on  the  OB-Gyn  Service,  the  Chief  of  Pediatrics, 
the  Chief  of  Nursing  Services,  the  Bacteriologist,  and  the 
Chief  of  the  H&E  Activity.  Data  sources  reviewed  were 
medical  records  of  infants  suspected  of  having  GBBHS 
disease  and  their  mother's  obstetrical  records,  obstetrical 
ward  log  books,  nursery  daily  census  log  books,  and  labora- 
tory specimen  log  books. 

Interviews  provided  background  information  about  the 
hospital  physical  plant,  nursery  staffing  practices,  and 
other  conditions  with  a possible  relationship  to  GBBHS 
disease.  The  nursery,  as  is  the  entire  hospital,  is 
housed  in  World  War  II  cantonment  type  buildings.  Recently 
the  nursery  was  enlarged  to  include  a second  room  but  prior 
to  that  time  space  and  ventilation  were  inadequate.  Com- 
plaints regarding  the  air  conditioning  in  the  OB-nursery 
wards  during  summer  1975  were  common.  Other  findings 
regarding  nursery  staffing  practices  included  the  fact  that 
during  nursery  staff  shortages,  nurses  were  pulled  from 
other  wards  with  perhaps  insufficient  regard  for  their 
prior  experience  or  for  their  recent  presence  on  infectious 
wards;  and  the  nursing  staff  had  to  provide  housekeeping 
services  for  the  OB  ward  and  the  nursery. 

The  medical  records  provided  investigators  a means  to 
make  a determination  whether  a case  was  GBBHS  disease  of 
perhaps  GBBHS  colonization.  Of  the  total  of  10  suspected 


788 


cages,  six  were  considered  GBBHS  disease  occurring  during 
1957.  Tabulations  of  maternal  complications,  premature 
rupture  of  the  membranes  (PROM) , prematurity  and  number  of 
births  by  month  were  obtained  from  review  of  the  1975 
obstetrical  log  book.  During  the  year  there  were  527 
births.  The  first  six  months  average  was  38.3  per  month 
compared  to  49.5  for  the  balance  of  the  year.  The  highest 
number  of  births  was  recorded  in  August.  There  were  56  "C" 
sections,  with  44  as  primary  sections.  Eleven  of  the  total 
were  performed  in  August.  Twelve  deliveries  were  noted  as 
PROMS.  All  12  were  over  24  hours  except  for  two  of  16  and 
18  hours  and  two  with  the  duration  not  indicated.  Four  of 
the  total  occurred  during  August.  Seventy-four  premature 
infants  were  born  evenly  throughout  the  year. 


Nursery  log  books  were  reviewed  to  find  the  daily 
nursery  census  and  the  number  of  infants  on  the  seriously 
ill  list  (SI)  as  indicators  of  staff  demand  and  efficiency. 
The  greatest  monthly  nursery  census  average  occurred  in 
August,  1975.  During  the  second  week  of  that  month  there 
were  three  days  with  over  15  infants  in  the  nursery  (average 
6.2).  At  this  same  time,  there  were  four  infants  on  the 
SI  list.  Bacteriology  laboratory  books  for  1975  were  re- 
viewed to  find  positive  culture  reports  pertaining  to 
infants  and  mothers  which  might  reveal  possible  cases  that 
were  overlooked.  This  led  to  the  discovery  of  two  addi- 
tional possible  cases,  which  on  review  of  their  medical 
records  were  determined  not  to  be  GBBHS  disease. 


The  occurrence  of  six  cases  of  GBBHS  disease  in  this 
newborn  population  is  more  than  would  normally  be  expected. 
Three  of  the  cases  occurred  during  the  months  of  August  and 
September.  Reviewing  all  data  the  following  observations 
were  made:  (a)  Ir  August,  there  were  57  births,  the  largest 
monthly  number  for  1975;  (b)  The  nursery  census  was  higher 
in  August  than  any  other  month  of  the  year.  During  the 
second  week,  there  was  a 24  hour  census  of  19  infants  in 
the  nursery;  (c)  There  were  eleven  "C"  sections,  the  largest 
number  for  any  one  month.  The  "C"  sections  required  more 
nursery  care  for  the  infants  because  post-op  mothers  are 
not  as  able  or  willing  to  care  for  their  infants;  (d)  Ward 
B-l  was  closed  because  of  a potential  fire/explosive 
hazard  from  22  July  to  27  August.  All  patients  and  infants 
were  moved  into  ward  B-2  within  a few  hours.  This  was  an 
open  ward  and  inadequate  for  use  as  a nursery  and  labor 
ward;  (e)  July,  August,  and  September  are  "vacation"  months 
and  insufficient  staffing  and/or  the  necessity  of  pulling 
relatively  inexperienced  (for  nursery  techniques)  personnel 
from  other  wards  only  compounded  the  problem;  (f)  On  4 


■ • Jr**  <rv***px***i*' 


789 


August  Case  #5  was  born  and  was  considered  a case  of  GBBHS 
sepsis.  It  is  possible  that  this  case  was  responsible  for 
widespread  contamination  of  the  nursery  environment. 

The  end  of  August  1975  Ward  B-l  was  reopened  and  the 
nursery  was  enlarged  with  another  room  added  for  intensive 
care.  The  drop  in  the  nursery  census,  improved  facilities, 
and  patient  care  could  explain  the  drop  in  the  number  of 
cases  since  that  time. 

3 . Influenza  A/swine  Outbreak  at  a Basic  Training  Center 

In  February  1976,  throatwashings  from  4 inpatients  at 
Walson  Army  Hospital  at  Fort  Dix  were  reported  to  contain 
a new  strain  of  A Swine  Influenza  (A  New  Jersey) . A fifth 
case  was  subsequently  identified  from  post-mortem  examina- 
tion of  a recruit  who  died  of  viral  pneumonia.  Documenta- 
tion of  the  pattern  and  extent  of  the  outbreak  was  under- 
taken. The  index  cases  included  4 BCT  recruits  and  one 
AIT  cadre.  An  additional  seven  probable  cases  were  identi- 
fied from  paired  adenovirus  surveillance  sera.  Case 
interviews  failed  to  implicate  a common  source, suggesting 
infection  from  man-to-man  transmission  during  a more 
widesoread  outbreak.  Since  recruit  populations  are  grouped 
in  discreet,  isolated  cohorts,  antibody  prevalence  rates 
in  units  of  cases  could  be  compared  to  non-case  units  to 
test  this  hypothesis  and  define  the  pattern  of  spread.  A 
ten  percent  sample  of  all  BCT  units  on  post  was  performed 
and  a simple  "case-control"  comparison  performed.  Compari- 
son showed  that  the  seropositivity  rate  in  companies  with 
a case  defined  by  virus  isolation  was  41.2%,  in  companies 
with  a case  defined  by  a four-fold  titer  rise  was  20.0%, 
and  in  control  companies  was  10.2%. 

The  above  preliminary  data  are  being  refined.  Criteria 
for  admission  to  the  study,  effects  of  vaccination  and 
heterologous  infection,  and  the  association  of  selected 
demographic  variables  are  being  reviewed.  Additionally, 
results  in  dependents,  retirees  and  cadre  will  need 
adjustment  by  age,  sex,  vaccination  history,  etc.  Additional 
preliminary  serologic  data  are  reported  under  DA  Project 
3A161102B71Q,  Work  Unit  166,  Viral  Infections  of  Man 
( DCD&I ) . 

4.  Prevalence  of  Antibodies  to  Adenoviruses  4,  7,  and  21 

in  Male  Basic  Combat  Trainees 


A study  was  initiated  to  obtain  current  data  on  the 
prevalence  of  antibodies  to  adenoviruses  in  trainees 
arriving  at  BCT  centers.  These  data  were  required  to 


790 


estimate  the  potential  impact  of  adenovirus  21  epidemics  on 
BCT  posts  and  to  provide  a basis  for  the  design  of  adeno- 
virus 21  vaccine  trials.  During  the  period  22-24  March 
1976  a sample  of  incoming  trainees  at  Forts  Jackson,  Knox, 
and  L.  Wood  was  selected  for  study.  Questionnaires  were 
administered  to  obtain  demographic  information  and  blood 
samples  were  drawn.  For  Dix  trainees  who  participated  in 
the  investigation  of  the  A/swine  influenza  outbreak 
(February  1976)  and  who  had  blood  samples  obtained  within 
7 days  after  arriving  on  post  were  also  included  in  this 
study.  Preliminary  results  from  this  study  are  reported 
under  DA  Project  3A161102B71Q , Work  Unit  166,  Viral 
Infections  of  Man  (DCD&I) . 

5 . Incidence  of  Congenital  Malformations  at  Fort  Hood,  TX 

During  the  study  of  an  outbreak  of  viral  hepatitis 
among  active  duty  populations  at  Fort  Hood,  Texas  (October 
1972-March  1975)  data  were  gathered  pertaining  to  congenital 
malformations  (CMs)  reported  by  Darnall  Army  Hospital  (Fort 
Hood) . Compilation  and  analysis  of  data  unexpectedly 
revealed  marked  increases  in  reported  CM  rates  from  24.4 
cases  per  1,000  total  births  in  1971  to  41.6  in  1972,  51.2 
in  1973  and  54.9  in  1974  (Jan-Jun) . A more  thorough 
investigation  was  then  undertaken. 

Computer  tapes  containing  records  for  all  births  and 
all  peuiatric  admissions  (ages  1-14)  from  1 Jan  1971 
through  30  Jun  1975  for  Fort  Hood  and  six  other  CONUS 
installations  were  obtained  from  the  U.S.  Army  Health  and 
Information  Systems  and  Biostatistical  Agency,  Fort  Sam 
Houston,  Texas.  Data  from  these  tapes  were  adapted  for  use 
in  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Computer  System  and  an 
existing  programming  system  was  modified  for  data  retrieval. 

Currently,  congenital  malformation  rates  by  time  and 
installation  are  being  computed  and  correlated  with  demo- 
graphic variables. 

6.  Chronic  Renal  Disease  Diagnoses  Among  Active  Duty  Personnel 


In  1974,  a joint  committee  established  by  the  NIH  and 
the  National  Kidney  Foundation  was  charged  with  identifying 
resources  by  which  renal  disease  information  could  be 
developed.  The  military  was  proposed  as  one  key  source  of 
reliable  statistics.  However,  their  efforts  to  retrieve 
Army  information  were  nonproductive.  The  need  for  Army 
collaborators  was  recognized,  and  a formal  request  for 
EPICON  assistance  was  submitted  and  approved.  The  project 
is  in  its  initial  phases.  The  two  major  sources  of  error 


791 


in  the  preliminary  study  have  been  identified  and  corrected. 
An  exhaustive  list  of  ICDA  renal  codes  has  been  submitted 
to  the  Individual  Patient  Data  System  (IPDS)  to  retrieve 
all  records  with  renal  disease  codes  in  military  treatment 
facilities  from  1971-1975.  Concurrently,  the  Division  of 
Biometrics,  WRAIR,  is  preparing  a user-oriented  program  to 
analyze  the  tapes  for  the  incidence,  prevalence,  morbidity, 
mortality,  and  demographic  characteristics  of  patients 
with  renal  disease. 


792 


Project  3A162110A821 
COMBAT  SURGERY 


Task  00 

Combat  Surgery 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1 ABflHCV  ACCESS  AON* 

DA  OA  6467 

1 DATE  OF  SUMMARY*  REPORT  CONTROL  IPR ROL 

y ^ 07  01  DD-  DR^Ef  A R 

A OATt  RRfV  SUWNY 

75  07  01 

4 RIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

• SUMMARY  SCTY*  1 RORH  SECURITY* 

u u 

T RIBRAMM6* 

NA 

• A ONER  INSTR'N  IS  IMCIMC  DA1A-  • LCV'LOFSWM 

CONTRA'  OR  ACCESS 

NL  Q m □ M A •O"1 

SO  NO  COOES*  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

RORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A RRMARY 

62110A 

3A162110A821 

00 

121 

b.  CONTRIBUTING 

c.  OOCHMMHMK 

CARDS  114F 

I TITLI  .i*  ,aawYlr  C^T 


(U)  Gastrointestinal  Responses  to  Shock  and  Trauma 

II  SCiCMTIIlC  AND  TCCMMOLOOICAL  •"•••* 


II  IT  A AT  i>A?l 

63  09 

1 A llTMATEO  COMPLETION  OATt 

C0NT 

1 A F UNO* NO  AOENCT 

DA  1 

14  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT  ORART 

A OATCS/BPFBCTIVt.  EAPiratior 

A NUMBER  * 

6 TYPE:  4 AMOUNT: 

IS  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

A PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

k FUNDS  (t»  AMtMRj 

'•CAL 

TEAR 

76 

4 

118 

PUBBIBV  ' 

77 

3 

168 

1»  MlKWkkl  DOO  OAIUII I « TIOM 


1A  PiHMM  OliMHliTMi 


■•■••Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


«*■■•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Surgery 
.«»<u “Washington,  DC  20012 


.•>l  joy,  COL  R.  J.  T. 
riu»«i  202  576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


AMMCIAAl  III  VC  IT  >0*  TO"  IIVUM  Ml  It  V I.  lull 

■»»«•  Reynolds,  LTC  D.  G. 
Ilium.  202  576-3791 

IOCUL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  KMN* 


■»■•:  Zinner,  MAJ  M.  J. 
"•Hi;  Gurll , MAJ  N.  J. 


n. inmiiimii. txa -it TSSK ci.-iM.il- 8S J f u)  Splanchnic  Hemodynamics ; (u)  Gastric  Blood  Flow; 
(U)  Shock;  (U)  Vasoconstrictor  'fherapy 


DA 


II  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE*  |A  APPROACH,  II  PROOFS  U fP«»«l  •*  l»RN4UPl  • l4M.I»f»F4  Sr  - 


FNM*  Mil  *1  —m A »l«  mwin 


23  (10  lo  elucidate  the  gastrointestinal  response  to  shock  and  trauma.  To  evaluate  the 
effects  of  epinephrine  and  norepinephrine  on  gastric  blood  flow.  To  evaluate  the 
(effects  of  ‘hese  drugs  and  truncal  vagotomy  currently  used  to  control  gastrointestinal 
(hemorrhage  To  studv  the  effeci  of  hemorrhagic  shock  on  the  development  of  stress  ul- 
Iceration.  These  studies  relate  to  the  gastrointestinal  pathology  that  frequently  j 

(occurs  in  combe:  casualties.  j 

2-t  U)  To  study  tnc  gastroincestl na.  hemodynamic  response  to  experimental  hemorrhagi 
shoe*  in  the  primate  and  dogs.  To  study  the  functions  of  the  gastric  mucosal  barrier 
during  hemorrhagic  shock.  To  evaluate  the  effects  of  adrenergic  amines  and  vasopressii. 
on  the  gastric  circulation.  To  study  the  effect  of  vagotomy  on  gastric  blood  flow  and 
AV  shunting. 

25  (U)  75  07  - 76  06.  1.  The  primate  gastrointestinal  circulations  do  not  seem  to 

have  significant  amounts  of  ischemia  during  shock.  During  hemorrhagic  shocK,  monkey 
GI  blood  flow  fell  only  20  to  30  per  cent,  and  during  endotoxic  shock  baboon  GI  blood 
flow  fell  only  slightly.  The  regional  GI  exceptions  are  the  stomach,  pancreas,  and 
spleen,  which  fell  significantly  during  shock.  2.  During  endotoxic  shock  in  the  baboon 
there  was  no  disruption  of  the  normally  defined  gastric  mucosal  barrier.  There  was 
some  Increase  in  acid  back  diffusion.  The  presence  of  this  acid  back  diffusion  and  the 
gastric  ischemia  resulted  in  stress  ulcers.  3.  Truncal  gastric  vagotomy  does  not 
appear  to  redistribute  flow  or  open  AV  shunts  in  the  primate  stomach.  Support  in  the 
imount  of  $22,000  from  FY  7T  funds  it  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul-30  Sep  76. 

For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report, 

1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76. 


’JH/jiNtlocaaiijcw 

D0.STJ498 


PREVIOUS  EDITION*  OF  T)«,l  FORM  ARC  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  14SSA 
AND  l «#*-!.  I MAR  61  (FOR  ARMY  USE  I ^^OSIOLETC 


Project  3A162110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  121  Gastrointestinal  responses  to  shock  and  trauma 
Investigators. 

Principal:  LTC  David  G.  Reynolds,  MSC 

Associate:  MAJ  Nelson  J.  Gurll,  MC;  MAJ  Michael  J.  Zinner,  MC 

I . Gastrointestinal  Blood  Flow  in  Response  to  Shock 

A.  Background.  In  many  previous  clinical  settings  of  shock  the 
ischemic  response  of  the  G1  tract  has  been  held  responsible  for  irrever- 
sibility of  the  shock  state.  This  work  was  founded  on  early  studies 
done  in  the  dog.  A study  was  conducted  in  primates  to  determine  the 
effects  of  hemorrhagic  and  endotoxic  shock  in  gastrointestinal  blood  flow. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Cynomolgus  monkeys  had  left  ventricular 
injections  of  radioactive  microsphere  (RMS)  during  a control  period  4 
hours  following  hemorrhagic  shock  and  2 hours  following  resuscitation. 
Baboons  were  used  for  the  endotoxic  shock  study.  These  animals  were 
injected  with  RMS  during  a control  period,  4 hours  after  endotoxemia 
(LD25)  and  1.2  hours  following  fluid  resuscitation.  Blood  flow  to  all 
major  GI  organs  was  determined. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Blood  flow  to  stomach,  pancreas,  and 
spleen  are  severely  decreased  during  shock  but  blood  flow  to  small  and 
large  bowel  are  not  severely  compromised.  In  the  baboon  during  the 
endotoxic  shock,  a greater  percentage  of  cardiac  output  went  to  the  gat 
during  shock  and  resuscitation  than  during  the  control  period. 

II.  Regional  Distribution  and  Arteriovenous  (AV)  Shunting  in  the  Castric 
Circulation 

A.  Background.  Previous  studies  from  this  laboratory  failed  to 
demonstrate  significant  AV  shunting  in  the  gastric  circulation.  Even 
under  the  influence  of  intra-arterial  epinephrine  or  vasopressin  in- 
fusion, no  increases  in  AV  shunting  were  noted.  The  role  of  truncal 
vagotomy  in  control  of  stress  ulcer  bleeding  has  long  been  thought  to 
be  the  result  of  opening  AV  shunts  in  the  submucosa  and  diverting  blood 
flow  away  from  the  mucosa.  A study  was  conducted  on  the  effect  of 
vagotomy  on  regional  blood  flow  and  AV  shunting  in  the  gastric  circula- 
tion of  baboons. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Total  gastric  blood  flow  was  measured 
electromagnetically  by  placing  a flow  transducer  on  the  celiac  artery 
of  animals  that  had  been  splenectomized  and  had  common  hepatic  artery 
ligation.  The  hepatic  artery  was  used  for  intra-arterial  delivery  of 
radioactive  microspheres  (15  + 5 with  3 tags.  These  were  injected 


794 


during  a control  period,  immediately  following  truncal  vagotomy  and  2 
hours  following  vagotomy.  These  were  used  to  determine  regional  distri- 
bution of  blood  flow  and  AV  shunting  in  the  stomach. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  At  this  time  the  study  is  not  completed. 
Preliminary  results  would  indicate  that  about  15%  of  gastric  blood  flow 
goes  to  the  mucosa  and  this  is  not  altered  following  vagotomy.  Approxi- 
mately 2%  of  the  injected  microspheres  appear  in  the  liver  during  control 
periods  and  this  also  does  not  appear  to  change  following  vagotomy.  We 
would  conclude  the  AV  shunting  plays  a negligible  role  in  the  control  of 
gastric  blood  flow. 

III.  Stress  Ulceration 


A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Acute  superficial 
erosion  of  the  gastric  mucosa  continues  to  be  a frequent  cause  of  life- 
threatening  hemorrhage  in  the  post-traumatic  patient.  Much  attention 
has  focused  on  the  role  of  the  gastric  mucosal  barrier  (GMB)  and  its 
disruption  in  the  pathogenesis  of  these  stress  ulcers.  The  traditional 
indications  of  a broken  barrier  are  a fall  in  transmural  electrical  po- 
tential difference  (PD)  and  an  increase  in  mucosal  permeability  resulting 
in  a greater  luminal  accumulation  of  sodium  ion  and  back  diffusion  of 
hydrogen  ion.  Disruption  of  the  GMB  has  been  reported  in  critically  ill 
patients  thus  implying  a role  in  the  development  of  stress  ulcers. * 

We  have  investigated  the  effects  of  severe  hemorrhagic  hypotension  in 
dogs  and  endotoxemia  in  baboons  on  the  integrity  of  the  GMB.  A variety 
of  factors  have  been  implicated  in  the  disuption  of  the  GMB  including 
bile  salts,  aspirin,  alcohol,  and  urea.  It  has  also  been  suggested  that 
histamine  release  in  the  gastric  mucosa  is  important  in  this  disruption. 2 
Recent  work  has  focused  on  the  metabolic  state  of  the  mucosal  cell  itself 
as  a determinant  of  gastric  mucosal  integrity. 3 in  order  to  more  fully 
elucidate  the  roles  of  histamine  and  metabolic  state  of  the  mucosa  on 
the  ability  of  the  stomach  to  protect  itself  against  erosion,  we  studied 
the  effects  of  the  histamine  H2  receptor  blocker,  metiamide,  as  well  as 
alteration  of  acid-base  balance  on  the  ability  of  the  gastric  mucosa  to 
deal  with  its  own  secreted  acid. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Dogs  and  baboons  were  prepared  with 
internally-drained  Heidenhain  pouches  which  had  their  blood  supply  based 
solely  upon  the  splenic  vessels.  Ihe  net  fluxes  of  volume,  hydrogen, 
sodium, potassium,  and  chloride  across  these  pouches  were  determined  by 
instillation  and  recovery  of  an  isotonic  acid  test  solution  containing 

a nonabsorbable  volume  marker.  These  tests  were  performed  during  a 
control  period,  for  three  hours  of  hypotension,  and  for  one  hour  fol- 
lowing resuscitation.  The  hypotension  was  induced  either  by  hemorrhage 
to  a blood  pressure  of  45  nm  of  mercury  or  intravenous  injection  :f  endo- 
toxin 10  mg/kg.  Resuscitation  was  with  the  shed  blood,  intraveno-  s fluids, 
and  correction  of  acid-base  balance.  Total  pouch  blood  flow  was  measured 
by  an  electromagnetic  flowmeter  on  the  splenic  artery.  Mucosal  blood 
flow  was  determined  by  an  aminopyrine  clearance  method.  Regional  and 
fractional  blood  flows  during  control,  shock,  and  post-resuscitation 
periods  were  determined  by  microsphere  injections  as  described  before. 


i 


1 

A 

\ 

\ 

A 

| 

i 

i 


795 


Transmural  electrical  PD  was  monitored  continuously.  Cardiac  output  was 
measured  by  thermal  dilution  using  a Swan-Ganz  pulmonary  artery  catheter. 
Pouch  and  total-body  oxygen  consumptions  could  be  calculated  from  the 
product  of  blood  flows  (pouch  flow  or  cardiac  output)  and  arteriovenous 
oxygen  content  differences  (splenic  artery  to  pulmonary  vein  or  femoral 
artery  to  pulmonary  artery) . 


Studies  were  also  performed  in  monkeys  in  the  attempt  to  pro- 
duce a reliable  primate  stress  ulcer  model.  Two  species  of  monkeys  were 
used  - Rhesus  and  cynomulgus . Under  light  anesthesia,  the  stomach  was 
crnnuiated  after  isolation  of  the  duodenum  and  esophagus  to  prevent  efflux 
ol  gas:ric  contents.  An  isotonic  saline  solution  containing  sodium  tauro- 
choiace  (a  known  barrier  breaker)  was  instilled  into  the  stomach.  Samples 
of  this  solution  were  periodically  aspirated  for  measurement  of  non- 
absorbable volume  marker  and  electrolytes.  Fluxes  were  then  calculated 
from  changes  in  ion  mass.  The  studies  were  performed  during  control,  one 
to  four  hours  of  hemorrhagic  shock,  and  following  resuscitation  with  fluids. 
Blood  flows  were  determined  using  micros phe res . 


The  effect  of  histamine  H2  receptor  blockade  with  metiamide  on 
the  gastric  mucosa  was  assessed  in  rats  and  conscious  dogs.  The  rats  were 
divided  into  groups  to  receive  either  saline  as  a control  or  metiamide. 
Stress  ulcers  were  induced  by  24  hours  of  fasting  and  restraint  in  wire 
mesh.  The  metiamide  was  given  in  a dose  of  5 mg/kg  body  weight  intra- 
peritoneally  every  eight  hours  for  the  24  hours  of  restraint  in  one  group; 
in  another  group  this  treatment  was  started  four  hours  before  restraint. 
Another  control  group  was  given  metiamide  without  restraint  or  fasting. 

The  stomachs  were  excised  and  graded  by  an  impartial  observer.  The  dogs 
were  studied  awake  by  perfusion  of  externally-drained  Heidenhain  pouches 
for  three  hours  on  each  test  day.  The  perfusion  fluid  wa-.  an  isotonic 
acid  test  solution  which  contained  sodium  taurocholate  in  half  of  the 
tests.  The  dogs  receive  either  saline  or  metiamide  at  12  umoles/kg/min 
as  an  intravenous  infusion.  Electrical  potential  difference  was  monitored 
continuously. 


In  anesthetized  dogs,  the  effect  of  altered  acid-base  balance 
was  investigated  using  isolated  in  vivo  patches  of  full  thickness  gastric 
fundus.  These  patches  were  mounted  in  double  lucite  chambers  one  half 
of  which  was  exposed  to  an  isotonic  acid  test  solution  while  the  other 
half  was  exposed  to  a mannitol  control  solution.  Fluxes  of  volume  and 
ions  were  determined  from  changes  in  mass  between  instillation  and  re- 
covery of  the  solutions  with  corrections  for  acid  secretion  on  the  control 
side.  The  studies  were  performed  every  fifteen  minutes  for  one  hour  each 
of  control,  acidosis,  and  recovery.  Acidosis  was  induced  by  decreasing 
the  tidal  volume  from  10  to  5 ml/kg  body  weight  and  introducing  5°L  CO2 
with  95%  oxygen  into  the  ventilator. 


C.  Results  and  Discussion. 


1.  Systemic  Hemodynamic  Changes.  Mean  arterial  pressure  d_ 
creased  from  122+5  to  79+9  mm  of  mercury  (pC.QOl)  and  cardiac  output 


W, 


I 


from  2.76+C  31  to  1.43+0.24  L/mln  (p<.001)  by  the  fourth  hour  of  endotoxic 
shock.  T t magnitudes  of  these  changes  were  somewhat  less  than  that 
induced  in  hemorrhagic  shock  which  was  reported  previously.  Endotoxemia 
resulted  in  an  early  decrease  in  total  body  oxygen  consumption  but  a re- 
turn to  control  values  by  the  fourth  hour  of  endotoxemia. 

2.  Regional  Hemodynamic  Changes . Endotoxemia  resulted  in  the 
decrease  in  pouch  mucosal  blood  flow  from  5. 2+0. 9 to  2.4+0. 7 ml/min 
(p<.01).  This  change  was  again  smaller  in  magnitude  than  the  change  seen 
in  canine  hemorrhagic  shock  where  total  pouch  blood  flow  fell  from  almost 
40  ml/min  to  5 ml/min.  Endotoxic  shock  in  the  baboon  did  not  result  in  a 
change  in  the  fractional  distribution  of  blood  flow  to  the  pouch.  The 
mucosal  blood  flow,  representing  65%  of  the  total  blood  flow  to  the  pouch, 
was  unchanged  by  shock  or  resuscitation.  In  the  monkey  experiments, 
hemorrhagic  shock  resulted  in  dramatic  decreases  in  gastric,  pancreatic, 
and  duodenal  blood  flow  during  shock  which  did  not  increase  appreciably 
with  resuscitation.  In  contrast,  blood  flow  to  the  liver,  distal  small 
bowel,  and  colon  was  maintained  fairly  well  during  hemorrhagic  shock. 

3.  Potential  Difference  and  Ionic  Permeability.  Potential 
difference  fell  from  40+3  to  28+4  mV  (pc. 01)  and  remained  low  following 
resuscitation  after  endotoxemia.  The  magnitude  of  this  fall  was  not  as 
great  as  that  seen  in  canine  hemorrhagic  shock.  The  ionic  fluxes  for 
potassium  increased  from  +5. 9+2.1  to  +11.1+2.5  mEq/30  min/100  sq  cm 
(p<.01)  in  shock  and  to  +19.5+7.0  after  resuscitation  from  endotoxic 
shock.  This  increase  in  the  luminal  gain  of  potassium  ion  was  similar 
to  that  seen  with  hemorrhagic  shock  and  indicates  some  damage  to  the 
gastric  mucosa.  With  endotoxemia  there  was  a moderate  but  not  signifi- 
cant increase  in  back  diffusion  of  hydrogen  from  -58+26  to  -131+59  mEq/ 

30  min/100  sq  cm  but  no  change  in  the  luminal  gain  of  sodium  ion  in  the 
pouch  from  a control  value  of  +183444  mEq/30  min/100  sq  cm.  Following 
resuscitation  from  endotoxemia  the  luminal  gain  of  sodium  increased  to 
+257+74  with  hydrogen  ion  back  diffusion  decreasing  to  -52+16.  As  with 
hemorrhagic  shock,  these  ionic  fluxes  do  not  indicate  the  traditional 
breaking  of  the  gastric  mucosal  barrier. 

4.  Gross  and  Microscopic  Examination.  Despite  the  lack  of 
physiological  evidence  to  the  disruption  of  the  GMB,  many  of  the  Heidenhain 
pouches  subjected  to  endotoxic  shock  showed  superficial  gastric  erosions 
confirmed  histologically.  Most  of  these  baboons  had  evidence  of  gross 
bleeding  from  the  pouch  sometime  during  the  shock  or  resuscitation  period. 
These  findings  are  similar  to  those  seen  in  hemorrhagic  shock  although 

the  ulcerations  were  not  as  severe  in  endotoxemia. 


5.  Effect  of  Histamine  H?  Receptor  Blockade.  Metiamide  did 
result  in  a slightly  higher  potential  difference  in  both  control  and 
taurocholate- treated  dogs  but  the  fall  in  potential  difference  due  to 
taurocholate  was  not  attenuated  by  metiamide.  The  ionic  fluxes  of  sodium, 
hydrogen,  potassium,  and  chloride  were  unchanged  by  metiamide  in  animals 
exposed  either  to  an  acid  test  solution  or  to  bile  salts.  In  rats,  meti- 
amide protected  against  the  development  of  stress  ulcerations. 


' 


■ 

* 

> 

v 


797 


6.  Effect  of  Acid-Base  Balance  on  Hydrogen  Ion  Back  Diffusion. 
Respiratory  acidosis  resulted  in  a fall  in  arterial  pH  from  7.38  to  7.19 
and  an  increase  in  calculated  serum  hydrogen  ion  concentration  from  43  to 
67  nM/L.  Despite  this  change  in  the  electrochemical  gradient,  hydrogen 
ion  loss  from  the  stomach  was  not  significantly  changed  by  acidosis, 
being  56+23  before  and  56+24  mEq/15  min  after  acidosis.  Recovery  resulted 
in  normalization  of  arterial  pH  and  serum  hydrogen  ion  concentration  with 
no  change  in  hydrogen  ion  loss  from  the  pouch.  However,  during  acidosis 
the  hydrogen  ion  loss  was  inversely  related  to  serum  hydrogen  ion  concen- 
tration. In  conclusion,  respiratory  acidosis  does  not  seem  to  change  the 
net  loss  of  hydrogen  ion.  Any  increase  in  the  gastric  mucosal  permea- 
bility by  acidosis  might  be  offset  by  an  increase  in  the  adverse  elec- 
trochemical gradient. 

Even  with  severe  ischemic  insult  to  the  gastric  mucosa 
resulting  from  hemorrhage  or  endotoxemia  there  appears  to  be  no  increase 
in  ionic  permeability  and  no  break  in  the  gastric  mucosal  barrier  in 
either  the  canine  or  baboon  model.  Acid  in  the  lumen  of  the  stomach  is 
sufficient  to  cause  acute  superficial  erosions  of  the  gastric  mucosa  in 
the  presence  of  severe  ischemia.  This  probably  results  from  an  inability 
of  the  stressed  mucosal  cells  to  buffer  the  normal  amount  of  acid  that  is 
back  diffusing.  This  is  made  worse  by  the  attendant  acidosis  in  these 
shock  states.  Histamine  H2  receptor  blockade  with  metiamide  decreases 
the  incidence  of  stress  ulceration  without  affecting  the  changes  in  ionic 
permeability  due  to  barrier-disrupting  agents  like  bile  salt. 

IV.  Cardiovascular  Effects  of  Urokinase 

A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Urokinase  is  an  acti- 
vator of  plasminogen  and  has  been  used  to  treat  pulmonary  embolism. 4 
Urokinase  was  found  to  be  more  effective  than  heparin  when  used  intra- 
venously to  treat  pulmonary  embolism.  The  chief  problem  associated  with 
its  use,  however,  was  a high  rate  of  bleeding  complication  which  may  have 
been  due  to  the  addition  of  heparin  to  the  urokinase  regimen.  A variety 
of  thrombo-embolic  diseases  are  associated  with  vasospasm.  While  investi- 
gating the  possibility  of  using  urokinase  intra-arterially,  we  discovered 
that  this  enzyme  is  also  a vasodilator.  This  vasodilator  property  may  be 
of  value  in  the  treatment  of  thrombo-embolic  occlusions  especially  those 
associated  with  vasospasm.  However,  the  relationships  between  vasodila- 
tion and  the  other  properties  of  urokinase,  namely  fibrinolysis  and 
thrombolysis,  have  not  been  elucidated.  Such  relationships  may  be  im- 
portant in  the  clinical  application  of  intra-arterial  urokinase  therapy. 
The  intra-arterial  route  may  prove  to  be  of  more  value  than  the  intra- 
venous route  because  of  vasodilation  and  the  requirements  for  a smaller 
dose. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Arterial  blood  flow  in  the  superior 
mesenteric  and  femoral  circulations  of  dogs  was  measured  by  electro- 
magnetic flowmeters.  Urokinase  isolated  from  human  urine  was  injected 
and  infused  intra-arterially  over  a dose  range  of  several  decades.  The 
effects  on  arterial  blood  flow,  arterial  blood  pressure,  and  venous  blood 

pressure  were  recorded.  Ihese  infusions  then  were  repeated  after  blocking 
plasminogen  activation  with  epsilon-amino  caproic  acid  (EACA) . 

798 


In  another  set  of  experiments  on  dogs,  obstructing  arterial 
thrombi  were  produced  by  a modified  Wessler  technique  in  the  femoral  and 
superior  mesenteric  arteries.  The  arteries  were  then  either  infused  with 
saline  or  urokinase  at  several  different  dose  levels.  The  results  of 
these  infusions  were  evaluated  by  arterial  blood  flow  measurement  (elec- 
tromagnetic flowmeter),  degree  of  thrombolysis  (arteriogram),  and  fibrino- 
lysis (fibrin  plate  assay  and  euglobulin  lysis  time).  Systemic  and  re- 
gional blood  samples  were  taken  for  determination  of  clotting-coagulation 
as  well  as  fibrinolysis. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Intra-arterial  urokinase  infusion  at 
100  C.T.A.  units/kg  body  weight/minute  resulted  in  mild  vasodilation  in 
the  femoral  circulation.  At  this  dose  we  were  also  able  to  achieve  throm- 
bolysis with  complete  dissolution  of  the  clots  in  the  femoral  artery  in- 
fused. No  dissolution  of  the  clot  in  the  contralateral  femoral  artery 
was  observed.  At  this  dose  level  fibrinolysis  was  achieved  by  shortening 
of  the  euglobulin  lysis  time  and  prolongation  of  the  fibrin  plate  lysis 
zone.  We  could  regionalize  this  effect  by  concomitant  treatment  with 
EACA,  and  at  this  particular  dose  level,  fibrinogen  concentration  was 
unchanged.  In  contrast,  infusion  of  urokinase  at  100  C.T.A.  units/kg/min 
into  the  superior  mesenteric  arterial  circulation  produced  no  increase  in 
blood  flow.  At  this  particular  dose  level  there  was  thrombolysis  as  well 
as  fibrinolysis  similar  to  that  seen  in  the  femoral  artery.  However, 
serum  fibrinogen  began  to  fall  at  this  particular  dose  level;  and  when 
125  units  was  infused  for  100  minutes  serum  fibrinogen  fell  to  less  than 
50  mg  %.  Thrombolysis  was  also  achieved  at  75  units/kg/min  at  which 
point  the  fibrinogen  level  was  normal.  It  would  seem  that  in  the  superior 
mesenteric  arterial  circulation  pushing  the  dose  above  100  C.T.A.  units/ 
kg/min  did  not  enhance  thrombolysis,  an  approach  too  dangerously  close 
to  fibrinogeno lysis.  In  other  words,  we  were  unable  to  use  a dose  in 
the  superior  mesenteric  arterial  circulation  to  produce  vasodilation 
without  untoward  effects.  In  this  circulation  we  were  also  not  able  to 
get  a regionalization  of  effects  as  we  did  in  the  femoral  circulation 
using  EACA. 


The  intra-arterial  administration  of  urokinase  offers  an  exciting 
new  way  to  treat  thrombotic  occlusions  of  major  vessels  without  severe 
alterations  in  blood  clotting.  Dissolution  of  all  thrombi  was  achieved 
in  either  the  femoral  or  superior  mesenteric  circulation  at  a dose  of 
approximately  100  C.T.A.  units/kg/min  for  100  minutes.  These  studies 
provide  a firm  background  for  the  use  of  urokinase  in  the  human  clinical 
situation. 


1 


■j  ■ ~ r " 


Project  3A162110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 


Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  121  Gastrointestinal  responses  to  shock  and  trauma 
Literature  Cited. 

References : 

1.  Skillman,  J.  J.,  Gould,  S.  A.,  Chung,  R.  S.  K.,  and  Silen,  W.: 

The  gastric  mucosal  barrier:  clinical  and  experimental  studies  in  crit- 

ically ill  and  normal  man,  and  in  the  rabbit.  Ann.  Surg.  172:  564,  1970. 

2.  Davenport,  H.  W.:  Gastric  mucosal  injury  by  fatty  and  acetyl- 

salicylic  acids.  Gastroenterology  46:  245,  1964. 

3.  Menguy,  R. , Desbaillets,  L.,  and  Masters,  Y.  F.:  Mechanism  of 

stress  ulcer:  influence  of  hypovolemic  shock  on  energy  metabolism  in  the 

gastric  mucosa.  Gastroenterology  66:  46,  1974. 

4.  Urokinase  Pulmonary  Embolism  Trial:  A National  Cooperative 

Study.  Circulation  47  (Suppl.  II):  1,  1973. 

5.  Reynolds,  D.  G.,  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Wickline,  D.  L.,  Locke,  D., 

and  Gurll,  N.  J, : The  effect  of  endotoxic  shock  and  fluid  expansion  on 

regional  blood  flow  in  the  baboon.  The  Physiologist  19:  in  press,  1976. 

6.  Gurll,  N.  J.,  Callahan,  W.,  and  Hufnagel,  H.  V.:  High-dose, 

short-term  local  urokinase  for  clearing  femoral  thrombi  by  vasodilation 
and  thrombolysis.  J.  Surg.  Res.  20:  in  press,  1976. 

7.  Gurll,  N.  J.,  and  Harmon,  J.  W.:  Canine  duodenal  mucosal  neu- 

tralization of  acid.  The  Physiologist  ljJ:  in  press  1976. 

Publications : 

1.  Jacques,  D.  P.,  Reynolds,  D.  G.,  Evans,  L.  W.,  and  Swan,  K.  G.: 
Adrenergic  mechanisms  in  the  hindlimb  circulation  of  baboons.  Surgery 
77:  577,  1975. 

2.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Kerr,  J.  C.,  and  Reynolds,  D.  G.:  Hemodynamic 

effects  of  intra-arterial  infusions  of  catecholamines  on  the  canine 
gastric  circulation.  Surgery  78:  381,  1975. 

3.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Kerr,  J.  C.,  and  Reynolds,  D.  G.:  Adrenergic 

mechanisms  in  canine  gastric  circulation.  Amer.  J.  Physiol.  229:  977, 
1975. 


4.  Fromm,  D.  Schwartz,  J.  H. , and  Quijano,  R.:  Effects  of  sali- 

cylate and  bile  salt  cn  ion  transport  by  isolated  gastric  mucosa  of  the 
rabbit.  Amer.  J.  Physiol.  230:  319,  1976. 

5.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Kerr,  J.  C.,  and  Reynolds,  D.  G.:  Primate 

gastric  circulation:  effects  of  catecholamines  and  adrenergic  blockade. 

Amer.  J.  Physiol.  230:  346,  1976. 

6.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Turtinen,  L.,  and  Gurll,  N.  J.:  Stress  ulcera- 

tion and  the  gastric  mucosal  barrier.  Amer.  Surg.  41:  209,  1975. 

7.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Turtinen,  L.,  Gurll,  N.  J.,  and  Reynolds,  D.  G.: 
The  effect  of  metiamide  on  gastric  mucosal  injury  in  rat  restraint. 

Clin  Res.  23:  484A,  1975. 

8.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Gurll,  N.  J.,  and  Reynolds,  D.  G.:  The  effect 

of  hemorrhagic  shock  and  resuscitation  on  gastrointestinal  blood  flow 
in  cynomolgus  monkeys.  Fed.  Proc.  35:  450,  1976. 

9.  Zinner,  M.  J.,  Gurll,  N.  J.,  and  Reynolds,  D.  G.:  Gastric 

hemodynamic  and  mucosal  responses  to  endotoxemia  in  the  baboon. 
Gastroenterology  _70:  A97/955,  1976. 

10.  Gurll,  N.  J. , and  Callahan,  W.,  II:  Hydrogen  ion  back  diffusion 

is  not  affected  by  acidosis.  Gastroenterology  70:  A34/892,  1976. 

11.  Gurll,  N.  J.,  and  Callahan,  W.,  II:  The  effect  of  metiamide  on 

the  gastric  mucosal  barrier  and  its  response  to  topical  bile  salts. 
Gastroenterology  A34/G92,  1976. 

12.  Gurll,  N.  J.,  Callahan,  W. , II,  and  Hufnagel,  H.  V.:  Vasodila- 

tion and  thrombolysis  with  intra-arterial  urokinase  infusion  in  the 
canine  femoral  circulation.  Clin.  Res.  24:  219A,  1976. 

13.  Gurll,  N.  J. , Callahan,  W.,  II,  and  Hufnagel,  H.  V.:  Effect  of 

intra-arterial  urokinase  infusion  on  blood  flow,  clotting  and  fibrino- 
lysis in  a canine  model  of  superior  mesenteric  arterial  thrombosis. 

Clin.  Res.  24:  285A,  1976. 


_ a ...  • -V:  ♦ • • ■ •».  .-J 


» D«  T|  Nil  < VJFRT 

75  O'  01 

A KINO  OR  IUMMANT 

D.  Change 

t lUMMANV  ICTV* 

u 

4 BORA  SC  CUM  T V® 

u 

» ACONAOANO* 

NA 

IN  DMB*M  INITA'N 

NL 

B IRICIEIi  DATA  ■ 
CON  TRACT  OA  ACC  CIS 

E Til  G NO 

• LtVtL  OF  SUM 

A.  BOM  USBT 

10  NO  COOES  # 

PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

•ORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

4.  RRIMARY 

62110A 

3A162110A821 

00 



[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  DMT  SUMMARY 


h-  cwimiinmo 


■ IMIlfMMMtlll 

aa 


CARDS  114F  i 


i amky  tcciiwoir  a date  or  saasriaiiv" 

DA  OB  6532  76  07  01 


Mpour  comnHH.  mac 
DD-DH*E(AH)6Jt> 


l 1IUI  iRnct*  ciNWHuiiat  MV* 

(U)  Pathophysiology  of  Systemic  Responses  to  Shock  and  Trauma 

» LCItHT  RlC  AND  TtCNNOLOOICAL  AREAS* 

012600  Stress  Physiology 


) START  CAti 

73  07 


• l|T|MATtO  COMPLETION  DATE 


C0NT 


' 11  F UMWMO  AOCMCV 

DA  I 


it  contaact  grant 
A OAi(i/i»rtc*iY(.  MA 


C.  TVRI 

«.  • *mO  OP  AIARD 


4 AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


i*  NlSRONHItl  OOOORi 


M NCSOURCII  ■ 1 TIMA  T| 

N A NO  FISSION  A*l  NAN  VR1 

L FUNDS  ff»  (mwnN) 

FISCAL 
V t A N 

76 

2 

9° 

77 

2 

i h 7 

!•  FINFOMMNO  OREAMlIATIOM 


"Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
»oo««.i"  Washington,  DC  20012 


REIRUMUll  INDIVIDUAL 

*»it-  Joy , COL  R.  J.  T. 
.I.,...,.  202  576-3551 


■ < .If 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


It.  MftrOMVANCt  M f MOD 

C.  in-House 


'**  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Surgery 
'Washington,  DC  20012 


’RiNClAAL  IN  VIST  10  A TO  A A MAN  MV  I A 

>*"'  Giordano,  LTC  J.  M. 

tMnmn  202  576-3793 

MOCIAL  IICURlTr  ACCOUNT  NUMflN  Hpll 


AllOC  I A T | INvCITIOATOaa 


DA 


!i  « i . •o»m  *,<?«  i.—if,  c.J.,  Microaggregates  ; (U)  Pulmonary  Hemodynamics; 

(U)  Vein  Grafts 


I KCHNIlAl  OlJlCTIVE.'  14  ARRAOACM.  II  RNOOAS  U CP-m««A  IiMI.IMmI  ManflNv*  * niNNr  RNItM  l*ll  *i  m«A  *IA  ClMil*»M»  C*N  ; 

23  (U)  To  evaluate  the  effects  of  microaggregates  in  stored  blood  on  pulmonary  hemo- 
dynamics; to  determine  the  mechanism  of  the  pulmonary  arterial  pressor  response  to 
alveolar  hypoxia.  These  studies  are  important  in  understanding  the  mechanism  of  the 
respiratory  distress  syndrome  and  in  the  resuscitation  of  patients  in  shock,  an  area 
of  vital  importance  in  the  management  of  combat  casualties.  To  evaluate  various  ma- 
terials for  use  as  venous  prostheses.  Such  material  is  needed  to  Improve  treatment  of 
peripheral  vascular  trauma. 

24  (U)  Radioactive  raicrospheres  were  used  to  determine  change  in  pulmonary  hemodynamics 
before  and  after  the  administration  of  stored  blood  with  microaggregates.  Ill  and  H2 
histamine  antagonists  and  alpha  and  beta  blockers  were  administered  in  an  attempt  to 
block  the  pressor  response  to  alveolar  hypoxia.  A "Teflon"  type  of  graft  material  was 
subjected  to  patency  tests  in  the  femoral  venous  system  of  dogs. 

25  (U)  75  07  - 76  07.  No  change  in  pulmonary  hemodynamics  were  demonstrated  before  or 
after  the  administration  of  microaggregates  suggesting  that  microaggregates  may  not  be 
responsible  for  the  respiratory  distress  syndrome.  The  histamine  antagonists  and  the 
catecholamine  blockers  did  not  influence  the  pressor  response  to  alveolar  hypoxia. 

The  Teflon  graft  material  did  not  prove  to  he  a suitable  venous  prosthesis. 

.'upport  in  the  tur.'jun*-.  "f  000  from  FY  j'T  finds  i r programme"!  fur  the  jeriuc  1 
jU  .'ep  To. 


For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report 
1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76. 


DD.ISVJ498 


PREVIOUS  IOI  T IONS  O F THIS  rORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  l«l|A  l NOVAS 
AND  1 Alt  I I MAR  Sf  1 1 OR  ARM*  USE*  ARE  OBSOLETE 

802 


MN^.'gi ''■Ma  WT  rNifair 


— . — - — ......  ...  ,,-i 


I 


Project  3A162110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  124  Pathophysiology  of  systemic  responses  to  shock  and  trauma 


Investigators 

Principal:  LTC  Joseph  M.  Giordano,  MC 

Associate:  COL  Norman  M.  Rich,  MC* 


Microaggregates 


A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Microaggregates,  com- 
posed of  platelets  and  white  blood  cells  in  a fibrin  matrix,  are  formed 
during  the  storage  of  human  blood.  The  infusion  of  large  volumes  of 
these  microaggregates  can  produce  pathologic  changes  in  pulmonary 
structure  and  function  and  may  be  significant  in  the  etiology  of  post- 
traumatic  respiratory  distress  syndrome  (RDS).  As  demonstrated  by 
Blaisdell,  Mosely  and  MacNamara,  post-transfusion  pulmonary  insuffi- 
ciency is  a significant  cause  of  morbidity  and  mortality  during  combat 
trauma.  Research  has  been  directed  toward  elucidating  the  factors 
involved  in  microaggregate,  formation,  evaluating  multiple  techniques  for 
the  prevention  of  microaggregate  formation  or  for  the  removal  of  micro- 
aggregates from  aged  blood,  and  determining  the  importance  of  micro- 
aggregates as  an  etiologic  agent  in  RDS. 

B.  Experimental  Approach 

1.  Evaluation  of  Microaggregates.  Evaluation  of  microaggregates 

was  undertaken  using  3 techniques:  A model  T multichannel  particle  size 

analyzer,  the  screen  filtration  pressure  (SFP)  apparatus  of  Swank,  and 
the  weighing  of  filter  grids  before  and  after  the  passage  of  known  vol- 
umes of  blood.  A comparison  of  these  techniques  revealed  the  Coulter 
counter  to  be  the  only  reproducible  quantitative  method  for  evaluating 
microaggregates . 

2.  Effect  of  Microaggregates.  To  determine  the  effect  of  micro- 
aggregates on  the  pulmonary  microcirculation,  blood  was  withdrawn  from 
dogs  and  stored  for  5 days.  The  quantity  of  microaggregates  was  deter- 
mined and  the  blood  transfused  back  to  the  animal  through  a catheter 
placed  in  the  left  pulmonary  artery.  The  measurement  of  pulmonary  blood 
flow  was  determined  before  and  after  transfusion  by  the  distribution  of 
radioactive  microspheres.  Our  hypothesis  was  that  if  blood  is  redistrib- 
uted away  from  the  left  lung  following  transfusion,  this  would  Indicate 
an  effect  of  the  stored  blood  on  the  pulmonary  microcirculation.  Three 


♦Associate  Investigator,  Chief,  Peripheral  Vascular  Surgery  Service, 
WRAMC 


I « 


. ™ "V  llll  mi  I»  Jll  1.  P ■■)  i . U..1  II  M . . ll.l'U.  II  I 


groups  were  investigated:  a)  Hemorrhagic  shock  model  in  which  the  ani- 

mal was  resuscitated  by  transfusing  stored  blood  with  microaggregates; 
b)  a non-shock  preparation  in  which  blood  was  transfused  by  stored  blood 
with  microaggregates;  and  c)  a non-shocked  preparation  in  which  stored 
blood  without  microaggregates  was  transfused. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion 

1.  Microaggregates  in  Stored  Human  Blood.  Strict  quantitation 
of  microaggregates  and  the  time  course  of  the  appearance  of  microaggre- 
gates in  human  blood  anticoagulated  in  both  ACD  and  CPD  was  undertaken. 

No  microaggregate  formation  was  noted  for  the  first  7 days.  Between  7 
and  21  days  a great  volume  of  microaggregate  formation  occurred.  From 
21  to  28  days  of  storage  smaller  increases  occurred.  The  volume  of 
microaggregates  in  both  anticoagulants  after  28  days  of  storage  were 
equal,  the  value  being  approximately  1500  + 100  u-^  x 10^/mm^.  The  vol- 
ume of  microaggregates  was  noted  to  occur  on]y  in  the  buffy  coat,  with 
plasma  and  packed  red  blood  ceil  fractions  being  virtually  free  of 
microaggregate  concentrations.  Additionally,  packed  red  blood  cells, 
glycerol  frozen  red  blood  cells,  and  commercially  prepared  plasma  and 
albumin  fractions  were  all  noted  to  be  low  in  microaggregate  content. 

2.  Evaluation  of  Factors  Involved  in  Microaggregate  Formation. 
These  studies  suggest  that  the  removal  of  platelets  and  white  blood 
cells  from  fresh  blood  prior  to  storage  prevents  microaggregate  forma- 
tion. Additionally,  the  in  vitro  or  in  vivo  treatment  of  blood  with 
aspirin  reduces  by  approximately  50%  but  does  not  prevent  microaggre- 
gate formation.  Treatment  of  blood,  before  or  after  storage,  with 
activators  of  the  fibrinolytic  system  (urokinase  or  streptokinase)  like- 
wise reduce  but  does  not  totally  prevent  microaggregate  formation.  The 
constant  agitation  of  blood  during  storage  reduces  microaggregate  forma- 
tion by  approximately  40%  but  causes  significant  red  blood  cell  hemolysis 
and  damage  to  blood  components.  After  microaggregates  have  been  formed, 
treatment  with  Arvin  followed  by  routine  filtration  reduces  microaggre- 
gate levels  to  immeasurable  levels.  Likewise,  the  centrifugation  of 
blood  for  5 minutes  at  5000  rpm  after  storage  followed  by  routine  filtra- 
tion completely  removes  all  microaggregate  volumes. 

3.  Effect  of  Microaggregates  on  Pulmonary  Hemodynamics.  No 
significant  redistribution  of  blood  flow  away  from  the  left  lung  occurred 
in  any  of  the  three  groups  studied.  This  suggests  that  microaggregates 
may  not  play  a major  role  in  the  development  of  the  respiratory  distress 
syndrome. 

II.  Infectibility  of  Vascular  Grafts 

A.  Statement  of  the  Problem.  This  laboratory  has  documented  the 
infection  rate  for  dacron,  bovine,  and  autogenous  vein  grafts  by  the 
intravenous  infusion  of  bacteria  3 weeks  after  the  graft  was  placed  in 
the  canine  infra-renal  abdominal  aorta.  An  important  clinical  question 


804 


is  how  long  following  operation  is  the  graft  still  susceptible  to  infec- 
tion. 


f 


B.  Experimental  Approach.  The  canine  infra-renal  aorta  was  excised 
and  reconstructed  with  dacron  grafts.  Six  months  following  operation, 
the  animals  received  10?  colony  forming  units  of  Staphylococcus  aureus 
intravenously.  Three  weeks  later  the  grafts  were  harvested  and  cultured. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Although  the  grafts  were  in  the  animal 
for  6 months,  3 out  of  14  became  infected.  No  correlation  could  be 
determined  between  pseudointima  development  and  infection.  This  study 
suggests  that  6 months  following  a vascular  operation,  the  risks  of 
infecting  a graft  are  sufficiently  great  to  warrant  administration  of 
antibiotics  prior  to  a procedure  that  may  be  associated  with  bacteremia. 

III.  Pulmonary  Arterial  Pressor  Response  to  Alveolar  Hypoxia 

A.  Statement  of  the  Problem.  The  mechanism  that  mediates  the 
pulmonary  arterial  pressor  response  to  alveolar  hypoxia  remains  undeter- 
mined. Most  investigators  have  implicated  a humeral  factor  secreted  by 
pulmonary  alveolar  cells  following  exposure  to  low  oxygen  tensions.  A 
series  of  studies  were  instituted  to  (1)  set  up  a non-invasive  model  to 
investigate  this  response;  (2)  to  administer  and  H2  histamine  blockers 
in  an  attempt  to  prevent  the  pressor  response;  and  (3)  to  administer 
alpha  and  beta  blockers  to  determine  the  influence  of  catecholamines  on 
this  response. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Dogs  were  intubated  with  a double  lumen 
endotracheal  tube.  The  distribution  of  cardiac  output  was  determined  by 
the  right  atrial  injection  of  radioactive  microspheres.  The  right  lung 
was  ventilated  with  100%  O2  and  the  left  lung  with  5%  O2.  Microspheres 
were  again  injected  to  document  the  redistribution  of  blood  flow  away 
from  the  hypoxic  left  lung.  Histamine  and  catecholamine  blockers  were 
administered  in  an  attempt  to  influence  this  response. 

C.  Results  and  Conclusions.  The  histamine,  alpha  and  beta  blockers 
did  not  attenuate  the  pressor  response.  These  studies  suggest  that 
histamine  or  the  catecholamines  do  not  mediate  the  pressor  response  to 
alveolar  hypoxia. 


1 

j 


I 


1 


i 

i 

i 


805 


L_ 


Project  3A162110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  124  Pathophysiology  of  systemic  responses  to  shock  and  trauma 


Literature  Cited. 


References : 


1.  Lamoy,  R.  E. , and  Hobson,  R.  W. : 
identification  of  experimental  abscesses. 


Indium  chloride  scanning  for 
J.  Surg.  Res.  In  press,  1976. 


2.  Giordano,  J.  M. , Zinner,  M. , Hobson,  R.  W. , and  Gervin,  A.  S. 
The  effects  of  microaggregates  in  stored  blood  on  canine  pulmonary 
vascular  resistance.  Surgery  79:1976,  in  press. 


3.  Giordano,  J.  M. , Lamoy,  R. , Wright,  C.  B.,  and  Hobson,  R.  W. 


comparison  of  autographs  and  frozen  irradiated  homografts  in  canine 
femoral  venous  reconstruction.  Surgery  79:1976,  in  press. 


4.  Giordano,  J.  M. , Zinner,  M. , Guba,  A.,  and  Lynch,  N. : A model 

for  the  investigation  of  the  pulmonary  arterial  pressor  response  to 
alveolar  hypoxia.  Clin.  Res.,  1976,  in  press. 


Publications : 


1.  Hobson,  R.  W. , Wright,  C.  B. , Zinner,  M. , and  Lamoy,  R.  E. : 
Cerebral  blood  flow  determination  by  radioactive  microspheres  in  subhuman 
primates:  Influence  of  unilateral  internal  carotid  ligation,  hypercapnic 

acidosis  and  hypocapnic  alkalosis.  Surgery  80:176,  1976. 


2.  Collins,  G.  J.,  Hobson,  R.  W. , Rich,  N.  M. , and  Levin,  I.: 
Arterial  dilator-shunt  for  use  in  carotid  artery  fibromuscular  hyper- 
plasia. Am.  J.  Surg.  130:381,  1975. 


3.  Giordano,  J.  M. , Wright,  C.  B. , Lamoy,  R. , and  Hobson,  R.  W. : 
Recanalization  of  venous  grafts:  Comparison  of  homografts  and  auto- 

grafts. Clin.  Res.  23:470,  1975. 


4.  Lough,  F. , Giordano,  J.  M. , and  Hobson,  R.  W. : Regional  hemo- 

dynamics of  large  and  small  arteriovenous  fistulas  in  dogs.  Surgery  79: 
346,  1976. 


5.  Ger\in,  A.  S.,  Mason,  K.  G.,  and  Buckman,  R.  F. : The  source  and 


removal  of  m* 
Surg.  C--  _ 


ggregates  in  aged  human  blood  and  human  blood  components, 
ostot.  141:582,  1975. 


806 


I 


6.  Hobson,  R.  W. , Rich,  N.  M.  , Wright,  C.  B. , and  Fedde,  C.  W.: 

Operative  assessment  of  carotid  endarterectomy:  internal  carotid 

arterial  back  pressure,  carotid  arterial  blood  flow,  and  carotid 
arteriography.  Amer.  Surg.  41:603-610,  Oct.  75. 

7.  Wright,  C.  B.,  and  Hobson,  R.  W. : Prediction  of  intestinal 

viability  using  Doppler  ultrasound  technics.  Am.  J.  Surg.  128:642- 
645,  Jun  75. 

8.  Rich,  N.  M. , and  Hobson,  R.  W.,  II:  Trauma  to  the  venous 

system.  In:  Vascular  Surgery  in  the  Lower  Extremities.  Edited  by 

K.  G.  Swan,  D.  G.  Reynolds,  N.  M.  Rich,  R.  W.  Hobson,  and  C.  B.  Wright. 
St.  Louis:  W.  H.  Green,  Inc.,  1976,  pp.  3-19. 

9.  Reynolds,  D.  G. , Jaques,  D.  0.,  Boynton,  W.  A.,  Brungardt,  J. 

M. , and  Swan,  K.  G. : Adrenergic  control  of  femoral  blood  flow,  pp.145- 
160,  ibid. 

10.  Swan,  K.  G. , Wright,  C.  B. , Evans,  L.  W. , Kerr,  J.  C. , and 
Reynolds,  D.  G. : Cholinergic  effects  on  femoral  blood  flow,  pp.169- 

176,  ibid. 


11.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Reynolds,  D.  G.,  and  Swan,  K.  G. : Sympathectomy 

and  femoral  blood  flow,  pp. 169-175,  ibid. 

12.  Hobson,  R.  W. , Howard,  E.  W. , Wright,  C.  B. , Swan,  K.  G. , and 

Rich,  N.  M.  : Hemodynamics  of  femoral  venous  ligation,  pp.215--221,  ibid. 

13.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Casterline,  P.  F.,  Sayre,  J.  T.,  and  Swan,  K.  G. : 
Management  of  venous  ligation,  pp, 223-238,  ibid. 

14.  Rich,  N.  M. , Hobson,  R.  W. , Wright,  C.  B.,  and  Swan,  K.  G.  : 
Techniques  of  venous  repair,  pp. 243-255,  ibid. 

15.  Hobson,  R.  W. , Wright,  C.  B.,  Rich,  N.  M. , and  Swan,  K.  G.  : 
Evaluation  of  vein  graft  patency,  pp. 257-263,  ibid. 


16.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Alix,  E.  C.,  Hobson,  R.  W. , and  Swan,  K.  G. : 
Results  following  reconstruction  of  the  femoral  vein,  pp. 265-273,  ibid. 


17.  Gervin,  A.  S.  : Complications  of  heparin  therapy,  pp. 307-322, 

ibid. 

18.  Hobson,  R.  W. : Low  molecular  weight  dextran  and  heparin  in 

venous  reconstruction,  pp. 337-341,  ibid. 


19.  Rich, 
arteriovenous 


N.  M. , Levin,  P.  M.,  and  Hutton,  J.  E. : Effect  of  distal 

fistulas  on  venous  graft  patency,  pp. 361-375,  ibid. 


20.  Swan, 
arteriovenous 


K.  G.,  and  Wright,  C.  B. : 
fistula,  pp. 377-383,  ibid. 


Hemodynamic  effects  of  the 


807 


21.  Hobson,  R.  W. , and  Wright,  C.  B. : The  peripheral  arterio- 

venous fistula,  pp. 385-389,  ibid. 

22.  Perloff,  L.  J. , Reckard , C.  R. , Rowlands,  D.  T. , and  Barker, 

C.  F. : Immunology  of  the  venous  homograft,  pp. 395-406,  ibid. 

23.  Wright,  C.  B.  , Hobson,  R.  W. , and  Swan,  K.  G. : Review  of 

autografts  and  homografts  in  canine  femoral  venous  reconstruction, 
pp. 409-413,  ibid. 

24.  Hobson,  R.  W. , Popovic,  N.,  Croom,  R.  D. , Rich,  N.  M. , and 

Bielke,  S.  R. : Fibrocollagenous  tubes  in  experimental  femoral  venous 

reconstruction:  functional  and  microscopic  evaluation,  pp. 415-424, 

ibid. 

25.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Lamoy,  R.  E. , and  Hobson,  R.  W. , II:  Hemo- 

dynamic effects  of  intra-arterial  injection  of  drugs  of  abuse.  Surgery 
79:425-431,  1976  (Apr). 

26.  Lough,  F.  C. , Giordano,  J.  M. , and  Hobson,  R.  W. : Regional 

hemodynamics  of  large  and  small  femoral  arteriovenous  fistulas  in  dogs. 
Surgery  79:346-349,  1976  (Mar). 

27.  Gervin,  A.  S. , Mason,  K.  G. , and  Wright,  C.  B. : Microaggregate 

formation  during  regional  hypoperfusion.  Surg.  Gynec.  Obstet.  141:719- 
723,  1975. 


808 


• AOl»C^CCI»»!oy 

HA  OA  6527 


io^^^^uhhar^^ 

76  07  01 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

^Tumnan^ctv^ 

U 


import  connoi  trmm 

Dl)-l}RhE(AR)636 


I DATE  »*tV  iUlTAV 

75  07  01 


4 KIM  o Of  tUWI  AMY 


D.  Change 


OAK  IICUM 

u 


REORAOINg” 

NA 


IA  Mirk  INSTR'N 

NL 


SPECIFIC  DATA  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACC  K II 

S YtS  Gwo 


• LEVEL  OF  | 


10  NO  COOCS  • PROGRAM  IlEHEnT 


PROJECT NUMtER 


TASK  ARE*  MUMIER 


WORM  UNIT  NUMICR 


62110A 


3A162110A821 


00 


125 


h.  CONTAI OUTING 


I TITlC  fj>ra<«4*  mil*  fc-rity  C CaA)* 

(U)  Control  Mechanisms  of  Regional  Circulation 

1}  SCIENTIFIC  AMD  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREA? 

003500  Clinical  Medicine  012900  Physiology 

DATE 


14  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATC 

CONT 


i*  penformance  net  moo 

C.  in-House 


I I ITAAT  OATf 

65  07 


IT  CONTRACT  ORANT 
A OATEI/f  FFCCTIVt:  NA 


. TVRt. 

. KINO  OR  AWARD’ 


A AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


IS  RESOURCES  Eil.  .ATS 

A PROFESSIONAL  HAN  YRI 

L FUND*  fl»  AmmAJ 

FISCAL 

TEAR 

76 

2 

7d 

77 

1 

133 

DA 


it  RIIPOklltLE  OOO  OR 0 AMI  I ATION 


«0  PERFORMING  OROANIIATION 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  o£  Research 
OONtil  •Washington,  DC  20012 


_L 


RtlPORVia  INDIVIDUAL 


haul  Joy,  COL  R.  J.  T. 

202  576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


l*“, *Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Surgery 

Washington,  DC  20012 

RRINClRAL  INVtSTIGATON  fPufMlF*  MAR  If  U S AuRali  fnallfMlIwi) 

rami*  Harken,  LTC  A.  H. 

Tt Li Rhone  202  576-2355 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUHRCR 
AHOCI  AT  I INVESTIGATORS 

»»»■  Woods , MAJ  M . 

MAMI: 


DA 


Oxygen  Consumption;  (tf)  ‘Tissue  Respiration; 

(U)  Organ  Perfusion 


21  TECHNIC  1L  OWJECTivE.*  |A  APPROACH,  It  PROGRESS  ( RmRiArA  IhWI.Hw)  m»M>ARA*  MmhIHfW  S»  lumtf  RfprtWa  FW«A  wfft  f«cwflfr  ClMRfRcafiai  ) 

23  (U)  To  define  the  mechanism  of  regulating  regional  circulation,  the  influence  of 
oxygen  delivery  and  oxyhemoglobin  affinity  on  tissue  respiration.  These  studies  apply 
directly  to  respiratory  support  of  soldiers  with  acute  battle  injuries  or  post-surgical 
stress . 

24  (U)  Physiologic  techniques  have  been  employed  to  document  the  response  of  Intact 
tissues  to  varieties  of  stress.  Tissue  respiration,  organ  metabolism  and  viability 
were  evaluated. 

25  (U)  75  07  - 76  06.  Control  mechanisms  of  regional  circulation.  Completed  studies 

In  an  Isolated  perfused  canine  hindlimb  or  heart  indicate  that  tissue  oxygen  uptake  is 
related  to  the  pH  and  oxyhemoglobin  affinity  of  the  perfusing  blood.  Alkalosis  Is  a 
profound  stimulus  to  lactate  production  in  an  isolated  canine  limb.  A rightward  shift 
of  the  oxyhemoglobin  dissociation  curve  (towards  lower  oxyhemoglobin  affinity)  permits 
increased  oxygen  off-loading  at  the  tissue  level  and  an  Increased  oxygen  uptake. 

Support  in  t.ie  amount  of  $26,000  from  FY  JT  funus  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul- 
30  Sep  76. 


For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report, 
1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76. 


Iti  tonimnwi  > 


1 ♦rt|h«lw*<  appro  r* ! 


00,7.7*1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  I ASS  A I NOV  SB 
AND  1411  I 1 MAR  SB  IFOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

H'W 


Project  jAi62110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  125  Control  mechanisms  of  regional  circulation 


Investigators 

Principal:  LTC  Alden  H.  Harken,  MC 
Associate:  MAJ  Monty  Woods,  MC 


I.  Factors  Influencing  Tissue  Respiration 

A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Oxygen  utilization  by 
tissues  is  influenced  by  the  chemical  composition  of  the  perfusing 
blood  and  cardiovascular  reflexes.  Variation  in  the  chemical  composi- 
tion of  the  blood  exerts  influences  both  centrally  and  peripherally. 
Experiments  were  performed  in  isolated  canine  hindlimbs  which  were 
perfused  under  tightly  controlled  conditions.  The  effects  of  variation 
in  pH,  O2  and  CO2  content,  lactate,  and  endotoxin  on  respiration  were 
determined. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  A membrane  lung  perfusion  system  was 
devised  with  which  a vascularly  isolated  but  viable  extremity  could  be 
perfused  with  blood  of  controlled  composition.  The  chemical  composi- 
tion of  the  perfusing  blood  was  changed  by  altering  pH,  PO2 , PCO2, 
using  stored  rather  than  fresh  blood,  and  adding  endotoxin  and  steroid. 
The  effects  of  these  alterations  on  tissue  respiration  were  measured. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Oxygen  consumption  (Vf^)  was  related 
to  the  blood's  pH  by  the  equation  Vq£  ■ 100.1  pH  - 1643  (r  = 0.86); 
thus  a change  in  acidity  of  the  perfusing  blood  by  0.1  p.l  unit  causes 

a 10%  change  in  limb  ^02*  When  blood  pH  was  above  7.3,  lactic  acid  was 
produced  and  when  pH  was  below  7.3,  it  was  consumed.  The  relationship 
between  the  A-V  lactate  difference  and  blood  pH  is  expressed  by 
Lactate  = 22.5  pH  - 162  (r  = 0.75).  Lactic  acid  production  does  not 
reflect  tissue  oxygenation  during  clinical  alkalosis.  In  seventeen 
dogs  the  addition  of  5 mg  of  endotoxin  to  the  perfusate  reduced  V02 
significantly.  The  eventual  addition  of  hemoglobin-oxygen  affinity  by 
perfusing  the  legs  with  2-4  week  old  blood  revealed  reduced  V02  when 
the  P50  of  the  perfusate  was  lowered. 

These  studies  demonstrate  several  relationships  between  the 
chemical  composition  of  blood  and  tissue  respiration  that  are  relevant 
to  anesthesia,  surgery  or  blood  banking.  In  addition,  evidence  is  pre- 
sented in  support  of  steroids  being  of  benefit  in  shock  therapy. 


810 


JST.  AT 


In  Vitro  Studies  of  Liver  Respiration 


A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  The  relationship 
between  extracellular  fluid  oxygen  tension  and  hepatocyte  oxygen  uptake 
was  evaluated  in  70  rabbits.  Normal  extracellular  fluid  (ECF)  oxygen 
tension  is  30  torr.  It  was  expected  that  hepatocyte  oxygen  uptake 
would  decrease  at  ECF  oxygen  tensions  below  30  torr  - presumably  due  to 
inadequate  diffusion  of  oxygen  into  cells.  Liver  cell  oxygen  uptake  at 
ECF  oxygen  tensions  above  30  torr  was  not  expected  to  change. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Oxygen  consumption  of  slices  of 
rabbit  liver  was  measured  in  chambers  fitted  with  oxygen  electrodes. 

The  effects  of  variation  of  PO2  in  the  electrolyte  solution  and  addi- 
tion of  etHnfexin  on  tissue  respiration  was  determined. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Oxygen  uptake  (V02)  was  maximal  at 
an  extracellular  fluid  PO2  of  30  torr.  At  a PO2  of  10  torr  V02  was> 
significantly  reduced.  However,  if  PO2  were  increased  to  90  toir,  VO2 
was  also  reduced.  These  observations  indicate  that  hepatocyte  respira- 
tion is  optimal  at  low  PO2S  within  a narrow  range. 

The  action  of  endotoxin  was  evaluated  on  both  slices  and 
homogenates  of  liver.  In  both  models,  endotoxin  induced  a significant 
reduction  of  It  would,  therefore,  appear  that  the  hepatocyte  cell 

membrane  does  not  protect  the  cell  from  the  detrimental  effects  of 
endotoxin. 


The  Clinical  Use  of  a Pulmonai 


Thermistor  Catheter 


A.  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Much  enthusiasm  has  been  generated 
concerning  the  clinical  value  of  a pulmonary  artery  thermistor  catheter 
for  the  measurement  of  pulmonary  artery  wedge  (left  atrial)  pressure 
and  cardiac  output. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  The  use  of  a pulmonary  artery  ther- 
mistor catheter  for  pressure  measurement  and  thermodilution  cardiac 
output  determination  was  evaluated  in  eleven  dogs.  A pulmonary 
catheter  was  placed  in  the  wedge  position.  A left  atrial  catheter  was 
simultaneously  placed  via  a superior  pulmonary  vein. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Pulmonary  artery  wedge  pressure  was 
a reliable  index  of  left  atrial  pressure  at  end  expiratory  pressures 
less  than  10  cm  H2O.  Fluctuations  in  pulmonary  artery  cemperature 
occurred  at  a frequency  equal  to  the  respiratory  rate  and  an  amplitude 
of  0.010°C  to  0.086°C.  Changes  in  amplitude  were  associated  with 
changes  in  ventilatory  waveform,  respiratory  rate  and  level  of  anes- 
thesia. Intermittent  and  continuous  positive  pressure  ventilation 
generally  dampened  and  reversed  the  pulmonary  artery  temperature  pat- 
tern exhibited  during  spontaneous  breathing.  This  suggested  that  when 
end  expiration  is  used  to  time  indicator  injection,  cardiac  output  will 


'•.T 

1 


be  underestimated  during  spontaneous  breathing  and  overestimated  during 
continuous  or  intermittent  positive  pressure  ventilation.  When  indica- 
tor was  injected  at  the  same  point  in  the  ventilatory  cycle,  successive 
values  of  cardiac  output  deviated  from  one  another  by  0.0  - 6.7%. 
Deviations  as  large  as  14%  resulted  if  sequential  injections  were  out 
of  phase  by  half  a respiratory  cycle.  Deviations  in  measured  cardiac 
output  can  be  minimized  by  injecting  indicator  at  the  same  point  in  the 
respiratory  cycle  if  it  is  not  feasible  to  measure  cardiac  output 
during  apnea.  The  clinical  utility  of  a pulmonary  artery  thermistor 
catheter  can  be  optimized  through  appreciation  of  its  specific 
strengths  and  limitations. 


Systemic  Oxygen  Delivei 


;en  Uptake,  and  Surgical  Stress 


A.  Statement  of  the  Problem,.  Recent  advances  in  respiratory 
physiology  and  technology  have  permitted  and  promoted  endotracheo- 
bronchial  maneuvering  on  a scale  not  previously  considered  safe.  The 
ventilatory  and  hemodynamic  sequelae  of  these  diagnostic  and  thera- 
peutic interventions  are  often  not  fully  appreciated  by  the  operating 
surgeon.  Straight  and  fiberoptic  bronchoscopes  at  best  only  partially 
obstruct  large  bronchi  with  resultant  decrease  in  ventilation :perfusion 
ratio.  Conversely,  continuous  positive  pressure  ventilation  may  de- 
crease pulmonary  blood  flow  with  resultant  increase  in  ventilation: 
perfusion  ratio.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  evaluate  the  rela- 
tionship between  systemic  oxygen  delivery  and  tissue  oxygen  uptake 
during  surgical  stress. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Ten,  25  kg,  mongrel  dogs  were  anesthe- 
tized with  pentobarbital  (25/mg/kg).  The  dogs  were  intubated  and 
ventilated  (15  ml/kg)  at  a rate  of  16  breaths  per  minute.  A femoral 
artery  catheter  was  placed.  Cardiac  output  was  measured  by  thermal 
dilution.  All  parameters  (cardiac  output,  arterial  and  venous  blood 
gases,  pulmonary  artery  pressure  and  oxygen  consumption)  were  measured 
as  soon  as  all  catheters  were  in  place  (Period  It  1) . Baseline  values 
were  again  measured  15  minutes  following  the  initial  determination 
(Period  It 2).  All  parameters  were  subsequently  measured  under  the 
following  conditions: 

Period  It 3.  10  cm  H2O  positive  end  expiratory  pressure 

Period  It 4.  Right  thoracotomy  with  equilibration  of  intra- 
pleural and  atmospheric  pressure 
Period  It 5.  Right  main  stem  bronchial  occlusion  with  right 
chest  up 

Period  It 6.  Right  main  stem  bronchial  occlusion  with  right 
chest  down 

Period  It 7.  Right  main  stem  bronchus  released  following 
several  depp  breaths,  right  chest  up 
Period  It 8.  10  cm  H2O  positive  end  expiratory  pressure 

(pleural  pressure  at  zero) 


812 


Period  // 9.  10  cm  H„0  positive  end  expiratory  pressure  and 

100%  oxygen  (Fi02  = 1.0) 

Period  #10.  Thoracotomy  closed,  intermittent  positive  pressure 
ventilation 

Following  the  initial  thoracotomy,  a monitoring  catheter  (PE  240)  was 
placed  into  the  left  atrium  of  each  animal. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Systemic  oxygen  delivery  (SOD)  and 
oxygen  uptake  (V02)  decreased  initially  in  parallel  then  SOD  decreased 
more  than  Vc^.  Following  closure  of  the  thoracotomy,  SOD  was  down  by 
60%  and  V02  was  80%  of  control  levels.  SOD  and  V02  did  not  relate  to 
each  other  in  a parallel  fashion.  Following  moderate  surgical  stress, 
V02  at  the  end  of  the  procedure  was  80%  of  control  levels. 

V.  Development  of  a Thermal  Diffusion  Probe  to  Measure  Blood  Flow  in 
Small  Volumes  of  Tissue 

A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  The  ability  to 
measure  tissue  perfusion  is  currently  limited  by  methods  which  are  dis- 
continuous, unacceptably  invasive  or  both.  Attempts  at  measuring 
tissue  perfusi  n with  the  aid  of  thermal  devices  has  met  with  limited 
success.  Several  methods  provide  qualitative  data  but  quantification 
of  tissue  blood  flow  has  not  been  realized.  An  improved  technique  for 
measuring  thermal  conductivity  and  diffusivity  has  been  developed  by 
engineers  working  at  MIT  and  Northeastern  University.  A collaboration 
with  this  group  has  been  established  with  the  aim  of  modifying  the 
technique  for  direct  measurement  of  tissue  blood  flow. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  The  thermal  diffusion  probe  was 
evaluated  in  an  isolated  hindlimb  preparation  which  permitted  control 
of  flow,  temperature  and  oxygen  delivery.  Thermal  conductivity  was 
measured  over  a physiologically  relevant  range  of  flows. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  There  is  a direct  and  signifies 
relationship  between  thermal  conductivity  and  tissue  blood  flow.  The 
initial  evaluation  of  the  probe  suggests  that  it  can  be  developed  to 
quantify  blood  flow  in  1 cm^  volumes  of  tissue. 

VI.  In  Vitro  Studies  of  Lung  Slic°  Respiration 

A.  Background  and  Statement  the  Problem.  The  relationship 
between  extracellular  fluid  oxygen  tension  and  lung  slice  oxygen  uptake 
in  the  presence  of  varying  concentrations  of  colloid  was  evaluated  in  86 
rabbits.  The  results  described  in  "II"  led  to  the  question  of  an 
optimal  PC>2  for  lung  slice  oxygen  uptake.  Also,  in  vitro  data  from 
other  labs  suggest  that  the  diffusivity  of  O2  in  solution  is  strongly 
influenced  by  protein  concentration. 


813 


B.  Experimental  Approach.  Oxygen  consumption  of  slices  of  rabbit 
lung  was  measured  in  a Yellow  Springs  apparatus.  The  effects  of  varying 
P02  and  the  addition  of  varying  concentrations  of  plasma  on  lung  slice 
respiration  were  determined. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  As  with  the  liver  slice  experiments, 
oxygen  uptake  was  maximal  at  a PO2  of  30  torr  and  reduced  at  P02's  of 
10  and  90  torr.  There  was  a direct  relationship  between  the  degree  of 
depression  of  lung  slice  oxygen  uptake  and  the  concentration  of  protein 
in  the  solution.  Colloid  inhibits  oxygen  uptake  of  lung  slices.  The 
relevance  of  these  findings  to  the  treatment  of  shock  lung  is  specula- 
tive. 

VII.  Coronary  Arterial  pH  as  a Determinant  of  Myocardial  Oxygen  Uptake 


A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Acidosis  is  known 
to  weaken  myocardial  contraction,  decrease  heart  rate  and  dilate 
coronary  vessels.  Previous  work  in  this  laboratory  (see  I)  demonstrat- 
ed a direct  relationship  between  perfusate  pH  and  skeletal  muscle 
oxygen  uptake.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  examine  the  magnitude 
and  mechanism  of  the  influence  of  coronary  arterial  pH  (pHa)  on 
myocardial  oxygen  uptake 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  A perfused  heart  preparation  was 
developed  which  permitted  control  of  heart  rate,  pressure  and  flow 
work,  coronary  flow,  oxygen  delivery,  pHa  and  temperature.  MVo2  and 
ventricular  contractility  (dp/dt)  could  be  measured  under  varying 
circumstances. 


C.  Results  and  Discussion.  MV02  was  directly  and  significantly 
related  to  pHa  in  all  animals  studied:  MV02^  “ 109  pHa  - 743  (r  * 

0.823).  The  mechanism  of  altered  MVo2  was  evaluated  by  relating  dp/dt 
and  MV02  to  pHa  in  control,  beta-blocked,  and  potassium  arrested 
hearts.  Arterial  pH  did  influence  dp/dt  and  thus  MVq2:  dp/dt 1 = 199 

pHa  - 1376  (r  = 0.834).  This  was  mediated  partially  By  the  effect  of 
catecholamines  and  pHa:  after  6-blockade  dp/dt%  ■ 139  - 929  (r  = 

0.832).  Basal  MVq2  ot  the  perfused  potassium  arrested  heart  was  also 
sensitive  to  pHa:  MV02  = 1.82  pHa  - 12.01  (r  = 0.48,  p<0.001). 

VIII.  The  Isolated  Influence  of  Temperature  on  the  Ability  of  Red 
Blood  Cells  to  Release  Oxygen 


A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  Temperature  influ- 
ences every  aspect  of  tissue  respiration.  It  has  thus  been  difficult 
to  determine  the  influence  of  thermally  induced  shifts  in  the  oxyhemo- 
globin dissociation  curve  because  of  the  strong  influence  of  tempera- 
ture on  tissue  oxygen  uptake. 


B.  Experimental  Approach.  A membrane  lung  perfusion  system  was 
devised  which  permitted  perfusion  of  a second  membrane  lung.  This 


allowed  the  direct  assessment  of  the  influence  of  temperature  on  the 
ability  of  red  blood  cells  to  release  oxygen  in  a metabolically  inert 
system. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  There  is  a direct  and  significant 
influence  of  temperature  on  the  ability  of  red  cells  to  release  oxygen. 
This  effect  may  render  cooled  tissues  hypoxic  in  the  face  of  adequate 
blood  flow.  It  is  also  evident  that  the  metabolic  response  of  tissues 
to  thermal  challenge  is  difficult  to  assess  when  their  metabolism  is 
hemoglobin  dependent. 

IX.  Alteration  of  Oxyhemoglobin  Affinity  of  Canine  Erythrocytes 

A.  Background  and  Statement  of  the  Problem.  There  is  consider- 
able theoretical  evidence  that  the  position  of  the  oxyhemoglobin  dis- 
sociation curve  (ODC)  has  an  influence  on  oxygen  delivery  to  tissues. 
Clinical  and  laboratory  documentation  has  been  sparse.  Since  the  pre- 
ferred animal  for  a large  amount  of  surgical  research  is  the  dog,  it 
would  be  of  value  to  develop  a technique  for  shifting  the  canine  ODC. 

B.  Experimental  Approach.  Dihydroxy acetone,  pyruvate,  and  phos- 
phate were  infused  into  35  dogs  at  1 / of  blood  volume  per  hour  for  five 
hours.  One  week  before  or  after,  a saline  solution  was  infused  at  the 
same  rate.  Hourly  2,3-DPG,  ATP  and  P^^  pre-  and  post-infusion  were 
measured.  Red  cell  triokinase  was  assayed. 

C.  Results  and  Discussion.  Triokinase  of  canine  RBC  was  0.2190 
lU/gm  Hgb  (150%  normal  human  level).  ATP  rose  from  1.9  to  2.45  pM/gm 
Hgb  after  five  hrs  of  infusion  of  dihydroxy acetone  solution.  Red  cell 
2,3-DPG  rose  from  16.19  + 0.4  pM/gm  Hgb  to  18.63  + 0.6  pM/gm  Hgb  after 
five  hours  infusion  of  dihydroxyacetone  solution  (p<0.01).  Pcq  changed 
from  27.57  + 0.9  to  31.76  + 0.6  over  the  same  period  (p<0.001).  Saline 
infusion  did  not  alter  2,3-DPG  or  P5o-  A simple  method  of  shifting  the 
ODC  in  awake,  unanesthetized  dogs  has  been  developed. 


Project  3A162110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  125  Control  mechanisms  of  regional  circulation 


Literature  Cited 

Publications : 

1.  Harken,  A.  H. , Woods,  M. , and  Wright,  C.  B. : Influence  of 

endotoxin  on  tissue  respiration  and  oxygen  dissociation  in  an  isolated 
canine  hindlimb.  Am.  Surg.  41:704-709,  1975. 

2.  Woods,  M. , Scott,  R.  N.,  and  Harken,  A.  H. : Practical  consid- 

erations for  the  use  of  a pulmonary  artery  thermistor  catheter. 

Surgery  79:469-475,  1976. 

3.  Woods,  M. , Harken,  A.  H.,  Balasubramanium,  T.  A.,  and  Bowman, 

H.  F. , (Spon:  R.  J.  T.  Joy):  An  initial  evaluation  of  a thermal  dif- 
fusion probe  (TDP)  for  measuring  tissue  blood  flow.  The  Physiologist 
18:457,  1975. 

4.  Harken,  A.  H. : Hydrogen  ion  concentration  and  oxygen  uptake  in 

an  isolated  canine  hindlimb.  J.  Appl.  Physiol.  40:1-5,  Jan.  1976. 

5.  Harken,  A.  H. , Woods,  M. : The  influence  of  oxyhemoglobin 

affinity  on  tissue  oxygen  consumption.  Ann.  Surg.  183:130-135,  1976. 

6.  Bell,  W.  A.,  Woods,  M. , and  Harken,  A.  H. : Influence  of  extra- 

cellular fluid  hyperoxia  and  protein  concentration  on  lung  slice  oxygen 
uptake.  Clin.  Res.  24:32A,  1976. 

7.  Woods,  M. , Harken,  A.  H. , Pringle,  J.  M. , and  Bell,  W.  A.: 

The  influence  of  temperature  (T)  on  the  ability  of  blood  to  release 
oxygen.  Fed.  Proc.  35:723,  1976. 

8.  Harken,  A.  H. : Lactic  acidosis.  Surg.  Gynec.  Obstet.  142:593- 

GOo,  1976  (Apr). 

9.  Harken,  A.  H. , and  Woods,  M. : The  influence  of  oxyhemoglobin 

affinity  on  tissue  oxygen  consumption.  Ann.  Surg.  183:124-135,  1976. 


«•.  NltOUNCEt  II  TINA  T| 

A PMOIBM IQNAL  MAN  YR| 

A T UN  OR  ( K*  AmmA| 

A OAT«*/irR«CTlV*.  NA 

| IRINA  T (ON 

IIKAL 

75 

9 

167 

C TYRI. 

A AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 

TtAN 

76 

9 

30 

!•  ACIPONUDLE  DOO  OAMANII  ATiON 

i 1 

M MMORMR&OMANIlATION  | 

1 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

U 


t OAT C RRIv  luWRY 


75  06  30 


« HIND  OR  IUMMART 

H.  Term 


10  NO  /coot*:* 


PROGRAM (L CUt N T 


b.  CONTNINUTINO 


C.  CON  T MINU  T 1 N Q 


62760A 


CAROS  11AF 

i TiTL«  iPNct*  >ir  M«ptir  ciMiiriMiiMi  cu»r 


* »ONM  (tCUWT V* 1 


u 


NNOJ1CT  NUNHR 


3A7627QA822 


T^mTIcyTacCEMiS!^ 

DA  0A  6469 


f Nf  AO*  NO* 

NA 


Trrr^r=^T- 

76  06  30 


s onm  initn'n 

NL 


TASK  AREA  NuMKR 


01 


mafomr  comrnoL  trmm ol 

DD  DR±E(AR)6 36 


IRCCIPIC  DATA- 
CONTAACTOA  ACCIM 

Qtei  □ — 


• L C VC l OR  IU« 


•OAK  UNIT  NUMMM 


120 


Z&S2QJ12. 

ICRL  ARIAI* 


e to  Disease  and  Injury 


* SCIENTIFIC  AND  TtCNNOLOOICAL  ANEAI* 

Physiology  003500  Clinical  Medicine  0Q230Q  Biochemistry 

U IIYMA f tO  COMNLftlON  OATt  •*  RUNOtNO  AOINCT 


r mm 


63  08 


-Z0_Q1 


■•M:'  Walter  Reed  Armylnstitute  of  Research 
*“M“'  Washington,  DC  20012 


RtSNOMtlOLl  INDIVIDUAL  Joy,  R.J.T. 

NAML 

202-576-3551 


COL 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 

ii.  rI^Aomm 7N5J53S  each  *R K3T  tSSSIKSHS S3B J 


_DA_ 


It  MIIOMlid  HtWO 


•hi*  Walter  Reed  Army  institute  of  Research 
Div.  of  Medicine 

Washington,  DC  20012 


■INCI0AL  IRVlIYIGATOR  IPNMM  MAR  If  U I AMR 

•«*  Earll,  COL,  J.M. 

202-576-3529 

*OCIAL  tSCUAITY  ACCOUNT  HUNOtN 
AMOClATt  IMVCITIOATON* 

— « Wartofsky,  LTC,  L. 

“rr  S-chaai.  M, 


(U)  Metabolic;  (U)  Stress:  (U)  Endocrine:  (U)  Hormone 


I TECHNICAL  ODAECTlVS.*  IA  APPROACH.  It  PNOONEM  fPiNHlPA  IoRHAmI  p«>|NpAl  l4mtHI»4  *r  «»Nl  P"'»«l  MRI  •!  PPM  MM  tRCMlfp  CtA*A‘*«A<«Ml  C«N»  J 

23.  (U)  Investigation  into  basic  mechanisms  of  diseases  of  military  Importance  and 

the  metabolic  response  of  patients  during  stress  of  disease  and  injury  to  provide 
rational  approach  to  therapy. 

26.  (U)  Metabolic  balance  studies  with  precise  collection  of  biologic  samples  from 

patients  under  rigidly  controlled  diet,  drugs,  and  activity.  Development  of  techniques 
to  measure  alterations  in  homeostasis  produced  by  disease  or  drugs.  Provide  clinical 
support  and  teaching  for  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  01.  Serum  levels  of  prolactin,  TSH,  and  growth  hormone  were 

found  to  increase  in  physiologically  significant  amounts  in  association  with  the  stress 
of  parachute  jumping.  Transsphenoidal  microsurgery  was  found  to  be  satisfactory  and 
effective  therapy  for  initial  treatment  of  patients  with  pituitary  tumors  associated 
with  acromegaly.  Studies  of  iodothyronines  in  amniotic  fluid  revealed  that  it  re- 
presents a readily  dlalyzable  compartment  for  exchange  of  T3,  T 4,  and  iodine  that  must 
be  considered  in  studies  of  the  f eto-placental  unit.  Combined  therapy  of  hyperthyroid 
subjects  with  lithium  and/or  iodine  revealed  that  both  agents  were  effective  but  that 
pre-treatment  with  lithium  may  blunt  the  effects  of  iodine  studies  of  thyroid-pituitary 
axis  during  acute  malaria  suggested  that  infection  appears  to  have  a suppressive  effect 
at  the  pituitary  rather  than  hypothalamic  level,  and  that  alterations  in  T3  and  revers 
T3  support  a shift  in  T4  conversion  from  activating  to  inactivating  pathways  in  this 
Infection.  A radioimmunoassay  for  3, 3’ -di iodothyronine  was  developed  and  is  being 
applied  to  studies  of  thyroid  physiology.  Studies  were  performed  in  collaboration  wit 
the  Surgical  Burn  Unit  at  BAMC,  and  suggested  that  thermal  Injury  (like  infection)  was 
associated  with  shifts  in  T4  metabolism  from  T3  to  reverse  T3  generation.  For  technic, 
report  see  WRAIR  Annual  Report  1 JULY  75-30  JUNE  1976. 

’AWIaIIi  to  can>fRc<of«  «— w fNNl  1 


DD  ,9,a 

WW|  M.  ■ „ 


1498 


PRIYlOUl  EO  TION*  Of  THIl  »0«M  ARE  OIIOLITE  DO  TORMI  'AIM 
AND  < I MAN  ••  lEOR  ARMY  U«E  * ■?  1.  O • I O L E T ■ 


'MV 


i 

; 


' *SWS""TM.n  NNMH~V‘ 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  120  Metabolic  response  to  disease  and  injury 

» ‘ 

Investigators : 

Principal:  COL  Jerry  M.  Earll,  MC 

Associates:  Marcus  Schaaf,  M.D.  ; LTC  Leonard  Wartofsky,  MC; 

MAJ  Richard  C.  Dimond,  MC;  Joseph  Bruton,  Ph.D. 

MAJ  Kenneth  D.  Burman,  MC 

Description 

This  work  unit  is  concerned  with  investigations  into  basic  mechanisms 
of  diseases  of  military  importance  and  the  metabolic  responses  occur- 
ing  during  stress  of  disease  and  injury.  To  provide  rational  approaches 
to  diagnosis  and  therapy,  metabolic  balance  studies  are  utilized  which 
require  precise  collections  of  biologic  samples  from  patients  during 
rigid  control  of  diet,  drugs,  and  activity.  In  addition,  support  is 
afforded  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center  in  training  house  staff,  four 
endocrine  fellows,  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  endocrine  patients,  and 
technical  laboratory  support  to  other  departments.  The  unit  maintains 
the  capability  of  mounting  field  studies. 

Progress 

1.  Polypeptide  Hormone  Metabolism. 


Plasma  concentrations  of  prolactin  in  humans  have  been  shown  to  rise  in 
response  to  a number  of  stimuli  which  have  in  common  some  element  of 
physical  stress,  among  them  surgery  under  general  anesthesia,  endoscopy, 
and  vigorous  exercise.  Thyrotropin  (TSH)  secretion  in  human  adults  has 
not  been  found  to  be  increased  by  the  stress  of  surgery,  by  fever,  or  by 
exercise,  but  recently  it  has  been  reported  that  small  increases  in  TSH 
secretion  occurred  in  young  men  in  anticipation  of  vigorous  physical 
exercise.  Growth  hormone  is  known  to  respond  to  a wide  variety  of  physical 
stresses,  while  growth  hormone  responses  to  psychic  stimuli  are  less 
extensively  documented.  In  this  study,  we  have  demonstrated  that  the 
stress  of  parachute  jumping  is  associated  with  the  release  of  prolactin 
and  TSH  as  well  as  growth  hormone.  Prolactin,  growth  hormone,  and 
thyrotropin  (TSH)  release  during  the  stress  of  parachute  jumping  has  been 
evaluated  in  14  male  subjects.  Subjects  were  studied  at  several  times 
before  and  immediately  after  their  first  military  parachute  jump.  All 
three  hormones  had  risen  significantly  1 to  14  min  after  the  jump,  compared 
to  mean  levels  measured  immediately  beforehand.  Earlier  studies  of  physical 
exercise  by  ourselves  and  others  would  suggest  that  emotional  stress 
played  a role  in  producing  changes  of  this  magnitude.  We  conclude  that 
prolactin,  TSH,  and  growth  hormone  are  released  in  physiologically  sig- 
nificant amounts  in  association  with  the  stress  of  parachute  jumping. 


V-  v*r*  ^ 


None  of  the  numerous  methods  used  for  the  treatment  of  acromegaly,  in- 
cluding conventional  x-ray  irradiation,  heavy-particle  irradiation, 
transsphenoidal  implantation  of  radioactive  isotopes,  cryohypophysec- 
tomy,  and  surgical  hypophysectomy , have  consistently  achieved  ideal 
therapeutic  goals.  All  of  these  therapeutic  modalities  have  a signifi- 
cant incidence  of  persistent  disease,  recurrent  disease,  or  loss  of 
normal  pituitary  function.  Renewed  interest  in  the  surgical  treatment 
of  acromegaly  and  other  pituitary  neoplasms  by  the  transsphenoidal  route 
has  been  stimulated  by  technological  advances  in  operating  microscopes 
and  image-intensifying  x-ray  equipment.  Serum  growth  hormone  levels, 
thyroid  function,  and  adrenal  function  were  measured  before  and  after 
surgery  in  16  of  17  acromegalic  patients  undergoing  transnasal  trans- 
sphenoidal microsurgery  of  the  pituitary.  Thirteen  patients  have  been 
followed  up  for  12  to  24  months;  three  patients  have  been  followed  up 
for  three  to  six  months.  Serum  growth  hormone  levels  decreased  to  less 
than  5 ng/ml  in  seven  of  nine  previously  untreated  patients;  thyroid 
and  adrenal  function  were  preserved  in  eight  of  these  nine  patients. 

In  seven  patients  treated  previously  by  other  inodes  of  therapy,  growth 
hormone  levels  after  transsphenoidal  surgery  decreased  to  less  than  5 
ng/ml  in  three,  to  between  5 and  10  ng/ml  in  three,  and  from  98  to  41 
ng/ml  in  one.  Preoperative  adrenal  function  was  normal  in  six  of  these 
seven  patients  and  was  preserved  in  four;  thyroid  function  was  normal  in 
five  patients  preoperatively  and  was  preserved  in  three.  Transsphenoidal 
microsurgery  appears  to  offer  an  effective  means  of  lowering  growth  hormone 
levels  and  a possibility  of  preserving  any  remaining  normal  pituitary 
function.  It  may  be  considered  for  initial  treatment  in  selected  patients 
in  whom  more  rapid  arrest  of  acromegaly  is  indicated. 


2.  Thyroid  Metabolism. 

a.  Thyroid  function  tests  in  amniotic  fluid. 

Because  of  recent  advances  in  antenatal  physiology,  it  has  become  relevant 
to  quantitate  thyroid  function  tests  in  human  amniotic  fluid.  For  this 
purpose,  21  sets  of  maternal  sera,  cord  sera,  and  amniotic  fluid  were 
obtained  from  normal  term  labor  and  deliveries. 

Total  (T4)  and  dialyzable  thyroxine  (DT4) , total  (T3)  and  dialyzable 
triiodothyronine  (DT3),  total  iodine  (TI) , thyroxine  binding  globulin  (TBG) , 
and  resin  T3  uptake  (RT3U)  were  measured  in  amniotic  fluid.  In  addition, 

T3,  T4,  TI,  and  TBG  were  measured  in  maternal  and  cord  sera. 


In  21  amniotic  fluid  samples,  T3  and  T4  concentrations  were  close  to  or 
below  their  lower  limits  of  detectability  (approximately  < 25  ng/100  ml 
and  <1  ug/100  ml,  respectively).  However,  when  larger  quantities  of 
unknown  samples  were  assayed,  and  when  T3  and  T4  content  were  increased 
per  assay  volume  by  lyophilization,  the  mean  (+SEM)  amniotic  fluid  content 
was  30+2  ng/100  ml  (n=5)  and  0.54  + 0.07  ug/100  ml  (n=5),  respectively. 
The  mean  (+SEM)  percent  DT3  in  amniotic  fluid  was  1.76  + 0.349%  (n=3)  and 
the  mean  (+SEM)  percent  DT4  was  0.225  + 0.02%  (n=4). 


Amniotic  fluid  mean  (+SEM)  TBG,  TI,  and  RT3U  concentrations  were  0.32  + 
0.04  mg/100  ml  (n=5),  3.4  + 0.2  ug/100  ml  (n=9) , and  0.55%  + 0.01  (n=5) 
respectively.  In  maternal  sera,  the  mean  (+SEM)  T3  concentration  was 


819 


150  + 8 ng/100  ml  (n=21),  the  mean  (+SEM)  T4  concentation  was  10.8  + 0.4 
ug/100  ml  (n=12),  the  mean  (+SEM)  TI  concentration  was  7.2  + 0.7  ug/100 
ml  (n=9)  and  the  mean  (+SEM)  TBG  level  was  8.56  + 0.96  mg/100  ml  (n=5) . 

In  cord  sera,  the  mean  (+SEM)  T3,  T4,  TI , and  TBG  concentrations  were 
30+3  ng/100  ml  (n=21),  9.4  + 0.5  ug/100  ml  (n=12),  7.6  + 0.4  ug/100  ml 
(n=10) , and  5.12  + 0.39  mg/100  ml  (n=5),  respectively. 

These  data  suggest  that:  (1)  in  the  analysis  of  amniotic  fluid  by  radio- 

immunoassay, different  final  T3  concentrations  were  obtained  when  hypothyroid 
amniotic  fluid  or  hypothyroid  sera  were  incorporated  into  the  standard 
curve;  (2)  T3  and  T4  are  present  in  low  concentrations  in  human  amniotic 
fluid,  but  the  percent  DT3  and  DT4  are  relatively  high;  (3)  because  of 
their  low  concentrations  it  is  not  feasible  to  routinely  measure  T3  and 
T4  in  amniotic  fluid  to  aid  in  the  prenatal  detection  of  congenital 
hypothyroidism,  although  the  utility  of  DT3  and  DT4  in  this  regard  remains 
speculative;  and  (4)  amniotic  fluid  represents  a readily  dialyzable  or 
transferable  compartment  of  T3,  T4,  and  iodine  that  must  be  considered 
in  models  investigating  maternal  and  fetal  transfer  of  thede  substances. 

b.  Synergistic  effects  of  lithium  (Li)  and  iodine  (I)  in  the 
treatment  of  hyperthyroidism  (HT) . 

Li  and  I have  similar  antithyroid  effects  and  primarily  act  to  inhibit 
thyroidal  release.  We  have  attempted  to  compare  the  relative  efficacy 
of  these  agents  given  singly  and  in  combination  in  order  or  assess  possi- 
ble synergism  of  action  which  might  be  used  advantageously  in  the  therapy 
of  either  severe  HT  or  for  those  patients  in  whom  thioureas  could  not  be 
employed.  18  patients  with  HT  were  studied  utilizing  a double  isotope 
technique  as  an  index  of  thyroidal  release  (Wartofsky  £t  al^.  JCI  49:78, 

1970;  Nicoloff  JCI  49:  1912,  1970),  with  serving  as  an  intrathyroidal 

label  and  ^-^^I-T4  as  a marker  of  T4  disposal.  Bidaily  measurements  of 
protein-bound  (PB)  ^^1,  PB^-^^I,  and  urinary  (U)  and  131j  were  made 

during  a 5 day  control  Deriod  and  two  subsequent  5 day  treatment  periods. 
Subjects  were  assigned  to  groups  given  either  Li  or  I alone  during  the 
first  treatment  period,  with  the  alternative  drug  added  as  combination 
therapy  for  the  assessment  of  synergism  during  the  second  treatment  period. 
Half  of  the  patients  in  each  treatment  group  were  blocked  with  methimazole 
(MMI) . Analysis  of  the  changes  with  time  in  the  slope  of  the  ratios  of 
U^-25j/yl31r  and  PBl25j/pgl31i  indicated  that  either  I or  Li  given  alone 
induced  comparable  and  significant  decreases  in  thyroidal  release.  Further 
significant  (p  <;05)  decreases  in  slopes  during  the  second  (combined) 
treatment  period,  occurred  only  in  those  patients  who  had  received  iodine 
initially.  Results  in  all  treatment  periods  were  the  same  in  the  presence 
or  absence  of  MMI  blockade.  Thus,  I and  Li  may  display  synergism  in  the 
treatment  of  HT  only  if  I is  employed  first,  but  the  combination  of  Li  + 

I,  if  Li  is  used  first,  i*  not  significantly  more  effective  than  Li  alone. 
These  observations  permit  -some  further  insight  into  the  mechanism  of 
action  of  these  drugs.  Since  previous  studies  indicate  that  Li  reduces 
thyroid  iodine  uptake,  pre-treatment  with  Li  may  prevent  or  attenuate 
accumulation  of  iodine,  thus  blunting  vne  inhibitory  effect  of  I on 
thyroidal  release,  whereas  administrat ion  of  Li  after  I pre-treatment 
allows  the  antithyroid  effects  of  boti  agents  to  be  realized. 


820 


c.  Alterations  in  T3,  reverse  T3  (rT3),  and  the  response  to 
thyrothropin  releasing  hormone  (TRH)  in  acute  malaria. 

Previous  studies  from  this  laboratory  on  thyroid  economy  during  malarial  in- 
fection (JCI  51:2213,  1972)  indicated  that  thyroid  gland  function  was 
suppressed.  Although  never  documented,  it  has  been  proposed  that  this 
suppression  was  related  to  a decline  in  TSH  release  during  infection.  The 
latter  could  be  secondary  to  increases  in  serum  T3  from  enhanced  T4  to  T3 
conversion  in  the  periphery,  or  to  inhibition  by  infection  at  a hypothalamic 
or  pituitary  level.  To  examine  these  possible  mechanisms,  we  have  performed 
serial  measurements  of  T3,  and  have  administered  TRH  to  assess  the  integrity 
of  pituitary  function  during  infection.  Basal  and  stimulated  PRL  levels 
were  measured  since  this  hormone  is  _j.svated  in  a variety  of  other  stresses; 
and  rT3  was  measured  since  recent  reports  indicate  that  alterations  in  serum 
T3  may  be  accompanied  by  reciprocal  changes  in  rT3.  Two  groups  of  4 normal 
male  volunteers  were  studied.  In  Group  I,  T4,  T3,  rT3,  TSH,  and  PRL  were 
measured  in  daily  basal  A.M.  samples  of  blood  before,  during,  and  after 
induction  of  acute  malaria.  In  Group  II,  TSH  and  PRL  responses  to  TRH 
(500  meg  i.v.)  during  infection  were  compared  to  those  observed  during  the 
control  period. 

In  Group  I,  TSH  and  PRL  transiently  decreased  from  mean  control  levels  by 
days  1 and  3 of  illness  respectively,  and  returned  toward  control  values 
after  treatment.  Serum  T4  progressively  increased  during  days  3-5  of 
infection,  while  a significant  and  marked  decrease  in  serum  T3  levels  was 
observed  on  day  3 of  infection  which  coincided  precisely  with  significant 
increases  in  rT3  levels.  In  Group  II,  TSH  responses  to  TRH  during  infection 
were  unchanged  while  PRL  release  was  increased. 

These  results  suggest  that  in  malaria:  1)  decreases  in  TSH  release  are  not 

related  to  increases  in  serum  T3;  2)  normal  TSH  and  augmented  PRL  response 
to  TRH  are  consistent  with  inhibition  by  infection  at  a hypothalamic  but 
not  pituitary  level;  and  3)  the  observed  reciprocal  alterations  in  T3  and 
rT3  in  malaria  indicate  a shift  in  conversion  of  T4  from  an  activating  to 
an  inactivating  pathway  which  may  represent  a homeostatic  mechanism  for 
decreasing  thermogenesis  in  this  illness. 

d.  Isolated  thyrotropin  (TSH)  deficiency. 

A 41  y.o.  male  presented  with  symptoms  of  hypothyroidism,  low  serum  T4  and 
T3.  Serum  TSH  was  unmeasurable;  a 500  ug  i.v.  bolus  of  TSH  releasing  hor- 
mone (TRH)  before  therapy  with  thyroid  hormone  revealed  no  increase  in  TSH 
but  a normal  increase  in  prolactin  (PRL).  The  diagnosis  of  isolated  TSH 
efficiency  (ITSHD)  was  based  on  an  absent  TSH  response  to  TRH  and  other- 
wise normal  pituitary  function.  Prior  to  availability  of  TRH  one  could 
not  distinguish  between  hypothyroidism  due  to  hypothalamic  disease  (ITRHD) 
and  ITSHD,  and  data  from  earlier  cases  did  not  permit  differentiation 
between  total  and  partial  ITSHD.  Our  patient  was  given  prolonged  (6  hr) 
infusion  of  TRH  (1  ug/min)  to  maximally  stimulate  the  pituitary  2 mos. 
after  withdrawal  of  thyroid  therapy  given  for  5 mos.  Sensitive  assays 
for  TSH  (detecting  1.0  uU/ml)  and  PRL  were  employed.  A 500  ug  bolus  TRH 


821 


test  was  repeated  for  comparison  to  the  pre-treatment  study,  since  a 
positive  feedback  of  T3  on  TRH  production  has  been  proposed.  Simult- 
aneously, to  detect  a thyroid  response  to  unmeasurable  TSH  increases,  an 
isotope  technique  was  used  as  an  index  of  thyroid  secretion,  with  125j  as 
a thyroid  label  and  as  a marker  or  peripheral  T4  disposal.  Bolus 

TRH  increased  TSH  from  1.0  to  1.8  pU/ml.  During  TRH  infusion,  TSH  increased 
to  1.5  pU/ml,  PRL  response  was  normal,  and  increases  in  the  slopes  of  PB 
pb  131j  (,004  to  .02,  p <0.001)  and  urinary  131j  reflected 

increased  thyroid  secretion  secondary  to  rises  in  TSH. 

We  conclude  that  our  patient  had  intact  lactotroph  but  impaired  thyrotroph 
response  to  TRH  but  did  not  have  ITRHD;  and  further  that  some  patients  with 
ITSHD  may  have:  1)  secretion  of  biologically  active  TSH;  2)  a facilitated 

TSH  response  to  TRH  after  prior  treatment  with  thyroid;  and  3)  measurable 
secretion  of  TSH,  and  hence  an  incomplete  form  of  the  disease. 

e..  A radioimmunoassay  for  3 ,3 'Diiodothyronine  (3,3'T2). 

Because  chromatographic  studies  had  suggested  that  3,3'T2  may  be  an 
important  metabolite  of  T4,  T3,  and  reverse  T3,  and  in  order  to  investigate 
its  physiology  in  health  and  disease,  we  have  developed  a radioimmunoassay 
for  its  measurement.  Utilizing  a specific  antiserum  to  L-3,3'T2-BSA 
conjugates  developed  in  rabbits,  cross  reactivity  was  less  than  0.5%  with 
T3  and  reverse  T3  and  less  than  0.01%  with  T4.  Intra-assay  variation 
averaged  2.9%,  and  inter-assay  variation  was  7.8%  and  18.5%  when  serum 
samples  with  3,3'T2  concentrations  of  8 ng/dl  and  12  ng/dl,  respectively, 
were  analyzed.  Assay  sensitivity  was  considered  to  be  6 ng/dl  by  statistical 
criteria. 

Although  routine  assays  were  performed  on  unextracted  samples  with  ANS 
used  to  inhibit  3,3'T2  binding  to  serum  proteins,  comparable  values  were 
obtained  if  samples  were  extracted  with  ethanol  prior  to  analysis.  Exposure 
of  serum  samples  to  acid  hydrolysis,  a procedure  which  theoretically  might 
inhibit  binding  of  iodothyronines  to  other  substances  such  as  glucuronide 
or  sulfate,  did  not  alter  measurable  values  of  3,3'T2.  Preliminary  studies 
do  suggest,  however,  that  the  quantity  of  3,3'T2  detected  in  amniotic  fluid 
samples  may  be  increased  slightly  by  prior  acid  hydrolysis  and  ethanol 
extraction. 


The  mean  (+SE)  serum  3,3'T2  concentration  in  18  euthyroid  subjects  was  17 
+ 1 ng/dl.  Thyrotoxic  patients  generally  had  elevated  3,3'T2  levels  (29 
+ 2 ng/dl;  n=5)  and  hypothyroid  individuals  tended  to  have  decreased  3,3'T2 
concentrations  (range  <6-22  ng/dl  n=ll).  Unextracted  amniotic  fluid, 
maternal  sera,  and  cord  sera  samples  had  mean  (+SE)  3,3'T2  concentrations 
of  20  + 2 ng/dl  (n*=10)  , 27  + 3 ng/dl  (n=*ll)  and  20  + 1 ng/dl  (n=5) , respec- 
tively. In  8 normal  thyroid  glands  the  concentration  of  3,3'T2  was  0.40 
+ .03  ug/gram  of  tissue.  TRH  administration  in  7 euthyroid  subjects  did 
not  evoke  an  increase  in  serum  3,3'T2  levels  when  measured  90  minutes 
after  injection.  In  contrast,  serum  3,3'T2  concentrations  did  increase  90 
minutes  following  TRH  administration  in  two  sheep,  although  it  could  not  be 
discerned  whether  this  rise  in  circulating  3,3'T2  was  secondary  to  thyroidal 
secretion  or  to  peripheral  conversion. 


In  summary,  these  data  suggest  that  3,3'T2  circulates  in  the  serum  of  normal 
individuals  and  tends  to  parallel  serum  concentrations  of  T3,  T4  and  rT3 
in  various  states  of  thyroid  function.  Hence,  the  radioimmunoassay  of 
3,3, 'T2  should  prove  useful  in  further  delineation  of  the  peripheral  metab- 
olism of  the  iodothyronines . Moreover,  the  ability  to  detect  3,3,'T2  in 
amniotic  fluid  indicates  that  further  studies  of  its  role  in  perinatal 
physiology  are  warranted. 

f.  Quantitative  fluorescent  thyroid  scanning  in  thyrotoxic  subacute 
thyroidits. 

The  differential  diagnosis  between  the  hyperthyroidism  associated  with  sub- 
acute thyroiditis  (SAT)  and  that  due  to  Graves'  disease  may  be  difficult. 
Hyper thyroninemia  may  accompany  SAT  in  10-30%  of  the  patients,  and  when  SAT 
is  painless,  the  diagnosis  may  be  erroneously  ascribed  to  Graves'  disease 
unless  a radioiodine  uptake  (RAIL  is  performed.  In  contrast  to  Graves' 
disease,  the  clinical  course  of  t ° thyrotoxicosis  of  SAT  is  predictably 
self limited.  Serial  fluorescent  thyroid  scanning  as  a means  of  quantitating 
thyroidal  content  of  stable  iodine  was  performed  in  6 patients  with 
thyrotoxic  SAT  in  an  attempt  to  differentiate  chis  disorder  from  Graves' 
disease  and  to  gain  further  insight  into  the  temporal  relationship  between 
serum  T4,  RAIU,  and  depletion  and  repletion  of  thyroidal  iodine.  Six 
previously  untreated  patients  (4F,  2M;  age  range  36-61)  presented  with 
signs  and  symptoms  of  thyrotoxicosis.  The  syndrome  was  painless  in  4 of 
the  6 patients.  Initially,  mean  (+SE)  T4  averaged  18.9  + 1.8  ug%  and 
RAIU  0.7  + 0.4%.  All  were  treated  symptomatically  with  propranolol  but  no 
thiourea  compounds. 

Thyroidal  iodine  (TI)  was  quantified  utilizing  a modified  source-detector 
for  “^Americium  with  two  sets  of  single-channel  analyzers  and  digital 
counters.  Calibration  of  net  counts  versus  mgms.  of  iodine  was  performed 
in  phantoms.  To  validate  the  technique,  the  TI  content  of  12  cadaver 
thyroids  as  assessed  by  fluorescent  scanning  was  compared  to  total  iodine 
measurements  by  direct  chemical  analysis  of  anaerobic  digests,  and  was 
found  to  correlate  significantly  (r  = 0.92;  p <0.01).  In  clinical  studies, 
normal  subjects  (n=30)  had  an  average  TI  of  10.1  + 3.9  mg,  while  patients 
with  untreated  Graves'  disease  and  elevated  RAIU  (n=28)  had  mean  TI  of 
24.4  + 9.9  mg.  In  contrast,  6 patients  with  thyrotoxic  SAT  had  a markedly 
decreased  TI  of  5.0  + 1.8  mg,  suggesting  early  depletion  of  hormonal  iodine. 
During  resolution  of  the  thyroiditis  (follow-up  1-6  mos.),  serial  measure- 
ments of  TI  remained  low  until  after  serum  T4  fell  to  below  normal,  ’ith 
subsequent  increases  in  TSH  and  RAIU. 

Conclusions:  1)  the  fluorescent  scan  and  RAIU  allow  discrimination  between 

the  thyrotoxicosis  of  painless  SAT  and  Graves'  disease;  2)  TI  is  depleted 
early  in  SAT  and  repletion  of  glandular  stores  depends  upon  return  of 
iodide  trapping  function;  3)  fluorescent  scanning  permits  accurate  i_n  vivo 
measurement  of  TI  and  promises  to  be  a useful  technique  for  study  of  the 
thyroid  gland  in  health  and  disease. 


823 


g Alterations  in  serum  triiodothyronine  and  reverse 
triiodothyronine  in  thermal  injury. 

Studies  were  conducted  in  collaboration  on  the  surgical  burn  unit  of  the 
Brooke  Army  Medical  Center.  Hypermetabolism  accompanies  thermal  injury 
(Tl)  and  has  been  ascribed  to  increased  catecholamines.  The  state  of 
thyroid  hormone  economy  in  this  circumstance  has  not  been  evaluated,  how- 
ever. Accordingly,  in  the  2 weeks  following  TI  in  5 men  (mean  burn  size, 
66%),  sequential  measurements  of  serum  free  thyroxine  index  (FTI) , 
thyrotropin  (TSH) , triiodothyronine  (T3) , and  reverse  T3  (rT3)  were  made. 
FTI  and  TSH  did  not  deviate  from  normal,  but  T3  decreased  greatly  while 
rT3  remained  normal  or  increased. 


Day  Post-TI 

3 

6 

8 

10 

13 

15 

T3,ng/100ml 
(nl, 80-180) 

52+12 

26+5 

36+7 

31+7 

16+4 

44+12 

rT3,ng/ 100ml 
(nl, 36-84) 

94+14 

104+10 

76+8 

85+19 

56+9 

66+8 

In  6 other  men 

(mean  burn  size, 

71%),  rT3 

increased  to 

152+26  ng/lOOml 

without  further 

decline 

in  T3  in 

the  4 day 

s prior 

to  septic  death. 

Despite  the  great  decrease  in  T3,  the  TSH  response  to  thyrotropin- 
releasing hormone  was  not  accentuated.  The  data  suggest  that  TI  is 
accompanied  by  a shift  in  the  metabolism  of  T4  from  pathways  that 
lead  to  T3  generation  to  pathways  that  lead  to  rT3  generation;  this 
diversion  may  be  conditioned  by  the  hypermetabolism  of  TI. 

h.  The  effect  of  varying  serum  T4  concentrations  on  extrathyroidal 
production  of  T3,  reverse  T3,  and  3-3'diiodothyronine  (3-3'T2). 

To  examine  whether  serum  levels  of  T4  are  important  in  regulating  its 
extrathyroidal  conversion,  9 athyreotic  subjects  were  studied  during 
separate  monthly  periods  of  daily  p.o.  administration  of  .05  mg  I-T4 
(period  1)  or  0.4  mg  L-T4  (period  II).  All  parameters  of  thyroidal 
economy,  including  reverse  T3  (rT3)  and  3-3'T2,  were  measured  by  specific- 
radioimmunoassays  during  the  last  week  of  both  study  periods.  The  mean 
results  obtained  are  expressed  in  relation  to  the  treatment  period  ( I / II ) : 
T4,  4.1/15.4  ug%;  T3,  55/210  ng%;  rT3,  27/104  ng%;  3-3’T2  11/13  ng%;  TBG , 

4. 3/3.4  mg% ; TSH,  32/1.0  pU/ml.  Mean  Free  T4  (FT4)  and  Free  T3  (FT3) 
concentrations  measured  by  equilibrium  dialysis  were  1.08/4.59  ng%  and 
224/1031  pg%;  respectively.  Each  parameter  increased  during  period  II, 
except  for  3-3'T2  levels  which  did  not  change  and  serum  TBG  and  TSH  levels 
which  decreased  significantly.  In  addition,  4 subjects  received  131i_t4 
and  125I-T3  i.v.  to  det  ermine  hormone  production  and  conversion  rates. 

Mean  conversion  rates,  estimated  both  by  concentration  ratios  of  T4/T3,  T4/ 
rT3,  and  FT4/FT3  and  by  analysis  of  kinetic  parameters,  were  the  same  during 
both  study  periods.  In  summary,  these  findings  suggest  that  (1)  the 
percentage  conversion  of  T4  to  both  rT3  and  T3  are  constant  regardless 
of  the  serum  levels  of  T4,  (2)  serum  TBG  levels  vary  inversely  with  serum 
T4  concentrations  and,  (3)  peripheral  conversion  appears  to  represent  one 


1 — - ...  . . . 


824 


source  of  circulating  3-3'T2.  The  mechanism  by  which  3-3'T2  levels  remain 
constant  during  study  period  II  while  its  presumed  precursors  increase 
requires  further  investigation. 


i.  Effect  of  T3  on  TSH  and  prolactin  responses  to 


TRH. 


Previous  investigators  have  shown  that  daily  administration  of  TRH  to 
normal  individuals  leads  to  diminishing  TSH  responses,  which  were  believed 
due  to  rising  serum  T3  with  subsequent  feedback  inhibition  of  the  pituitary. 
Patients  with  primary  hypothyroidism  were  examined  in  the  present  study  to 
test  this  hypothesis,  since  their  T3  cannot  increase  after  TRH.  Bi-daily 
TRH  (100  pg)  was  given  to  4 patients  for  3 consecutive  days,  and  repeated 
on  a 4th  day  following  oral  T3  (50  Mg).  TSH  and  PRL  responses  were  un- 
changed during  these  3 days  of  serial  TRH  and  were  unaltered  by  T3  admin- 
istration on  the  fourth  day.  In  5 other  hypothyroid  subjects  studied  be- 
fore and  during  3 consecutive  days  of  T3  administration,  TSH  but  not  PRL 
responses  to  TRH  appeared  to  decrease  slowly  but  progressively.  These  ob- 
servations led  us  to  re-examine  TRH  responses  in  normal  subjects  given  T3, 
since  other  workers  had  reported  that  50  pg  T3  completely  abolished  TSH 
response.  Responses  to  TRH  in  11  normals  on  a control  day  were  compared 
to  those  observed  1 hour  after  oral  T3.  In  spite  of  marked  increases  in 
serum  T3,  there  was  no  significant  difference  between  the  mean  TSH  responses 
of  the  two  studies. 


TRH  was  administered  by  continuous  infusion  (1  pg/min)  for  6 hours  in  5 
normal  subjects.  PRL  and  TSH  responses  peaked  within  60  and  180  minutes, 
respectively,  and  then  plateaued.  To  ascertain  whether  this  plateau 
effect  was  due  to  increases  in  T3,  similar  infusions  were  given  to  5 hypo- 
thyroid patients,  and  a similar  pattern  of  response  was  observed,  suggesting 
that  the  plateau  phase  was  not  due  to  increases  in  serum  T3.  The  total 
amount  of  TSH  and  PRL  discharged  during  TRH  infusion  was  estimated,  and 
served  as  an  index  of  pituitary  content  of  these  hormones.  In  the  5 normal 
subjects,  total  daily  net  TSH  and  PRL  release  averaged  123  mU  and  197  pg, 
respectively.  These  estimates  are  consistent  with  direct  analyses  by 
others  of  PRL  and  TSH  content  in  the  human  pituitary.  In  5 hypothyroid 
patients,  readily  dischargeable  TSH  and  PRL  content  averaged  640  mU  and 
307  pg,  respectively. 


We  conclude  that:  1)  acute  increases  in  serum  T3  do  not  suppress  TRH- 

stimulated  TSH  or  PRL  secretion  in  either  normal  or  hypothyroid  subjects; 

2)  the  decline  and  subsequent  plateau  in  TSH  and  PRL  levels  during  con- 
tinuing TRH  stimulation  are  related  to  factors  governing  do  novo  synthesis 
and  release,  rather  than  to  rising  T3  levels;  3)  integration  of  the  early 
peak  TSH  and  PRL  responses  to  continuous  TRH  infusion  may  serve  as  a useful 
tool  for  the  estimation  of  pituitary  content  of  these  hormones  in  vivo. 


j.  Hypothyroidism  after  X-irradiation  to  the  neck. 


Hypothyroidism  caused  by  x-ray-induced  radiation  damage  to  the  thyroid 

gland  has  been  thought  to  be  both  a late  and  an  uncommon  complication  of 

such  treatment.  Three  patients  who  developed  hypothyroidism  after  x irradiation 


825 


to  the  neck  are  presented.  The  first  two  cases  demonstrate  that  patients 
can  develop  clinical  and  chemical  hypothyroidism  after  a very  short  interval 
ollowing  radiotherapy.  Hypothyroidism  developed  in  the  first  patient  in 
the  absence  of  surgical  manipulation  of  the  neck,  or  a large  iodine  load 
4 months  after  receiving  6800  rad  of  x-ray  therapy  to  his  neck  for  carcinoma 
of  the  larynx.  The  second  patient  developed  hypothyroidism  approximately 
6 months  after  his  radiotherapy  for  carcinoma  of  the  esophagus.  Both  of 
these  patients  demonstrated  high  titers  of  serum  antithyroid  antibodies. 

A third  patient  with  Hodgkin's  disease  did  not  manifest  clinical  symptoms 
and  signs  of  hypothyroidism  until  6 years  after  radiation  therapy.  These 
cases  demonstrate  the  variability  of  onset  of  hypothyroidism  after  radio- 
therapy and  emphasize  the  need  for  careful  evaluation  of  thyroid  function 
before  and  after  neck  irradiation. 

k.  Effect  of  propranolol  on  thyroid. 

A dual  isotope  method  allowing  simultaneous  analysis  of  both  endogenous 
thyroidal  release  and  peripheral  thyroxine  disposal  was  employed  in  four 
patients  with  thyrotoxicosis  before  and  during  propranolol  therapy  (160 
mg/day)  to  determine  whether  beta  adrenergic  blockade  with  this  agent 
affected  the  secretion  or  metabolism  of  thyroid  hormone.  Since  catecholamines 
may  be  involved  in  the  regulation  of  both  thyrotropin  (TSH)  and  prolactin 
(PRL)  release  from  the  pituitary,  the  effect  of  propranolol  on  the  TSH  and 
PRL  responses  to  thyrotropin-releasing  hormone  (TRH)  was  also  examined.  In 
the  dosage  employed  in  these  patients,  propranolol  had  no  demonstrable 
effect  on  either  thyroid  hormone  secretion,  the  peripheral  disposal  of 
T4,  or  the  TSH  and  PRL  responses  to  TRH. 

l.  Thyroid  function  in  Klinefelter's  syndrome. 

Thyroid  function  and  prolactin  (PRL)  responsiveness  to  thyrotropin- 
releasing hormone  (TRH)  were  examined  in  6 patients  with  Klinefelter's 
syndrome  prior  to  and  after  therapy  with  testosterone.  The  thyroid 
function  tests,  including  serum  triiodothyronine  (T3) , thyroxine  (T4) , 
thyroxine  binding  globulin  (TBG) , resin  T3  uptake  (RT3U) , radioactive 
iodine  uptake  (RAIU),  thyrotropin  (TSH)  stimulation  and  the  TSH  response 
to  TRH  were  normal  during  both  periods  of  study.  Testosterone  treatment 
had  no  significant  effect  on  any  of  these  parameters  with  the  exception 
of  the  RT3U  which  increased.  PRL  responses  to  TRH  were  significantly 
higher  than  those  observed  in  normal  men  (P  <0.05).  Despite  the  fact 
that  mean  plasma  PRL  responses  to  TRH  were  decreased  when  the  patients 
were  restudied  during  testosterone  therapy,  they  remained  greater  than 
those  of  normal  men.  Mean  serum  estradiol  concentrations  were  normal 
and  did  not  increase  significantly  during  testosterone  therapy. 

These  studies  suggest  that:  (1)  thyroid  function  may  be  normal  in 

patients  with  Klinefelter's  syndrome  more  often  than  previously  reported, 
and  (2)  patients  with  Klinefelter's  syndrome  may  manifest  PRL  hyper- 
responsiveness to  TRH  that  is  decreased  but  not  normalized  during 
testosterone  therapy.  Because  estradiol  levels  failed  to  increase  despite 
a marked  rise  in  testosterone,  further  studies  are  warranted  to  examine 
testosterone  and  estradiol  clearance  and  conversion  rates  in  patients 
with  Klinefelter's  syndrome. 


826 


i pujiuiu  ii  hi  i.mm  .i..uiiinmi-w»..i ' imp m ,- j.  wiiP1! 1 i-'w*1  ■".him .* 


m.  Treatment  of  thyroid  excess  by  resin  hemoperfusion. 

The  ability  of  an  extracorporeal  hemoperfusion  system  employing  neutral 
Amberlite^  resin  to  bind  thyroid  hormone  and  to  decrease  circulating 
levels  of  triiodothyronine  (T3) , thyroxine  (T4) , and  free  thyroxine 
(FT4)  was  evaluated  in  dogs  made  thyrotoxic  by  the  intramuscular  adminis- 
tration of  thyroid  hormone.  Since  the  resin  column  and  tubing  were  charged 
with  saline,  the  effects  of  hemodilution  from  this  source  on  serum  T3  and 
TA  was  assessed  by  control  perfusion  through  a column  which  did  not  contain 
any  resin.  After  correction  for  hemodilution,  the  mean  serum  T3,  TA  and 
FTA  decreased  during  2 hours  of  resin  hemoperfusion  by  39%,  35%,  and  46%, 
respectively.  Hormonal  clearance  rates  were  calculated  in  two  experiments 
and  the  estimated  net  hormone  removed  averaged  60.4  pg  of  T3  and  1990  pg 
of  TA.  Hematologic  indices  and  routine  chemistries  did  not  change  signif- 
icantly in  these  dogs  during  the  procedure  except  for  a decrease  in  mean 
serum  albumin  concentration  and  an  increase  in  mean  serum  glucose  concen- 
tration. 

Hemoperfusion  through  this  resin  system  seems  to  be  a safe,  effective 
means  of  decreasing  serum  T3,  TA,  and  FTA  in  thyrotoxic  dogs  and  warrants 
evaluation  for  the  treatment  of  thyroid  storm  in  man. 

n.  Effect  of  water  loading  on  TSH  and  prolactin  responses  to  TRH. 

Reports  of  suppression  of  plasma  prolactin  (PRL)  in  humans  by  water  loading 
led  us  to  examine  the  effect  of  a 20  cc/kg  water  load  on  serum  TSH  in  21 
normal  volunteers.  In  addition,  the  effects  of  a water  load  on  basal  and 
TRH-stimulated  TSH  and  PRL  levels  wer  evaluated  in  seven  patients  with 
primary  hypothyroidism.  The  water  load  had  no  effect  on  basal  serum  TSH 
levels  in  either  normal  or  hypothyroid  subjects,  and  did  not  alter  the 
TSH  response  to  TRH  in  hypothyroid  subjects.  Basal  or  TRH-stimulated 
plasma  PRL  was  also  unaffected  by  water  loading  in  the  hypothyroid  subjects. 
These  data  suggest  that  a water  load  of  20  cc/kg  does  not  significantly 
affect  TSH  release  by  the  anterior  pituitary,  and  also  provide  further 
evidence  that  water  loading  does  not  consistently  suppress  PRL  secretion. 

o.  Effect  of  water  and  hypotonic  saline  on  prolactin. 

To  test  the  effect  of  acute  changes  in  plasma  osmolality  on  plasma  prolactin 
concentrations,  the  hormone  was  measured  before  and  during  oral  water  loading, 
hypotonic  saline  infusion,  and  hypertonic  saline  infusion  in  normal  subjects. 
In  10  normal  men  there  was  a small  but  statistically  significant  rise  in 
mean  prolactin,  from  7.6  to  12.3  ng/ml,  occurring  within  half  an  hour  after 
the  ingestion  of  a water  load  of  20  ml/kg.  A small  but  statistically 
insignificant  rise  in  mean  plasma  prolactin  was  observed  in  11  normal 
women,  although  there  was  a significant  negative  correlation  between  plasma 
prolactin  and  plasma  osmolality  in  these  subjects.  No  effect  of  the 
intravenous  infusion  of  either  hypotonic  saline  (0.45%)  or  hypertonic  saline 
(5%)  on  mean  plasma  prolactin  was  noted  in  5 normal  men.  These  studies  do 
not  confirm  a previously  reported  suppression  of  prolactin  concentrations 
by  oral  water  loading  or  hypotonic  saline  infusions  in  normal  subjects. 


827 


While  the  data  suggest  a negative  correlation  between  plasma  osmolality  and 
plasma  prolactin,  at  least  after  water  loading,  they  do  not  support  a 
physiological  role  for  prolactin  in  the  short-term  regulation  of  plasma 
osmolality  in  humans. 

3.  Metabolism 

A comparison  was  made  of  the  effectiveness  of  treatment  with  clofibrate 
and/or  chlorpropamide  in  patients  with  diabetes  insipidus.  Six  patients 
with  vasopressin-responsive  diabetes  insipidus  received  clofibrate  and 
chlorpropamide,  singly  and  in  combination.  Decrease  in  urinary  output 
averaged  (mean  +SE) : Clofibrate,  2 gm/d , 44+7%;  chlorpropamide,  230  mg/ 

d,  50  + 8%  clofibrate.  2 gm/d  and  chlorpropamide,  125  mg/d,  48  + 6%; 
clofibrate,  2 gm/d  and  chlorpropamide,  25-  mg/d,  59  + 3%.  Water  deprivation 
tests  before  and  during  treatment  showed  significantly  higher  basal,  final 
and  peak  urinary  osmolatities  (Uosm)  and  lower  free  water  clearance  (C^o) 
on  chlorpropamide,  singly  and  in  combination;  clofibrate  raised  Uosm  less 
but  significantly  decreased  Cj^O-  Water  load  tests  before  and  during 
treatment  showed  that  chlorpropamide,  singly  and  in  combination,  markedly 
decreased  maximal  urinary  flow,  maximal  C^o*  ^ water  load  excreted,  and 
increased  minimal  Uosm;  clofibrate  significantly  decreased  maximal  urinary 
flow  and  C^„o  only.  One  patient  responded  to  combination  therapy. 
Chlorpropamide  caused  serious  hypoglycemia  in  3 of  6 patients.  Clofibrate 
had  no  significant  side  effects.  We  conclude  that  the  oral  agents  are 
effective  in  treatment  of  patients  with  partial  diabetes  insipidus.  In 
selecting  an  oral  agent  for  treating  diabetes  insipidus  we  advise  initial 
trial  of  clofibrate;  if  ineffective,  low  dose  chlorpropamide  may  be  tried 
with  precautions  to  avoid  hypoglycemia.  An  occasional  patient  who  is 
unresponsive  to  chlorpropamide  and  clofibrate  alone  may  respond  to 
combination  therapy. 


„ a*  'Hi  'ifc-aa- 1 1 1 mWn rtk'adfc 


t 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  120  Metabolic  response  to  disease  and  injury 
Literature  Cited. 

Publicat ions : 


1.  Noel,  G.  L. , Dimond,  R.  C. , Earll,  J.  M. , and  Frantz,  A.  G. : 
Prolactin,  thyrotropin,  and  growth  hormone  release  during  stress 
associated  with  parachute  jumping.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med. 

47  (5): 543-547,  1976. 

2.  Atkinson,  P.  L. , Dimond,  R.  C. , Becker,  D.  C. , Martins,  A.  N. , 

Schaaf,  M. , Wartofsky,  I,.,  and  Earll,  J.  M. : Treatment  of  Acromegaly  by 

Transsphenoidal  Microsurgery.  J.  Amer.  Med  Ass’n.  233:1279-1283, 

22  September  1975. 

3.  Burman,  K.  D. , Read,  J.,  Dimond,  R.  C. , Strum,  D. , Wright,  F.  D., 

Patow,  W. , Earll,  J.  M.  , Wartofsky,  L. : Measurements  of  3,3* ,5*  — 

Triiodothyronine  (Reverse  T3) , 3,3'-Diiodothyronine,  T3,  and  T4  in  human 
amniotic  fluid  and  in  cord  and  maternal  serum.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab. 
43:1976,  In  Press. 


! 

! 


4.  Wartofsky,  L.,  Burman,  K.  D. , Dimond,  R.  C.  , Noel,  G.  L. , 

Frantz,  A.  G. , and  Earll,  J.  M. : Studies  on  the  nature  of  thyroidal 

suppression  during  acute  falciparum  malaria:  Integrity  of  pituitary 

response  to  TRU  and  alterations  in  serum  T3  and  reverse  T3.  Submitted 
for  publication  to  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  1976. 

5.  Boehm,  T.  M. , Dimond,  R.  C. , and  Wartofsky,  L. : Isolated 

thyrotropin  deficiency  with  thyrotropin-releasing-hormone  induced  TSH 
secretion  and  thyroidal  release.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Meta.  43 : 1976 

in  Press  (Article). 


6.  A Radioimmunoassay  for  3,3'Diiodothyronine  (3,3'T2).  Burman, 

K.  D. , Strum,  D.,  Dimond,  R.  C. , Djuh,  Y.  Y.,  Wright,  F.  D. , Earll,  J.  M. , 
and  Wartofsky,  L. : Submitted  for  publication,  J.  Clin.  Investigation. 

1976. 


7.  Becker,  R.  A.,  Johnson,  D.  W. , Wilmore,  D.  W. , Burman,  K.  D., 
Wartofsky,  L.,  and  Woeber,  K.  A.:  Alterations  in  serum  T3  and  reverse  T3 

in  thermal  injury.  Clin.  REsearch.  24:269,  1976  (Abstract). 


8.  Burman,  K.  D. , Dimond,  R.  C. , McGuire,  R.  A.,  Earll,  J.  M. , 

Strum,  D. , and  Wartofsky,  L.:  The  effect  of  varying  serum  T4  concentrations 

on  extrathyroid  production  of  T3,  reverse  T3,  and  3-3'  Diiodothyronine. 

Clin  Research.  24^:270,  1976  (Abstract). 


829 


*■*  ’■ 


9.  Wartofsky,  L. , Dimond,  R.  C. , Noel,  G.  L.  , Frantz,  A.  G.,  and 

Earll,  J.  M. : Effect  of  acute  increases  in  serum  triiodothyronine  on  TSH 

and  Prolactin  responses  to  TRH,  and  estimates  of  pituitary  stores  of  TSH 
and  PRL  in  normal  subjects  and  patients  with  primary  hypothyroidism. 

J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  42^451-466,  1976. 

10.  Adler,  R.  A.,  Corrigan,  1).  F. , and  Wartofsky,  L.:  Hypothyroidism 

after  X-irradiation  to  the  neck.  Johns  Hopkins  Medical  Journal.  138:180- 
184,  1976. 

11.  Wartofsky,  L.,  Dimond,  R.  C. , Noel,  G.  L.  , Frantz,  A.  G.,  and 

Earll,  J.  M. : Failure  of  propranolol  to  alter  thyroid  iodine  release, 

thyroxine  turnover,  or  the  TSH  and  PRL  responses  to  TRH  in  patients  with 
thyrotoxicosis.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  4J^:427-432,  Sept.  1975. 

12.  Burman,  K.  D.,  Dimond,  R.  C.,  Noel,  G.  L.  , Earll,  J.  M.,  Frantz, 

A.  G.,  and  Wartofsky,  L.:  Klinefelter's  Syndrome:  Examination  of  thyroid 

function,  and  the  TSH  and  PRL  responses  to  TRH  prior  to  and  after 
Testosterone  Administration.  J Cli  Endocrinol  Metab.  41:1161-1166, 
December  1975. 

13.  Burman,  K.  D.,  Yeager,  H.  C.,  Briggs,  W.  A.,  Earll,  J.  M.,  and 

Wartofsky,  L.:  Resin  Hemoperfusion : A method  of  removing  circulating 

thyroid  hormones.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  42:70-78,  January  1976. 

14.  Wartofsky,  L. , Dimond,  R.  C. , Noel,  G.  L. , Adler,  R.  A., 

Frantz,  A.  G. , and  Earll,  J.  M. : The  effect  of  an  oral  water  load  on  serum 

TSH  in  normal  subjects,  and  on  TSH  and  PRL  responses  to  TRH  in  patients 
with  primary  hypothyroidism.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  41:725-728, 

October  1975. 

15.  Adler,  R.  A.,  Noe.,  G.  L.,  Wartofsky,  L.,  and  Frantz,  A.  G. : 

The  effects  of  oral  water  loading  and  intravenous  hypotonic  and  hypertonic 
saline  on  plasma  prolactin  in  man.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  41:383-389, 
August  1975. 


16.  Burman,  K.  D.,  Monchik,  J. 


Earll,  J.  M.,  and  Wartofsky,  L. 


Ionized  and  total  serum  calcium  and  parathyroid  hormone  in  hyperthyroidism. 
Annals  Int  Med.  84:668-671,  June  1976. 

17.  Burman,  K.  D. , Dimond,  R.  C.,  Earll,  J.  M.,  Wright,  F.  D., 
and  Wartofsky,  L.:  Sensitivity  to  lithium  in  treated  Graves'  Disease: 

Effects  on  serum  T4,  T3,  and  reverse  T3.  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab. 

43:1976  in  Press. 


18.  Wartofsky,  L.,  Dimond,  R.  C.,  Noel,  G.  L. , Earll,  J.  M.,  and 
Frantz,  A.  G. : Estimates  of  pituitary  stores  of  TSH  and  PRL  in  normal 

subjects  and  patients  with  primary  hypothyroidism  by  the  use  of  continuous 
TRH  infusion.  In  Proceedings  VII  International  Thyroid  Conference,  Boston 
9-13  June  1975,  Excerpta  Medica,  Amsterdam,  pp.  268-271. 


as sr-. 


19.  Burman,  K.  D.,  Diraond,  R.  C.,  Wright,  F.  D.,  Earll,  J.  M., 

Burton,  J.,  and  Wartofsky,  L.:  A radioimmunoassay  for  3,3',5'-L- 

Triiodothyronine  (reverse  T3) : Assessment  of  thyroid  gland  content  and 

serum  measurements  in  conditions  of  normal  and  altered  thyroidal 
economy  and  following  administration  of  TRH  and  TSH.  Submitted  for 
publication  to  J Clin  Endocrinol  Metab.  1976. 

20.  Wartofsky,  L. : A Therapeutic  Approach  to  Hyperthyroidism. 

Medical  Opinion.  _5:46-51,  June  1976. 

21.  Dimond,  R.  C. : Diagnosis  of  Thyroid  Disease  Based  upon 
Radioimmunoassay  of  TSH.  Medical  Opinion.  _5:14-17,  June  1976. 

22.  Thompson,  P.,  Earll,  J.  M. , and  Schaaf,  M.  S.:  Comparison 

of  Clofibrate  and  Chlorpropanide  in  Vasopressin  Responsive  Diabetes 
Insipidus.  Submitted  to  Archives  Int  Medicine.  1976. 


n .v-.'W''  * 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

^Tummar^s^t^ 

u 


1 0*  T ( »«(V  SUITRY 

75  07  01 


• KIND  OR  SUMMARY 


0.  Change 


to  NO  COOES*  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

62760A 


<x  row*1 wwy 


2 S i€HTt»,C  AMO  TCCMMOLOOICAL  A REAS* 

01 0100  Microbiology 


[Pll  Redacted] 


11  S T A A - DATE 

59  05 

>4  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATE 

C0NT 

IS  R UN  DIN  G AOIMCT 

DA  I 

IS  performance  me  THOO 

C.  In-House 

IT  ..ON  TRACT  GRANT 
A O A T IS/E  RREC  HvE 
h.  NuMlf  N * 

t.  IYP( 

A « INO  or  AftAIIO 

EXPIRATION 

<1  AMOUNT 

f.  C JM.  AMT  . 

|R  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A PROFESSION AL  MAN  TRS 

A FUN  OS  (l»  AwimAj 

FISCAL 

▼ EAR 

76 

3 

269 

77 

3 

373 

1 

EG  PERFORMING  ORGANISATION 

I 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

KAMI  * 

Walter  Reed  Army 

Institute  of  Research 

Washington,  DC 

20012 

ADORE  SI 

Washington 

DC  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  MAR 

V J 4C4**All  |A 

..I*.-, 

«.„ONIIILI  IMOIVIOUA,  JOY,  COL  R 

. J.  T. 

name 

FORMAL,  S. 

s. 

202-576-3551 

202-576-3344 

SOCIAL  SECURITY.  ACCOUNT  NUMBER  HHH 

i general  usr 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

KANE. 

NAME 

Gemski 

P. 

DA 

n « C Y MO  A OS  (r  ■Ac'W  ittvrlb,  C/«..TJ7| 


C ON  Y nifj  TiNQ 


CAROS  114F 


* RORU  IEcTIrI^^ 

u 


Tm»c^cc«SST 

DA  0A  6445 

» ME  Oft  AMMO* 


PROJECT  NUMI( ft 

3A762760A822 


t prtctft  >IM  r«*aj* 

(U)  Pathogenesis  of  Enteric  Diseases 


NA 


76  07  01 


OMV'M  M|Tft*N 

NL 


TASK  AREA  NUMICR 

— cn 


rsport  comrmoL  ifaeroc 

DD  DRkF.(AH,bjt> 


SRICITIC  DATA  • 
COM  T ft ACT Oft  ACC  Ell 

Otis  D ho 


LEVEL  OR  IUM 
A.  *OU  UNIT 


WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


rrr 


" Cm*) 


(U)  Salmonellosis:  (U)  Immunity;  (U)  Immunization 


21  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE."  *A  APPROACH.  21  RROGRIU  iR-mlft  lx«»Ai*l  M»ft«RA<  IMmlHtR  Sr  »<•»•  RMftM  Mtl  (I  M<*  M*  MOoNr  ClMAlloHx  C«*  ) 

23.  (U)  To  study  the  pathogenesis  of  bacterial  infections  of  the  gastrointestinal 
tract,  particularly  those  caused  bv  Shigella,  Salmonella  and  Escherichia  coli  is 
being  studied  to  establish  factors  and  mechanisms  by  which  disease  is  provoked. 

Through  an  elucidation  of  such  elements,  procedures  for  prevention  and  control  of 
diarrheal  diseases  can  be  devised.  Diarrhea  is  a significant  problem  in  military 
personnel  operating  overseas. 

24.  (U)  The  genetic  control  of  0-antigen  specificity  of  enteric  pathogens  is  being 
studied  since  such  cell  envelope  components  are  of  importance  in  disease  and  its 
prevention  through  vaccination. 

25.  (U)  75  07-76  06  Monkeys  with  high  circulating  levels  of  S.  dysenteriae  1 
antitoxin  (anti-neurotoxin)  are  not  resistant  to  oral  challenge  with  S.  dysenteriae  1. 
Form  II  S.  sonnei  fails  to  regain  its  virulence  after  acguiring  the  ability  to 
synthesize  E.  coli  0-25  polysaccharide.  Mini  cells  from  strains  of  S.  dysenteriae  1 
and  S.  flexneri  2a  have  been  prepared  and  characterized.  For  technical  report  see 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 
Support  in  the  amount  of  $105,000  from  FY  JT  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  i Jui- 
30  Sep  76. 


DD,'.*“J498 


TiONS  OF  This  ROHM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I4IM 
AAR  (I  i TOR  ARMY*  UtE  > A^^BIOLETI 


I i 

I ' 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 

Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

I-ork  Unit  121  Pathogenesis  of  Enteric  Diseases 

investigators 

Principal:  Samuel  B.  Formal,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  Peter  Gemski,  Ph.D. 

Description 

The  pathogenesis  of  bacterial  infections  of  the  gastrointestinal 
t^act,  particularly  those  caused  by  Shigella,  Salmonella  and  Escherichia 
col i is  being  studied  to  establish  factors  and  mechanisms  by  which 

Through  an  elucidation  of  such  elements,  pro- 


disease is  provoked, 
cedures  for  prevention  and  control  of  diarrheal  diseases  can  be  devised. 


Progress 

By  employing  an  integrated,  immunologic,  cytologic  and  genetic 
approach  (see  previous  annual  reports)  studies  in  this  department  are 
concentrating  on  further  elucidation  of:  (I)  virulence  factors  and 

lechanisms  involved  in  intestinal  penetration  and  toxin  elaboration  by 
pathogens,  key  mechanisms  by  which  enteric  diseases  are  provoked;  (II) 
the  genetic  control  of  0 antigen  specificity  of  enteric  pathogens  since 
such  cell  envelope  components  are  of  importance  both  in  disease  and  its 
prevention  through  vaccination;  and  (III)  the  application  of  genetic 
techniques  for  development  of  live,  oral  vaccines  against  Shigellosis. 


1.  Monkeys  were  immunized  with  crude  native  "exotoxin"  produced  by 
Shigella  dysenteriae  1 and  developed  high  levels  of  circulating  anti- 
toxin. These  animals  were  not  protected  against  oral  challenge  with 
virulent  S_.  dysenteriae  1. 

2.  Guinea  pigs  immunized  with  a "rough  E"  S.  minnesota  strain  or  a 
galactose  epimeraseless  col i 0111  strain  were  protected  against  a 
penicillin-induced  gram-negative  bacteremia. 

3.  A significantly  higher  proportion  of  Escherichia  col i strains 
isolated  from  the  blood  or  urine  of  human  beings  elaborates  a heat- 
labile  material  which  is  toxic  fur  mice  than  do  similar  organisms  isola- 
ted from  the  feces. 


83  3 


4.  Form  II  Shigella  sonnei  fails  to  regain  its  virulence  after 
acquiring  the  ability  to  synthesize  E.  coli  0-25  polysaccharide. 

5.  Minicells  from  strains  of  S.  dysenteriae  1 and  S..  flexneri  2a 
have  been  prepared  and  characterized. 


Materials  and  Methods,  and  Results  in  5 Areas  of  Research  Named  Above 

1.  Studies  have  been  conducted  to  determine  if  antibodies  to 
Shigella  dysenteriae  1 toxin  is  effective  in  protecting  against  disease 
caused  by  this  organism.  Six  monkeys  were  injected  subcutaneously  - 
first  with  three  weekly  doses  of  crude  toxoid,  followed  by  eight  doses 
of  crude  native  toxin  spaced  at  3 to  5 day  intervals.  The  preimmuniza- 
tion sera  from  these  animals  contained  less  than  4 HeLa  cell  neutral- 
izing units  of  antitoxin;  following  the  3 doses  of  toxoid  the  titer 
rose  to  500  neutralizing  units;  and  after  the  8 doses  of  toxin  it  rose 
to  greater  than  4,000  units.  These  animals,  together  with  5 controls, 
were  orally  challenged  with  virulent  S_.  dysenteriae  1 cells  2 weeks 
after  the  last  dose  of  toxin  was  administered.  Three  of  the  six 
animals  injected  with  the  toxin  suffered  severe  dysentery  with  blood, 
mucous  and  inflammatory  cells  in  the  diarrheal  stool.  Two  of  the  five 
control  animals  experienced  a watery  diarrhea.  The  vaccination 
procedure  failed  to  confer  protection. 

2.  A significant  number  of  guinea  pigs  die  after  being  injected 
with  50,000  units  of  penicillin.  Deaths  follow  an  overwhelming  over- 
growth of  gram-negative  organisms  in  the  intestine  which  results  in  a 
severe  cecitis,  a moderate  ileitis  and  a high  incidence  of  bacteremia. 

In  our  animals,  Klebsielli  are  the  most  common  organisms  which  are 
isolated  at  the,  time  of  death.  We  have  employed  this  model  to  assess 
the  protective  capacities  of  three  bacterial  strains  which  others  have 
suggested  might  confer  some  degree  of  non-specific  protection  against 
gram-negative  infections.  These  agents  were  E.  col i strain  J-5  which 
is  a galactose  epimeraseless  mutant  of  an  0-lTl  parent  strain;  strain 
R595,  which  is  a "rough  E"  (Re)  mutant  of  S.  minnesota;  and  IE.  col i 0-14, 
which  evokes  antibody  against  the  Common  Enterobacterial  Antigen. 

Guinea  pigs  received  subcutaneously  6 graded  doses  of  heat  killed  c^lls 
followed  by  5 graded  doses  of  living  bacteria.  The  animals  were  given 
penicillin  two  weeks  after  the  last  vaccine  dose.  Significant  protec- 
tion against  penicillin-induced  bacteremia  was  observed  in  those  animals 
which  were  inoculated  with  Re  mutant  S.  minnesota  (R595)  strain  (Table 
1). 

3.  Work  in  domestic  animals  ano  fowls  has  indicated  that  extra- 
intestinal  infections  with  Z.  col  >,  has  hi> *n  associated  with  the 
organism's  ability  to  elaborate  a heat-labile  toxin.  Sterile  ultrasonic 
filtrates  of  overnight  broth  cultures  of  these  organisms  kill  mice 
within  24  hours  of  intravenous  injection.  The  incidence  of  this  heat- 
labile  toxin  has  been  compared  in  strains  of  £.  coli  isolated  from  the 
stools  of  normal  adult  human  beings.,,  from  the  urine  of  individuals  with 


cystitis  or  pyelonephritis,  and  from  the  blood  of  bacteremic  patients. 
The  results  are  summarized  in  Table  2.  The  heat-labile  toxin  from 
human  £.  col i strains  is  inactivated  by  both  trypsin  and  pronase. 

While  the  toxin  in  strains  isolated  from  domestic  animals  has  been 
denonstrated  to  be  plasmid-controlled,  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to 
demonstrate  that  this  is  the  case  with  strains  from  human  beings. 
Eighty-five  percent  of  the  toxin-producing  strains  also  elaborated  a 
hemolysin.  On  the  other  hand  forty-one  percent  of  the  toxin-negative 
cultures  were  hemolytic.  The  hemolysin  of  strains  from  animal  sources 
have  been  found  to  be  plasmid-determined.  Preliminary  studies  with 
strains  from  human  sources  indicate  that  this  hemolysin  is  under  chromo- 
somal control . 

4.  Shigella  sonnei  is  responsible  for  most  of  the  Shigellosis  in 
developed  countrTes"!  TFe  virulent  form  (FI)  of  this  organism  may 
dissociate  at  a high  frequency  both  in  the  human  intestine  and  on 
laboratory  media  to  an  avirulent  mutant  ( FI I ) . The  FI  and  FII  forms 
have  different  colony  types  and  also  differ  serologically.  The  sero- 
logic difference  is  attributable  to  the  loss  of  the  FI  O-specific  poly- 
saccharide side  chain  by  the  FII  mutants  and  this  loss  is  considered 
also  to  be  responsible  for  the  lack  of  virulence  of  the  mutant. 

Previous  studies  had  demonstrated  that  transferring  the  0-25  anti- 
gen from  £.  coli  to  a virulent  strain  of  S.  flexneri  2A  (using  micro- 
bial recombination  techniques)  did  not  alter  the  virulence  of  the 
dysentery  strain.  Similar  experiments  were  performed  with  the  FI  and 
FII  S..  sonnei.  Hybrids  of  the  FI  strain  expressing  0-25  polysaccharide 
side  chains  were  isolated  which  retained  their  virulence.  However, 
similarly  constructed  hybrids  of  the  FII  mutant  failed  to  regain  the 
ability  to  cause  disease  even  though  they  now  elaborate  a side  chain 
compatible  with  virulence.  The  possibility  exists  that  the  length  of 
tho  0-25  side  chain  cf  the  FII  avirulent  hybrids  is  less  than  that  of 
the  FI  hybrid  and  that  this  may  account  for  the  fact  that  these  organ- 
isms did  not  regain  virulence. 

5.  A mutant  strain  of  Escherichia  coli  K- 12  has  been  shown  by 
Adler  to  express  an  aberrant  cell  division  cyc’c  which  causes  the 
production  of  small  anucleate  cells  termed  min  cells.  Studies  have 
revealed  that  suspensions  of  minicells  with  less  than  one  contaminating 
parental  cell  per  10^  minicells  can  be  prepared  by  a combination  of 
differencial  and  rate  zonal  sucrose  density  gradient  centrifugation. 
Purified  minicells,  although  lacking  chromosomal  DNA,  contain  normal 
levels  of  protein  and  RNA.  While  they  are  incapable  of  cell  division, 
minicells  possess  functional  cell  wall,  ribosomal  and  metabolic  systems. 

The  uniqueness  of  the  minicell  system  has  been  utilized  as  a model 
for  studying  the  cell  division  cycle  and  the  function  and  replication 
of  plasmids.  Their  use  as  a model  for  studying  factors  related  to 
pathogenesis  of  enteric  diseases  has  not  been  exploited.  Thus  we  have 
initiated  studies  to  prepare  and  characterize  minicell  producing  mutants 


835 


of  various  pathogens  known  t,o  cause  enteric  diseases.  Mini  cel  1 s pro- 
ducing mutants  o'  S.  typhi murium,  S.  typhosa,  toxogenic  £.  coli , 

Proteus  and  Shi ge i la  nave  now  been  isolated.  We  describe  the  isolation 
and  characterization  of  minicell  producing  strains  of  Shigella  flexneri 
2a  and  Shigella  dysenteriae  1 which  retain  their  property  of  virulence. 

The  S_.  flexneri  2a  from  which  a mini  cell  producing  mutant  was 
isolated  is  strain  M42-43,  previously  shown  to  elicit  classical  dysentery 
in  man  and  other  primates.  S.  dysenteriae  1 strain  1617,  isolated 
during  the  recent  epidemic  of  Shiga  dysentery  in  Central  America  was 
employed  as  the  parent  for  constructing  a minicell  producing  mutant  of 
toxigenic  S.  dysenteriae  1. 

Minicell  producing  mutants  were  isolated  after  mutagenesis  of 
parental  strains  with  N-methyl-N  -nitro-N-nitrosoguanidine  (NTG).  Cells 
surviving  mutagenesis  were  plated  on  TSA  and  after  18  hours  incubation 
at  37C,  the  colonies  were  examined  microscopically  for  an  aberrant 
colonial  morpholcgy.  Saline  suspensions  of  such  clones  were  then 
screened  for  the  presence  of  mtntceUs  by  examination  with  light  phase 
microscopy.  Isolates  which  were  filamentous  or  which  produced  small 
spherical  cells  were  recloned  and  further  tested  to  establish  their  mini- 
cell  prancing  capacity,  A rrlnictll  producing  mutant  of  V fjeitfcri 
designated  M42-43MCI,  and  one  of  S.  dysenteriae  1 designated  1617-MCV 
were  so  recovered. 

Broth  cultures  of  both  mutants  yield  similar  findings  with  respect 
to  cell  morphology.  When  examined  with  light  phase  microscope,  such 
cultures  were  heterogeneous  in  that  they  contained  cells  either  smaller 
or  larger  than  wild  type,  some  cells  which  were  filamentous  and  free 
■ini  cel  Is  fn  addition  to  fret  rrlritelH,  ceils  undergol'-'Q  asy  metrical 
division  to  yield  a minicell  are  also  seen. 

Purified  suspensions  of  minicells  were  prepared  by  the  following 
procedure.  Strains  M4243-MCI  and  1617-MCV  were  grown  in  BHI  broth  for 
24-36  hours  at  37C  with  aeration.  After  a preliminary  low  speed 
centrifugation  (2000  xg,  10  min)  to  remove  a large  proportion  of  the 
whole  cells,  the  minicell-rich  supernatant  was  centrifuged  for  15 
minutes  at  20,000  xg.  The  resulting  pellets,  which  contained  both  mini- 
cells  and  whole  cells  were  resuspended  in  physiological  saline  to 
yield  a cell  concentration  50-100  fold  greater  than  the  original  culture 
Samples  (about  2.0  ml)  of  this  suspension  were  then  layered  on  50  ml 
preformed  sucrose  density  gradients  (5-30  w/v)  and  centrifuged  for  25 
minutes  at  3000  RPM  in  a Beckman  L3  ultracentrifuge  equipped  with  a SW 
25.2  swinging  bucket  rotor.  This  procedure  resulted  in  the  separation 
of  a large  dense  band  of  minicells  which  was  distinct  from  a secondary 
diffuse  band  found  to  consist  of  whole  cells.  The  minicells  were 
withdrawn  from  the  gradients  with  a syringe,  suspended  in  saline  and 
sedimented  at  20,000  xg  for  15  minutes.  A second  and  on  occasion  third 
sucrose  density  gradient  separation  was  employed  to  obtain  purified 
preparations  of  minicells.  The  level  of  contaminating  whole  cells  was 
determined  by  plating  minicell  preparations  on  TSA.  The  number  of 


836 


mi ni cel  Is  in  purified  suspensions  were  estimated  by  count  ing  in  a 
Petroff-Hauser  Chamber.  Purified  minican  suspensions,  prepared  as 
described,  routinely  contained  less  than  one  whole  cell  per  10°  mini- 
cells. 


As  summarised  in  Table  1,  purified  MCI  and  MCV  minicell  suspen- 
sions contain  very  low  levels  of  DNA.  Protein  concentrations  were 
determined  by  using  the  method  of  Lowery  - with  crystalline  bovine 
serum  albumin  as  the  standard.  DNA  concentrations  were  established  by 
employing  the  method  of  Burton  with  herring  DNA  as  a standard.  The 
small  amounts  of  DNA  detected  in  minicell  suspensions  can  be  attri- 
buted to  contaminating  parental  cells  and  to  the  possibility  that  MCI 
and  MCV  mini  cel  Is  contain  plasmid  DNA. 


Our  studies  indicate  that  minicell  producing  strains,  M4243  MCI 
and  1617  MCV  retain  properties  related  to  virulence  of  Shigellae. 
Although  both  strains  yield  a colonial  morphology  typical  of  rough 
strains  and  tend  to  sediment  when  grown  in  liquid  medium,  they  aggluti- 
nate to  titer  in  respective  antisera  and  are  insensitive  to  phages 
specific  for  strains  defective  in  lipopolysaccharide  structure.  Both 
strains  evoke  a positive  Sereney  test  for  keratonconjunctivitis  which 
reflects  the  capacity  of  Shigellae  to  penetrate  colonic  epithelial 
cells.  This  invasive  property  is  further  illustrated  by  their  pene- 
tration of  HeLa  cells.  The  ligated  ileal  loop  model  was  also  employed 
to  assess  the  virulence  of  these  minicell  producing  mutants.  Both 
strains  evoke  a positive  ileal  loop  in  rabbits  when  cells  are  employed 
in  the  test,  thus  indicating  mucosal  invasion.  In  addition,  cell  free 


sonicates  of  S.  dysenteriae  1617  MCV  produce  a positive  ileal  loop 
indicating  that  tnis  strain  has  retained  its  enterotoxin  producing 


property.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  their  aberrant  cell  division  cycle 
has  not  significantly  affected  penetration  of  a multiplication  within 
the  epithelial  cells  of  the  cornea  and  gut  mucosa.  The  recovery  of  such 
virulent  minicell  producing  mutants  provides  an  opportunity  to  study 
the  effectiveness  of  purified  minicells  as  a nonreplicating  oral  vaccine 
against  Shigellosis.  Moreover,  investigation  of  the  ability  of 
purified  Shigella  minicells  to  penetrate  epithelial  cells  and  in  the 
case  of  S.  dysenteriae  to  produce  enterotoxin,  may  provide  some  insight 
into  our  understanding  of  these  factors  in  the  pathogenesis  of 
Shigellosis.  Such  studies  are  now  underway. 


837 


as  '-t.  i ■»- 


I 


t 

♦ 

I 


< 

s 


i 

I 


< 

f 


i 


LD 

in 

00 

• 

• 

• 

■ 

rH 

01 

•H 

?| 

o> 

cn 

00 

(N 

ro 

in 

m 

o> 

0i 

in 

<3* 

CN! 

vp 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

r- 

01 

01 

rH 

rH 

r—\ 

ro 

£ 


in 

in 


31 

8 


a 

Q) 


I 


t 
81  § 


A 

I 

tr» 


oil  oi|  oil 


5 

t 


ro 


« 

* 


50,000  units  injected  subcutaneously  14  days  after  the  last  vaccine  dose 
95  percent  confidence  limits;  group  1 vs  group  4 P=  <.001 


aji 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Wbrk  Unit  121  Pathogenesis  of  enteric  diseases 
Literature  Cited. 

Publications : 

1.  Gemski,  P.  and  S.  B.  Formal.  1975.  Shigellosis:  An  invasive 

infection  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract.  Microbiology.  Ed.  by  D.  Schlessinger. 

2.  Takeuchi,  A.,  H.  R.  Jervis  and  S.  B.  Formal.  1975.  Animal  model 

of  human  disease:  Monkey  shigellosis  or  dysentery.  Am.  J.  Path.  Sft:  251-254. 

3.  Giannella,  R.  A.,  R.  E.  Gots,  A.  N.  Chamey,  W.  B.  Greenough  III, 

and  S.  B.  Formal.  1975.  Pathogenesis  of  salmonella-mediated  intestinal  fluid 
secretion:  Activation  of  adenylate  cyclase  and  inhibition  by  indanethacin. 

Gastroenterology,  69:  1238-1245. 

4.  Giannella,  R.  A.,  W.  R.  Rout,  S.  B.  Formal  and  H.  Collins.  1976. 

Role  of  plasma  filtration  in  the  intestinal  fluid  secretion  mediated  by 
infection  with  Salmonella  typhirrurium.  Infection  and  Immunity,  13:  470-474. 

5.  Wohlhieter,  J.  A.,  P.  Gemski,  and  L.  S.  Baron.  1975.  Extensive 

segments  of  the  Escherichia  coli  K12  chromosome  in  Proteus  mirabilis  diploids. 
Molec.  gen.  Genet.  139:  93-101. 

Abstracts : 

1.  MacDermott,  R.  P. , P.  F.  Summers,  A.  A.  Reeder,  G.  H.  Lowell,  and 

S.  B.  Formal.  1976.  Antibody  dependent,  cell-mediated  cytotoxicity  of 
shigella.  Gastroenterology  70:  910. 

2.  Kinsey,  M.  D. , S.  B.  Formal,  G.  J.  Danrnin  and  R.  A.  Giannella.  1976. 

The  importance  of  oral  inoculation  in  the  pathogenesis  of  shigella  diarrhea. 
Gastroenterology  70:  902. 

3.  Thompson,  M.  R. , S.  B.  Formal  and  P.  Gemski.  1976.  Toxins  of  Shigella 

dysenteriae  1 and  Shigella  flexneri  2a.  Fed.  Proc.  35:  1394. 


84  2 


pT  - ▼*  'rvr'»>!«56 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


1 D**e  MlV  SUWRY 

75  07  01 


4 KINO  Of  luMMOr 

D.  Change 


10  MO  cooes  * 


6.  COMT NI6UT IMG 


RROGRAM ELEMENT 

~E7jm 


CARDS  114F 


• WORM  KCUMTY1 


PAQJiC  T NUMKR 

IKTETTSmTZ 


I A6CNCT  ACCESSION* 


DA.  .QA 


I AfONAMNi 


NA 


IDaT^^ummaT^" 

76  07  01 


► Utr«  M»STE> 

NL 


TASK  A AC  A HUNIIR 

— m 


•CROAT  comntoL  trmaoi. 

DO  DRkE'AR  >6J6 


SPECIFIC  OAT  A - 
COM  TRACTOR  ACCESS 

L3  res  Omo 


t LWCL  OR  SUM 


•OAK  UNIT  NUMKA 


ITT 


TITLI  fPr»<#4»  ml*  IMNIp  tt  *•((—»  Cf^j* 

(H)  Histopathologic  Manifestations  of  Military  Diseases  and  Injuries 

I 4 C I f » T I » I C AND  T ICHNOLOOK  AC  A ARAS* 

002600  Biology 

f»  itaat-Ba7| 


63  08 


[IT  COM 

A DATIS/»T»«CTIVI. 


14  itTIMATCO  COMPLETION  OATE 


CQNI 


NA 


■ MAlAA  t ION 


4 AMOUNT 
(.CUM.  AMT. 


It  PCSPONSIOIE  DOO  ONOMKIIATION 


I 


16  ACIOUMC6I  CSTIMATI 

A PMOFStAlONAL  HAN  VMS 

k F UN  OS  0*  AmimA) 

FISCAL 

VRAM 

76 

5 

?1  cl 

77 

5 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

Washington,  DC  20012 

»•  J 


NC  l PON  SI  BL  ■ INDIVIDUAL 

D4M.  JOY,  ROBERT  J.  T.,  COL 
ULlWHOM  (202)  576-3552 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

II  NtVMCPO*  yf»*c**  IaCM  »IA  C»*J 


DA 


l«  AEMFOnhanCE  MET  NOD 

C.  In-House 


m MRRORMNO  ODSANIIATMM 


*“•*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Pathology 
Washington,  DC  20012 

PAINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR 

»*••*  Takeuchi , A.  _ 

(202)  576-2024 

SOCIAL  SCCUAItT  ACCOUNT  RUHOCN 
AMOCIATI  IN vfll Tl O A TONS 

«*•«  Jervis,  H.,  Hase,  T.,  Ewing,  E. 

— »■  Henlev.  G.,  Colvin,  R. 


UU  Immune  responses:  (111  Enteroviruses:  III)  Intestine:  (II)  Electron  Microscopy:(U) 


II  TECHNICAL  OD4ECTIVE  * 14  MPPNOACM,  It  RROOKU  (TvwIN  InAWANl  'Mnll/lff  M ixaM*  Pft  (A*  U«r  af  *1*  fAcurl*  ClM4l6c«>fs»  C««M  > 


Dysentery 


23 ( U ) To  define  histopathologic  manifestations  of  injuries  and  diseases  which  have  cur- 
rent or  potential  problems  in  military  personnel.  The  current  effort  is  directed  towarc 
studies  of  enteric  diseases  and  immunologic  responses  with  infections.  These  studies 
provide  a basis  for  a comprehension  of  pathogenesis,  scientific  treatment,  and  deter- 
mination of  prognosis  in  enteric  infectious  diseases  of  military  personnel. 

24 ( U ) Various  morphologic  techniques  including  histology,  histo-  and  cytochemistry, 
autoradiography,  immunofluorescent  microscopy,  transmission  and  scanning  electron 
microscopy  are  employed.  Various  immunologic  techniques  have  also  been  utilized. 

24(11)  75  07-76  06  Further  studies  on  experimental  Entamoeba  histolytica  infections  have 
clarified  pathogenesis  of  the  histolysis  of  bowel,  the  hallmark  of  amoebic  dysentery; 
cytolytic  enzymes  released  from  granulocytes  caused  by  invading  amoeba  and  concomittant 
vascular  thrombotic  events  result  in  histolysis  and  ulceration  of  the  bowel.  Immuno- 
pathologic  studies  of  responses  of  the  gut  mucosa  to  parenteral  immunization  with 
shigella  bacilli  are  being  carried  out  in  rabbits  and  guinea  pigs;  parenteral  immunizatibn 
fails  to  prevent  mucosal  invasion  by  orally  administered  shi gel T ae  but  appears  to  prever t 
clinical  bacillary  dysentery.  A new  experimental  model  was  established  in  rabbits  and 
guinea  pigs  in  order  to  obtain  basic  information  on  acute  immune  response  in  guts.  EM 
studies  on  experimental  canine  coronavirus  have  established  characteristic  cytopathic 
effects  Jji  vivo;  the  virions  penetrate  from  gut  lumen  into  enterocytes  by  pinocytosis, 
replicate  exclusively  on  smooth  membranes  and  release  from  host  cells  thru  disrupted 
luminal  plasma  membrane  into  gut  lumen. Support  in  the  amount  or  i'go.ooo  from  FY  7T  funds 
is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul-30  Sep  76. 

For  technical  reports,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Reports, 

1 Jul  75  - 30  June  76. 

to  conlfMclo/w  «»ni  •rigtottor'4  IMuw) 


DO, '."“J  498 


NS  OR  THIS  TORM  ANC  3 8 SOL  ETC  DO  FOAMS  I 4tl  A 
I 61  i FOR  A AM  V USE  AMI  OEIOLlTf 

X43 


p AE  v tout  EDI  TIOI 
ANO  I 466' t IMAM 


NOV  6 S 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  123  Histopathologic  Manifestations  of  Military  Diseases 
and  Injuries 

Investigators. 

Principal:  Akio  Takeuchi , M.D. 

Associates:  MAJ  Edwin  Ewing,  MC;  Tatsuo  Hase,  M.D.;  Helen  R. 

Jervis,  Dr.  Nat.  Sc.;  SSG  Garnett  Henley,  MS; 

LTC  Paul  K.  Hildebrandt,  VC 

Description: 

To  define  histopathologic  manifestations  of  injuries  ex- 
perimentally produced  and  diseases  which  present  current  or 
potential  problems  in  military  personnel.  The  current  effort 
is  directed  toward  studies  of  diseases  of  the  digestive  tract 
and  immune  responses  due  to  infections  and  injuries.  These 
studies  provide  a basis  for  a comprehension  of  pathogenesis, 
scientific  treatment,  and  determination  of  prognosis  in 
diseases  and  injuries  in  military  personnel. 

Approach  to  the  Problem 

A multi-disciplinary  approach  including  conventional 
histology,  histo-  and  cytochemistry,  autoradiography,  radio- 
tracer  methods,  various  immunologic  techniques,  immunofluorescent 
microscopy,  transmission  and  scanning  electron  microscopy  is 
employed. 

Progress 

In  the  past,  this  work  unit  was  primarily  concerned  with 
studies  of  histopathologic  manifestations  of  acute  diarrheal 
diseases  of  infectious  origin.  In  the  past  year,  we  have 
expanded  this  work  unit  and  included  collaborative  studies  of 
experimental  rickettsial  and  trypanosomal  infections  with  other 
departments  of  WRAIR  and  WRGH. 

i 

I.  STUDIES  OF  HOST-INDIGENEOUS  MICROBE  RELATIONSHIP  IN  THE 
DIGESTIVE  TRACT 

Medical  microbiology  has  been  concerned  primarily  with  the 
potentially  pathogenic  members  of  indigeneous  microflora. 
Symbiotic  species  are  of  at  least  equal  importance  because  they 
maintain  essential  anatomical  and  physiological  function  with 
the  host  (Dubos  1967).  The  lumen  of  the  digestive  tract  is 
now  acknowledged  as  the  site  of  a dynamic  ecological  system 
composed  of  extremely  large  populations  of  different  microbes 
maintained  in  balanced  proportions.  Studies  have  indicated 
that  indigeneous  microbes  in  the  gastrointestinal  flora  of 
mammals  predominantly  populate  within  certain  anatomical  and 

844 


histological  divisions  of  the  digestive  tract  (Dubos  et  al . 

1962).  Some  of  these  microbes  are  preferentially  localized 
in  a close  proximity  to  the  surface  of  gastrointestinal 
mucosa,  while  others  are  predominantly  found  in  the  glandular 
lumen  of  the  crypt  (Savage,  Dubos  & Schaedler  1968).  A 
study  indicated  that  the  large  concentration  of  epithelial- 
associated  indigeneous  microbes  resist  access  of  pathogenic 
bacteria  to  the  intestinal  epithelial  surface  (Savage  1972). 

Since  the  adherence  of  indigeneous  bacteria  is  required  for 
colonization  of  epithelial  cells  of  the  buccal  mucosa  of 
man,  it  has  been  suggested  that  the  bacterial  adherence  may 
be  inhibited  by  the  presence  of  abundant  secretory  immuno- 
globulin (Williams  & Gibbons  1972,  1974). 

Little  is  known  about  "gastrointestinal  epithelial  cell  - 
associated  indigeneous  microbes"  in  mammals  including  monkey 
and  man  (Nelson  & Mata  1970;  Takeuchi  & Jervis  et  al.  1974). 

For  this  reason,  we  have  continuously  studied  these  problems; 
current  efforts  have  been  directed  toward  studies  of  gastric 
spirilla  in  the  stomach  of  rhesus  monkeys  and  man.  (See  1974- 
75  Annual  Report,  Dept,  of  Experimental  Pathology,  WRAIR). 

A.  Studies  on  Structure  and  Host-Relationship  of  Gastric 
Spirilla  of  Monkeys 

The  presence  of  spirilla  (GS)  in  gastric  mucosa  has  long 
been  recognized  in  various  animal  species  including  monkey  and 
man.  Yet,  little  is  known  about  the  entity  and  the  condition 
is  often  overlooked.  Using  histology,  thin  sectioning,  negative 
staining  and  shadow-casting  techniques  by  electron  microscopy, 
studies  on  structure  of  GS  and  their  host  relationship  in 
healthy  rhesus  monkeys  are  being  completed. 

In  collaboration  with  the  Department  of  Pathology,  WRGH  and 
Laboratory  Service,  Kansas  City  VA  Hospital,  we  have  been 
studying  GS  in  human  patients.  Our  preliminary  findings 
indicate  that  the  structure  of  GS  and  their  host-cell  relationship 
in  gastric  mucosa  appears  to  be  indistinguishable  from  those  of 
monkeys. 

In  paraffin  section  stained  by  H&E,  GS  may  be  mistaken  for 
strands  of  mucus  (Fig.  1 & 2).  In  thick  sections  of  Epon- 
embedded  tissue,  GS  are  recognized  as  "corkscrews"  with  up  to 
12  coils.  They  are  8um  long  and  0.8um  wide.  GS  have  character- 
istic polar  flagella.  They  concentrate  in  isthmus  and  are  found 
less  frequently  in  neck  and  base  of  gastric  glands,  while  they 
are  rare  or  totally  absent  in  gastric  lumen.  GS  are  closely  as- 
sociated with  parietal  cells  (Fig.  3)  and  are  capable  of  pene- 
trating into  parietal  cytoplasm.  In  either  intra-  or  extra- 
cellular locations,  GS  elicit  neither  changes  of  host  cyto- 
components  nor  inflammatory  response. 

Further  studies  on  GS  in  human  subjects  will  clarify  the 
structural  characteristics  of  GS  and  its  clinical  entity  in 
human  subjects. 


845 


'-"'it'  ! .m+jrVr-rtTTW-T 


Fig.  1 - Gastric  mucosa  of  isthmus  portion  of  pylorus 
gastrectomy  specimen.  The  patient  had  a gastrectomy 
for  perforation  of  a peptic  ulcer  at  the  duodenum. 

The  glandular  contents  containing  numerous  gastric 
spirilla  are  mistaken  for  strands  of  mucus  in  paraffine 
sections  routinely  stained  by  hematoxyl in-eosin.  X440 


846 


Ftr  .« 


w*-  zir,  w 


T~  >, 


I 


Fig.  2 - Gastric  mucosa  of  isthmus  portion  of  pylorus. 

This  was  prepared  from  a section  adjacent  to  that  shown 
in  Fig.  1 and  stained  by  Wal thin-Starry  (silver).  Numerous 
silver  stained  gastric  spirilla  are  aggregated  and  seen 
as  slender  and  slightly  curved  microbes  in  the  glandular 
lumen  (arrows).  X440 


i:.«B£SK 


Fig.  3 - Gastric  spirilla  (GS)  in  glandular  lumen  of  isthmus, 
stomach,  healthy  rhesus  monkey.  Flagella  of  spirillum  are  in 
a direct  contact  of  microvilli  (MV)  of  a parietal  cell  (PC). 
X52 ,000 


I 


II.  STUDIES  OF  HOST-PATHOGENIC  MICROBE  RELATIONSHIP  IN  THE 
DIGESTIVE  TRACT 

A . Studies  on  Histolysis  and  Ulceration  of  the  Cecum 
Experimental  in  Entamoeba  Histolytica  Infections 

Background 

In  man,  acute  diarrhea  caused  by  E.  histolytica  is 
attributable  to  colonic  lesions  associated  with  invading 
amebae.  The  most  common  colonic  lesions  in  human  patients 
are  acute  ulceration  which  initially  developed  in  the  cecum. 

Cecal  ulcers  often  complicate  the  prognosis  of  patients 
because  they  develop  frequently  into  perforation  of  the 
bowel  wall  followed  by  peritonitis  and  also  because  they  are 
an  initial  source  of  extra-enteric  amebic  lesions.  Yet  the 
pathogenesis  of  acute  amebic  ulceration  has  never  beer, 
satisfactorily  clarified.  Some  believe  that  ulcers  develop 
from  necrosis  of  bowel  tissue  by  "lytic  enzyme"  produced 
by  invading  amebae,  while  others  postulate  that  secondary 
invasion  of  bacteria  is  responsible  for  ulcer  formation  in 
the  colon.  This  discrepancy  had  been  mainly  related  to  as 
yet  unclarified  mechanism  of  initial  penetration  of  the  gut 
mucosa  by  amebae  and  the  subsequent  early  changes  of  the 
mucosal  tissue  surrounding  invading  amebae.  Some  believe 
that  the  ameba  penetrated  the  epithelium  by  mechanical  means. 
Others  postulate  that  necrosis  of  gut  mucosa  by  cytolytic 
enzymes  produced  by  the  ameba  is  responsible  for  penetration 
and  establishing  tissue  infections. 

By  electron  microscopy,  Griffin  (1972)  and  Pittman  et  al . 
(1973)  studied  rectal  biopsy  specimens  from  human  patients 
with  histolytica  infections.  Although  these  studies 
clarified  several  aspects  of  amebic-colonic  mucosa  interactions, 
they  did  not  demonstrate  penetration  of  colonic  epithelium  by 
amebae  and  their  effect  on  the  epithelial  cell.  This  may  be 
due  to  the  limitations  inherent  in  rectal  biopsy  material  and 
the  fact  that  human  cases  clinically  encountered  represent  a 
relatively  advanced  stage  of  the  disease. 

It  has  been  found  that  young  germfree  guinea  pigs,  inoculated 
intracecally  with  cultured  £.  histolytica  and  the  enteric  flora 
from  a patient  with  acute  amebic  colitis,  develop  lesions  similar 
to  those  of  human  amebiasis  and  thus  provide  a good  experimental 
model  for  studies  on  the  pathogenesis  of  amebic  disease.  Using 
this  model  at  an  early  stage  of  infection  when  trophozoites 
invade  the  cecal  mucosa,  we  have  demonstrated  for  the  first 
time,  ul trastmctural ly,  how  amebae  penetrate  from  the  gut 
lumen  to  the  lamina  propria  through  the  cecal  epithelium  and 
how  cytoplasmic  components  of  epithelial  cells  respond  to 


penetrating  amebae.  (See  Annual  Report,  1973-74,  Department 
of  Experimental  Pathology,  WRAIR)  and  also  early  responses 
of  mucosal  cells  and  vasculatures  to  invasion  of  amebae 
(See  Annual  Report,  1974-75,  Department  of  Experimental 
Pathology,  WRAIR). 

We  have  continued  to  study  these  lesions.  The  present 
study  is  concerned  with  the  subsequent  changes  of  the  cecum 
during  tissue  invasion  by  amebae.  Our  special  attention  is 
paid  to  analyze  the  pathogeneiss  of  histolysis  and  ulceration 
of  the  cecum  in  this  experimental  amebae  infection. 

EXPERIMENTAL  INFECTION  AND  MORPHOLOGIC  METHODS 

NIH  Hartley  strain  germfree  guinea  pigs  were  used  as  experi- 
mental hosts.  The  animals  were  obtained  by  Caesarean  section, 
maintained  in  Reynier's  series  500  stainless  steel  isolators 
on  dietary  regimen  L-445  and  monitored  at  weekly  intervals  by 
procedures  described  (Phillips  & Gorstein  1966).  All  animals 
were  inoculated  at  the  age  of  12-17  days  and  each  received  a 
1.0  ml  inoculum  containing  200,000  £.  histolytica.  CDC  J-190 
strain  amebae  were  injected  directly  into  the  cecum  during 
laparotomy  under  sodium  pentothal  anesthesia.  They  were 
maintained  in  vitro  in  Locke's  egg-rice  flour  medium  with 
enteric  flora  from  the  patient,  incubated  at  37°  C and  trans- 
ferred thrice  weekly.  Inocula  were  prepared  by  pooling  the 
sediment  from  48  hour  cultures  and  quantitating  with  a hemo- 
cytometer.  Control  animals  were  treated  just  as  the  experi- 
mental group  except  they  were  inoculated  with  only  the  enteric 
flora  without  amebae. 


Guinea  pigs  were  killed  at  post-inoculation  intervals  of 
7-12  days  by  ether  anesthesia  and  autopsied  in  a conventional 
manner.  The  cecum  was  removed  immediately  and  immersed  in 
chilled  physiological  saline  wherein  the  cecal  wall  was  opened 
and  the  luminal  contents  carefully  removed.  Multiple  sections 
were  taken  from  mucosa  of  the  cecum.  Each  section  was  divided 
into  three  pieces  and  processed  for  histochemistry  (HC),  light 
(LM)  and  electron  microscopy  (EM). 

PRELIMINARY  OBSERVATIONS 

Light  microscope  observations  on  microerosins  and  the  margin 
of  ulceration  at  the  bowel  mucosa  showed  that  areas  of  the 
histolysis  is  characterized  by  amorphous  material,  cell  debris 
and  red  blood  cells  (Fig.  4 & 5).  When  the  ulcerated  lesions 
of  the  mucosa  were  stained  by  Alkaline  phosphase,  the  reaction 
products  are  limited  to  the  ulceration  (Fig.  6).  In  order  to 
clarify  the  nature  of  the  localized  activity  of  the  phosphatase 
activity,  microerosins  and  ulceration  at  the  bowel  mucosa  have 
been  studied  by  electron  microscopy.  At  ultrastructural  level, 
lysis  of  granulocytes  would  correspond  to  the  areas  of  histolysis, 


I 


' .V 


* ' 1 


r r- 

< 

«gr  ♦ 

Nv.  > / 


\ 


■** 


'*0> 


0*  V; 


Y 


<5; 


// 


( 


t'A 


Fig.  4 - Interglandular  (surface)  portion  of  cecal  mucosa  infected 
with  E.  histolytica.  Amebae  (*)  are  in  process  of  invading  through 
area  of  histolysis  consisting  of  amorphous  material,  cell  debris 
and  red  blood  cells.  Epithelial  cells  arrows  show  severe  degeneration 
and  cell  death  while  those  away  from  invading  amebae  are  unaltered. 

Few  granulocytes  are  seen  in  the  lamina  propria.  X650 


\J] 


V 


6 


.V 


Fig.  5 - Glandular  portion,  cecal  mucosa  with  H.  histolytica  infection. 
Multiple  ameba  (*)  are  in  process  of  mucosal  invasion.  Severe  degeneration 
is  only  limited  to  epithelial  cells  (between  arrows)  and  mesenchymal 
cells  close  to  invading  amebae.  Epithelial  cells  distal  to  ameba  appear 
unaltered.  X650 


t i 


1*1*1  i.ii^i  ill., ,11111  #*>«  V ■ M-I'W  A n*WTT^*RW?S^ 


."f+v:  '■*  f’f!" ••:' 

Azr-s  ? M;  & 


m 


■*■•■ 


Fig.  6 - Cecum  infected  with  £.  hi stolytica . Frozen  processed  for 
thp  demonstration  of  Alkaline  phosphatase  shows  reaction  products 
distributed  throughout  the  area  of  histolysis  in  the  center  and 
normal  reaction  at  the  brush  border  of  the  gut  epithelium.  X50 


853 


.S  — C<i  *<* 


■-“7-  “.r.  ?i- 

7^,, 


wmn  ii u.  ii  ■ -i  11 * ■•'!  u ■<  ii 


in.  STUDIES  OF  INTESTINAL  INFECTIONS  WITH  ENTEROVIRUSES 
Background 

Abundant  information  is  available  concerning  the  physico- 
chemical, infective  and  pathogenic  properties  of  enteroviruses. 
Most  of  these  data  have  been  obtained  from  studies  of  virus-cell 
interactions  in  tissue  culture  system  rather  than  observations 
on  enteric  infections  in  vivo. 


In  natural  virus  infections  the  precise  role  of  the  gastro- 
intestinal tract  either  as  the  portal  of  entry  or  as  the  initial 
site  of  virus  replication  has  not  been  well  established.  It  is 
generally  considered,  however,  that  it  is  an  initial  site  of 
replication  for  many  enteroviruses  (Dowie,  1963;  Stenhouse,  1970). 

For  instance,  Enders  and  his  colleagues  demonstrated  that  the 
Lansing  strain  of  the  poliomyelitis  virus  multiplied  in  suspension 
cultures  in  human  embryo  intestinal  tissue  more  than  25  years  ago 
(Enders  et  al.  1949).  Yet,  little  is  known  about  host  cell-virus 
relationship  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract  in  vivo. 

In  collaboration  with  two  groups  of  investigators,  light  and 
electron  microscope  studies  on  enteric  infections  by  enteroviruses 
have  been  completed.  In  these  studies  we  used  a murine  adenovirus 
K87  and  a canine  coronavirus  1-71.  Special  attention  has  been 
given  to  site  of  viral  replication  and  cytopathic  effects  of  host 
cells  in  the  gut  mucosa. 

A.  Study  of  Experimental  Enteric  Infection  of  Mice  with  a 
Mouse  Adenovirus  K87 

The  physiocochemical , pathogenic  and  oncogenic  aspects  of  adeno- 
virus-host cell  interaction  have  been  well  studied  in  in  vitro  systems. 
Yet,  little  is  known  about  adenovirus-host  cell  interaction  in  vivo 
(Margolis  & Kilham  et  al.  1975).  In  particular,  we  lack  information 
concerning  virus  tissue  tropisms  and  the  histopathologic  aspects  of 
adenovirus  infections  in  the  digestive  tract. 

Adenovirus  strain  K87,  (Hashimoto  & Onishi  et  al.  1973,  Hashimoto 

& Sugiyama  et  al.  1966  and  Hashimoto  & Sugiyama  et  al.  1970)  originally 

isolated  and  identified  by  Hashimoto  and  his  colleagues  from  the 
feces  of  a healthy  inbred  mouse,  strain  DK1  (Ushiba  & Kitasato  et  al . 
1962)  grows  well  in  mouse  kidney  tissue  culture  (Hashimoto  & Sugiyama 
et  al.  1966).  Either  oral  or  parenteral  administration  of  K87  to 
mice  results  in  replication  of  the  viral  antigens  exclusively  in  the 
bowel  but  produces  no  symptoms  in  the  infected  animals  (Sugiyama  & 
Hashimoto  et  al.  1967).  When  DK1  mice  are  orally  infected  with 
suspension  of  K87  grown  in  mouse  kidney  culture  cells,  viral  antigens 

start  to  increase  at  3 days  and  reach  a maximum  between  7 and  14  days 

after  infection  (Hashimoto  & Sugiyama  et  al.  1970).  At  the  height 
of  the  viral  replication  in  the  gut,  numbers  of  virally  infected 
cells  are  found  in  the  epithelial  lining  of  the  distal  small  intestine; 
this  has  made  feasible  electron  microscope  observations  on  the  adeno- 
virus-host  cell  interaction  in  vivo. 


854 


The  present  work  describes  morphologic  feature  of  an  experi- 
mental enteric  infection  of  the  DK1  mouse,  inoculated  orally  with 
the  mouse  adenovirus  strain  K87,  as  observed  by  fluorescent  anti- 
body technique  and  by  light  and  electron  microscopy.  In  particular, 
it  establishes  the  small  intestinal  epithelial  cells  as  the  site 
of  replication  of  the  structural  antigen  of  K87  adenovirus. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 

Dr.  Hashimoto,  Prof,  of  Microbiology,  Keio  University,  Tokyo, 

Japan,  has  infected  mice  with  his  adenovirus  in  his  laboratory  and 
supplied  us  with  all  necessary  virological  data  and  infected 
intestinal  tissues. 

Mice.  Fifty-eight  mice  used  in  this  experiment  were  four- 
week-old  inbred  strain  OKI  white  mice  (Ushiba  & Kitasato  et  al. 

1962),  caged  individually  and  allowed  access  to  food  and  water 
ad  libitum.  Of  these,  46  animals  were  experimentally  infected  and 
the  remaining  12  were  used  as  noninfected  controls. 

Virus.  Mouse  adenovirus,  strain  K87,  isolated  by  Hashimoto 
was  used"  '(Hashimoto  & Sugiyama  et  al.  1966).  The  virus  suspensions 
were  prepared  from  freeze-and-thawed  mouse  kidney  tissue  cultures 
(MsKTC)  infected  with  the  virus  after  5-9  passages  through  MsKTC, 
as  described  in  detail  elsewhere  (Sugiyama  & Hashimoto  et  al . 1967). 

Viral  challenge.  The  inoculum,  of  0.4  ml  containing  4 x 105 
TCD50,  was  administered  orally  to  each  mouse,  through  a metal  tube 
inserted  into  the  stomach  under  ether  anesthesia.  The  control 
inoculum  was  0.4  ml  of  physiologic  saline  (Hashimoto  & Sugiyama 
et  al . 1970) . 

Tissue  preparation.  At  5,7,  and  14  days  after  oral  inoculation 
groups  of  infected  and  control  mice  were  anesthesized  by  ether, 
sacrificed  by  cervical  dislocation  and  necropsied  in  a conventional 
manner.  A segment  of  the  ileum  was  removed,  divided  into  four 
portions  and  processed  as  follows: 

Viral  isolation  and  titration.  For  virus  isolation,  a 10% 
suspension  of  feces  and  a 5%  suspension  of  the  homogenized  first 
portion  of  the  ileum  were  made  and  titrated  by  procedures  described 
in  detail  elsewhere  (Hashimoto  & Sugiyama  et  al.  1970). 

Direct  fluorescent  antibody  technique  (FA).  A second  portion 
of  the  ’leum  was  opened  longitudinally,  rolled  and  placed  on  a strip 
of  paper  in  a test  tube  which  was  held  for  10  minutes  i ..  a mixture 
of  ethanol  and  dry  ice,  to  freeze  the  tissue  at  -73  C.  The  frozen 
tissues  were  sectioned  in  a cryostat,  fixed  and  treated  with  fluorescein 
labeled  mouse  K87  virus  antiserum.  Preparations  of  the  antiserum  and 
the  method  of  conjugation  with  fluorescein  isothiocyanate  have  been 


7-px  7 


described  previously  (Hashimoto  & Sugiyama  et  al.  1970).  Sections 
were  examined  under  a Nikon  Fluorescence  Microscope,  Type  SUR-F. 

The  specificity  of  the  FA  staining  was  established  by  treating 
in  the  same  fashion  sections  from  uninoculated  mice  or  by  blocking 
the  reaction  in  inoculated  mice  with  a gamma  globulin  solution 
prepared  from  K87  immune  serum.  In  both  cases  no  fluorescence 
was  seen. 

Light  Microscopy  (LM).  A third  portion  of  the  ileum  was  fixed 
in  chilled  10%  buffered  neutral  formalin  and  routinely  processed 
for  histologic  study.  Paraffin  sections  were  stained  with  one  of 
te  following  stains:  hematoxylin  and  eosin  (H&E),  periodic  acid- 

Schiff  (PAS),  Giemsa  alcian  blue,  or  Feulgen.  Thick  1-2  pm  sections 
of  Epon  embedded  material  were  stained  with  azure  Il-methylene  blue. 


Electron  Microscopy  (EM).  A fourth  portion  of  ileum  was  minced, 
fixed  in  2%  glutaraldehyde  in  phosphate  buffer  for  2 hours  and  wash- 
ed with  phosphate  buffer.  The  tissues  were  further  fixed  with 
3.3%  osium  tetroxide  in  S-collidine  buffer  and  processed  for  EM 
examinations. 

OBSERVATIONS 


FA  microscopy  observations  on  frozen  sections  of  the  ileum  from 
infected  mice,  stained  by  FA  techniques  with  serum  immunized  with 
K87  adenovirus  were  essentially  the  same  as  those  reported  previously. 
Cells  containing  viral  antigen  were  localized  in  the  intestinal 
in  vitro  (Hashimoto  et  al.  1966)  epithelial  lining  and  absent  in 
tne  lamina  propria.  They  appeared  singly  and  were  randomly  dis- 
tributed in  both  villi  and  crypts.  The  viral  antigen  was  seen  as 
a round  or  sometimes  as  an  angular  or  crescent-shaped  mass,  usually 
located  at  the  base  but  occasionally  close  to  the  luminal  surface 
of  the  epithelial  lining.  In  many  instances,  the  fluorescence 
appeared  to  be  confined  to  the  nucleus  of  epithelial  cells. 

Light  Microscopy.  The  ileum  of  control  noninfected  DK1  mice 
was  essentially  the  same  as  that  of  mice  of  other  strains.  The 
ileal  mucosa  of  infected  OKI  mice  examined  at  5 and  7 days  after 
oral  challenge  was  undistinguishable  from  its  counterpart  in  the 
control  mice.  In  contrast,  the  ileum  at  14  days  post-infection 
showed  significant  changes  which  included  a decreased  villus-crypt 
ratio  and  a moderately  increased  cellularity  in  the  lamine  propria. 
However,  there  was  no  acute  inflammation  in  the  mucosa.  The  crypts 
were  slightly  distended  and  contained  cellular  debris. 

Paraffin  sections  stained  with  H&E  and  carefully  examined  at 
magnifications  of  more  than  300  times  revealed  large,  bizarre 
shaped,  homogeneously  basophilic  nuclei  which  were  sparsely  dis- 
tributed in  the  epithelial  lining  of  both  villi  and  crypts.  Some 
were  oval  or  round;  others  were  angular.  Under  oil  immersion 
(XI, 200)  they  often  showed  several  smaller,  dense  inclusions  sur- 
rounded by  less  dense  nucleoplasm.  These  inclusions  were  consistently 
Feulgen  positive  but  PAS  negative,  indicating  the  presence  of  DNA. 

856 


.1 

1 

j 


i 


\ 


1 


i 

i 

■! 

i1 

V 


'•.r-rn 


The  enlarged  nuclei  in  the  infected  ileal  tissues  were 
identified  by  LM  more  easily  on  Epon  preparations  than  on 
paraffin  sections;  moreover,  Epon  sections  revealed  better 
structural  details.  The  nuclei  were  round  or  oval  or  had  an 
irregular  perimeter.  The  most  common  shape  was  oval,  outlined 
by  a distinct  nuclear  membrane  with  a lightly  stained  nucleo- 
plasma,  containing  small  dense  granules  often  concentrated  at 
the  periphery.  The  distribution  of  these  granules,  however, 
varied  from  one  enlarged  nucleus  to  another,  and  they  could  be 
also  evenly  distributed  throughout  the  neoplasm. 

Some  enlarged  nuclei  were  clearly  located  in  columnar  cells 
of  the  villus  epithelium.  It  was  not  possible,  however,  at  the 
IM  level  to  recorgnize  with  certainty  all  the  ceil  types  in 
which  these  enlarged  nuclei  were  located,  especially  in  the  crypt 
epithelium,  which  is  closely  oopulated  by  different  types  of  cells. 

Electron  Microscopy.  Ultrastructural  studies  confirmed  the 
LM  observations  and  provided  further  details.  The  fine  structure 
of  the  small  intestine  of  mice  was  similar  to  that  of  other  mammals 
and  has  been  described  in  detail  (Takeuchi  & Sprinz  et  al.  1965). 

On  the  basis  of  their  ultrastructural  characteristics,  intestinal 
epithelial  cells  could  be  divided  into  four  types  (Trier,  1963); 
columnar,  goblet,  Paneth,  and  argentaffine  cells.  Between  the 
epithelial  cells  of  both  villi  and  crypts  were  thelial  lymphocytes 
(Takeuchi  X Sprinz,  1967).  The  villi  were  covered  predominantly 
by  columnar  cells  between  which  mucus  secreting  goblet  cells  were 
sparsely  located,  while  the  crypt  epithelium  consisted  of  immature 
columnar  cells,  Paneth  cells,  goblet  cells  and  argentaffine  cells. 
Cellular  elements  in  the  ileal  lamina  propria  were  similar  to 
these  previously  described  in  guinea  pigs  (Takeuchi  & Sprinz,  1967). 

In  general,  the  ileal  mucosa  of  infected  animals  at  5 and  7 
days  after  oral  challenge  was  similar  to  that  of  control  animals. 
Enlarged  nuclei  were  occasionally  identified  in  cells  within  the 
epithelium,,  but  their  presence  was  extremely  rare  and  appeared 
to  have  no  effect  upon  the  surrounding  cellular  organelles  and  on 
the  other  components  of  the  gut  mucosa;  therefore,  the  following 
ultrastructural  observations  were  mostly  made  on  ileal  tissues 
obtained  14  days  after  oral  infection.  Enlarged  nuclei  were  then 
easily  identified  in  both  crypt  and  villus  epithelium  at  low 
magnification  and  corresponded  to  those  observed  by  FA  and  LM. 

They  were  confined  to  three  types  of  epithelial  cells  - columnar, 
goblet  and  Paneth  cells.  Nuclei  containing  large  viral  masses 
belonged  to  columnar  and  goblet  cells  on  the  villi,  while  in  the 
crypts  they  were  found  preferentially  in  the  Paneth  cells  and 
more  rarely  in  goblet  cells. 

At  high  magnification,  fully  formed  virions  were  identified 
in  the  infected  nuclei  (Fig.  7).  They  were  strikingly  uniform  in 
size,  being  75  + 5 nm  in  diameter  and  appeared  hexagonal  (Fig.  7 ). 


857 


I 


In  favorable  sections,  two  types  of  virions  were  identified,  some 
with  dense  central  cores  and  others  with  electron  lucent  centers 
(Figs.  7 & 3 ).  Occasionally,  capsids  could  be  resolved  in  some 
virions  (Fig.  7).  Most  virions  were  arranged  in  typical  arrays 
(Figs.  7-9  ) while  others  were  free  and  randomly  scattered  in 

the  nucleoplasm  (Fig.  10),  or  close  to  arrays  in  dense  homogeneous 
matrix,  or  abutted  to  less  dense  and  granular  matrix  (Fig.io  ). 

The  number  of  virions  in  each  infected  nucleus  varied  from  one 
cell  to  another;  in  some  nuclei  they  aggregated  in  small  numbers 
(Fig.10  ) while  in  others  they  formed  large  crystals  (Fig.  7), 
often  exhibiting  alternate  light  and  dark  bands  (Figs.  8 7 10). 

In  some  infected  nuclei  there  were  several  ill-defined  electron 
dense  spherical  masses  (Figs.  8 & 10  ),  while  in  others  also 
containing  homogenously  darks  spheres,  portions  of  the  peripheral 
nucleoplasm,  including  virus  aggregates,  projected  toward  the 
cytoplasmic  matrix  (Figs. 10  & 13).  These  nuclear  projections 
resembled  the  nuclear  projections  filled  with  virus  aggregates 
which  have  been  described  by  Fong  and  colleagues  (Fong  & Bensch 
et  al.  1968)  as  well  as  the  "protrusions  of  the  nuclear  membrane" 
of  Yamamoto  (Yamamoto,  1969).  Occasionally  the  nuclear  membrane 
topographically  close  to  viral  particles  were  partially  dissolved, 
resulting  in  free  communication  between  the  nucleoplasm  and 
cytoplasmic  matrix  and  in  the  release  of  virions  from  the  nucleus. 

In  the  cytoplasm  of  infected  cells,  virions  might  be  enclosed 
in  membrane-bound  vacuoles  together  with  dense  amorphous  material 
and  fragments  of  membranes  (Fig.10  ),  or  might  lie  free,  without 
enclosing  membranes  (Fig.  12).  Other  cytopathic  changes  in  infected 
columnar  cells  included  the  emergence  of  slit-like  translucent 
spaces  enclosed  by  a single  membrane  (Fig.  8)  and  swelling  of 
mitochondria,  while  other  cytoplasmic  organelles  such  as  endoplasmic 
reticulum  remained  unchanged.  In  contrast,  the  cytoplasmic 
components,  including  the  granules  of  the  goblet  and  Paneth  cells, 
showed  no  significant  changes,  even  though  they  contained  a large 
number  of  virions. 


Both  columnar  and  goblet  infected  cells  were  seen  in  the 
process  of  shedding  from  the  mid-villus  epithelium  into  the  intestinal 
lumen  (Fig.  12),  while  the  Paneth  cells  were  seen  shedding  into 
the  crypt  lumen  (Fig.  11  ).  Extruded  cells  containing  virions, 
showed  a variety  of  degenerating  cytoplasmic  organelles  as  described 
above.  Sometimes  virions  were  identified  free  in  the  gut  lumen. 


Neither  viral  attachment  to  the  microvillus  or  viral  penetration 
throught  the  microvillus  and  nuclear  membrane  were  observed. 
Mesenchymal  cells  and  the  extracellular  space  of  the  lamina  propria 
were  free  of  virions. 


a*  *-■ Lr  ■ ■—  r -J.  * 


858 


Fig.  7 - Apical  portion  of  infected  ileal  villus  epithelium.  The 
columnar  cell  shows  a large  nucleus  containing  crystalline  arrays 
of  virions.  Note  the  difference  between  the  infected  nucleus  and 
noninfected  nucleus  on  the  left  (N).  The  other  cytoplasmic  components, 
including  microvilli  (MV),  and  the  intercellular  junctions  (arrows) 
remain  unaltered.  Basal  lamina  of  epithelial  cells  is  marked  by 
arrowheads;  below  it  is  a capillary  (C).  X8,200.  The  subunit 
structure  of  the  capsid  is  seen  in  soem  virions  (Inset)  XI 10,000. 


Fig.  8 - Paneth  cell  in  infected  ileal  crypt  epithelium.  Numerous  virions 
form  crystalline  arrays.  The  nuclear  membrane  shows  the  typical  double  or 
parallel  membranes.  The  Paneth  granules  are  synthesized  in  the  Golgi 
system  (Gl)  and  accumulate  in  the  cisterna  (arrow)  developing  into  larger 
and  denser  mature  granules  (*).  In  the  cytoplasm,  there  are  slit-like 
transluscent  structures  (SLT).  Other  cytocomponents  are  not  remarkable. 
XI 3,000. 

860 


Fig.  9 - Portion  of  nucleus  of  villus  columnar  cell  showing  peculiar 
projections  of  nucleoplasm  into  the  cytoplasm,  which  focal ly  enfold 
the  cytoplasmic  matrix  (arrows).  Note  crystalline  arrays  of  virions 
in  nucleus  and  mucus  granule  (G)  of  adjacent  goblet  cell.  X19.000. 


802 


yn&X’*' VJ: f&*  &V  • J:  V ' ■;  •" 

» Viw  i<*l&  . , « r t <f«  %■>  * . *,V^  • ■«•»••  . ^ * • .. 


iq.  10  - Part  of  infected  nucleus  of  villus  columnar  cell, 
uclear  protrusions  are  developing  at  both  ends  (Pr);  the  left 
ne,  separated  from  the  main  portion  of  tne  nucleus  and  enclose 
y the  inner  nuclear  membrane  (arrow),  contains  virus  particles 
nd  a dark  round  inclusion.  X22,C00. 


. V"  Vyv\ '"***  S'  v-8yt’  ’ *%r«iFS*** 


* •O'  * 


Fig.  11  - Crypt  of  infected  ileum.  The  nuclei  of  two  cells,  apparently 
Paneth  cells,  are  in  process  of  shedding  into  the  crypt  lumen.  A 
portion  of  shedding  cell  is  still  attached  to  epithelial  cells  (arrows) 
Note  Paneth  granules  (*).  Goblet  cell  is  discharging  mucus  into  crypt 
lumen  (G).  X6.800. 


864 


Fig.  12  - Mid-villus  portion  of  infected  ileal  epithelium.  Infected 
columnar  cells  together  with  goblet  cell  (G)  are  in  process  of 
shedding  into  lumen.  Aggregates  of  virions  are  present  in  the 
cytoplasm  (arrows).  The  nuclei  (N)  of  these  infected  cells  are  free 
of  virions,  as  confirmed  when  objerved  at  a higher  magnification. 

X5 ,800. 


TO 


COMMENTS 

The  present  observations  have  demonstrated  viral  replication 
of  mouse  adenovirus  K87  in  the  epithelial  cells  of  the  small  gut 
mucosa.  By  FA  technique,  the  specifically  labeled  fluorescent 
viral  antigen  has  been  clearly  localized  within  the  intestinal  epi- 
thelial layer  of  both  villus  and  crypt,  and  LM  has  identified  it 
with  nuclear  inclusions  of  cells  in  the  epithelium.  Since  the 
epithelium  of  the  small  bowel  of  the  normal  mouse  consists  of 
four  kinds  of  epithelial  cells,  that  is  columnar  (absorptive), 
goblet,  Paneth  and  argentaffine  cells,  and  includes  also  migrating 
cells  of  mesenchymal  origin  (Takeuchi  & Jervis  et  al.  1969)  such 
as  lymphocytes,  neutrophilic  leukocytes  and  globular  leukocytes, 
it  has  not  been  possible  to  determine  by  FA  and  LM  the  specific 
cell  type  in  which  the  adenovirus  replicates. 

The  present  EM  evidence  has  ruled  out  the  possibility  of 
mesenchymal  cells  as  the  replication  site  of  the  K87  viral  antigen 
and  has  established  without  a doubt  that  K87  adenovirus  replicates 
only  in  columnar,  goblet  and  Paneth  cells.  Adenovirus  K87,  there- 
fore, demonstrates  a specific  tissue  tropism,  as  virions  are  absent 
from  other  intraepithelial  cells  such  as  argentaffine  cells  and 
lymphocytes.  Characteristically,  the  columnar,  goblet  and  Paneth 
cells  are  the  only  cells  that  face  the  gut  lumen  with  a micro- 
villus surface.  It  is,  therefore,  possible  that  specific  receptor 
sites  such  as  those  shown  in  cultured  cells  for  other  adenoviruses 
(Dales,  1973,  Longberg-Holm  & Philipson,  1969,  Phi  1 i pson  & Longberg- 
Holm  et  al.  1968),  might  be  present  on  the  microvilli.  The  adeno- 
virus K87  might  absorb  to  such  a receptor  site  and  penetrate  the 
cells  through  the  microvilli.  The  demonstration  of  such  penetration, 
however,  has  not  been  possible  during  the  present  jm  vivo  study. 

A tissue  tropisim  similar  to  that  seen  in  the  mouse  enteric 
adenovirus  K87  has  been  reported  by  Clemmer  in  the  small  bowel  of 
the  chicken  infected  orally  with  adenovirus  strain  93  (Clemmer  1965). 

In  their  FA  and  LM  observations,  Clemmer  and  Ichinose  have  found 
that  both  the  viral  antigen  and  nuclear  inclusions  appear  only  in 
the  villus  epithelium  but  are  totally  absent  in  the  crypts  (Clemmer 
& Ichinose,  1968).  They  have  stated  that,  in  their  in  vitro 
system,  the  viral  antigen  Strain  93,  is  first  revealed  between 
8 and  10  hrs  after  infection  (Clemmer  & Ichinose,  1968).  Since 
in  the  normal  chicken  the  intestinal  epithelial  cells  migrate 
from  the  crypts  to  the  villus  in  8 hrs,  they  have  concluded  that 
adenovirus  93  probably  infects  the  epithelial  cells  in  the  crypts 
md  replicates  during  their  migration  into  the  villi  where  it 
becomes  visible.  In  this  context  it  must  be  remembered  that  chickens 
lack  Paneth  cells  (Windisch,  1966). 

As  in  the  chicken,  the  distribution  of  virus  infected  cells  in  the 
mouse  ileum,  may  well  be  explained  on  the  basis  of  intestinal  cell 
kinetics.  The  columnar  cells  of  the  epithelium  of  the  small  intestine 
of  the  mouse,  undergo  continuous  renewal  and  rapid  migration  out 
of  the  crypts  (Merzel  & Leblond  1969,  Thrasher  & Greulich  1966) 

865 


• t — t * 


as  do,  if  albeit  more  slowly,  the  mucus  secreting  goblet  cells 
(Cairnie  1970,  Merzel  & Leblond  1969).  In  contrast,  the  Paneth 
cells  are  renewed  at  a much  slower  rate  and  do  not  migrate  out 
of  the  crypts  (Cairriie  1970,  Cheng  & Merzel  et  al.  1969).  It 
is  conceivable  that,  in  the  mouse  adenovirus  K87  infection 
reported  here,  all  cells  may  be  infected  in  the  crypts,  but 
that,  in  the  time  necessary  for  viral  replication  and  vis- 
ualization, the  columnar  and  most  goblet  cells  would  have 
migrated  out  of  the  crypts  and  onto  the  villi,  while  the  Paneth 
cells,  which  remain  in  the  crypts  and  whose  turnover  is  much 
slower,  would  allow  replication  to  occur  in  the  crypts  to  such 
an  extent  as  to  be  easily  visualized. 


In  the  normal  mucosa,  epithelial  and  goblet  cells  are  not 
extruded  until  they  reach  the  tip  of  the  villi,  and  the  structural 
integrity  of  the  gut  epithelium  is  maintained  by  characteristic 
interdigitation  and  invagination  of  the  lateral  plasmalemma  of 
epithelial  cells  which  are  tightly  connected  through  intercellular 
junctional  complexes.  During  the  adenovirus  K87  infection,  ex- 
trusion of  infected  columnar  and  goblet  cells  may  occur  at  the 
mid-villus  level  while  an  accelerated  extrusion  of  Paneth  cells 
has  been  observed  in  the  crypts.  The  premature  shedding  of  adeno- 
virus infected  cells,  we  believe,  represents  a morphologic  expression 
of  adenovirus  induced  cytopathic  effect  (CPE).  A similar  excessive 
loss  of  villus  epithelial  cells  is  commonly  associated  with 
infections  by  pathogenic  organisms  such  as  Shigellae  (Takeuchi  & 
Formal  et  al.  1968,  Takeuchi  & Sprinz  et  al.  1967),  Salmonellae 
(Takeuchi  & Sprinz,  1967),  and  Entamoeba  histolytica  (Takeuchi  & 
Phillips,  1975).  It  has  been  suggested  that  under  these  conditions, 
accelerated  shedding  of  epithelial  cells  results  from  failure  of 
intercellular  junctions  which  amy  be  related  to  loss  of  calcium  due 
to  changes  in  calcium  metabolism  (Takeuchi  & Phillips,  1975).  It 
may  be  possible  that  a similar  mechanism  is  at  work  in  the  present 
virus  infection. 


Intracytoplasmic  membrane-enclosed  vacuoles  bearing  viral 
particles  resemble  the  phagocytic  inclusions  containing  adenovirus 
7,  described  by  Chardonnet  and  Dales  in  HeLa  cells  infected  with 
that  agent  (Chardonnet  & Dales,  1970).  They  have  shown  that  viral 
particles,  after  penetrating  the  cell  membrane,  are  sequestered 
in  membrane-bound  phagocytic  vacuoles  which  contain  lysosomal 
enzymes.  The  virus-containing  vacuoles  found  in  our  material,  bear 
also  a close  resemblance  to  the  autophagic  vacuoles  or  phagolysosomes, 
containing  pathogenic  bacteria  which  are  found  in  intestinal 
epithelial  cells  (Takeuchi  & Sprinz  et  al.  1965). 


In  contrast  to  the  columnar  cells,  the  cytoplasm  of  the 
secretory  goblet  and  Paneth  cells  appear  unaltered  even  when 
infected  with  virus.  Under  normal  conditions,  in  both  goblet  and 
Paneth  cells,  granular  contents  are  synthesized  in  the  endoplasmic 
reticulum  and  packaged  in  the  Golgi  complex  where  they  accumulate 
and  develop  into  membrane-bound  mature  granules.  Synthesis  and 


4- 


secretion  continue  in  the  infected  cells,  indicating  that  they  are 
capable  of  functioning  in  spite  of  the  presence  of  large  numbers 
of  virions. 

In  neither  columnar  nor  secretory  epithelial  cells,  we  have 
seen  those  other  early  changes  observed  in  adenovirus-infected 
cell  cultures,  such  as  intranuclear  fibers  (Kalnius  & Stich  et  al. 
1966),  and  paracrystal 1 ine  formations  (Henry  & Slifkin  et  al . 1971). 
These  morphologic  differences  between  i_n  vivo  and  jja  vitro  response 
to  viral  infection  may  be  due  to  difficulty  of  sampling,  but  may 
be  also  related  to  differences  in  the  strain  of  adenovirus  or  to 
host  cellular  factors  - in  this  case,  the  biological  nature  of 
intestinal  epithelial  cells  or  perhaps  the  specific  environment 
conditions  in  the  gut  (Hashimoto  & Onishi  et  al . 1973). 

Nor  has  cell  necrosis  been  observed  even  in  the  prematurely 
shedding  cells  of  the  gut,  such  as  has  been  reported  by  Margolis 
and  colleagues  (Hoenig  & Margolis  et  al.  1974,  Margolis  & Kilham 
et  al . 1974)  in  their  study  on  the  interaction  between  host  cells 
and  the  adreno-tropic  mouse  adenovirus.  Multiplication  of  this 
adenovirus  produces  severe  degeneration  and  necrosis  of  the  infected 
adrenal  cortical  cells  and  an  acute  inflammatory  response;  the 
latter,  possibly,  cecondary  to  cell  necrosis.  It  is  possible  that 
the  premature  extrusion  of  the  mouse  intestinal  epithelial  cells 
infected  with  K87  adenovirus  may  prevent  the  severe  degeneration 
and  death  seen  in  the  adreno-tropic  adenovirus  infection,  and  there- 
fore may  also  be  responsible  for  the  lack  of  inflammation  noted  in 
the  viral  enteric  infection. 


In  conclusion,  the  present  FA,  LM  and  EM  jji  vivo  studies  of 
adenovirus  K87  in  the  mouse  have  provided  new  information  on  several 
aspects  of  the  interaction  between  virus  and  host  cells  as  yet  un- 
disclosed by  in  vji_tro  observations. 


B.  Studies  of  Enteric  Infection  of  Neonatal  Dogs  with 
Canine  Coronavirus  1-71 

The  coronavirus-host  cell  interaction  has  been  well  studied 
in  in  vitro  systems  (Becker  & McIntosh  et  al . 1967).  Yet, 
comparatively  little  is  known  about  coronavirus-host  cell  inter- 
action in  vivo,  and  especially  about  intracellular  sites  of 
replication  and  cytopathic  effects  (CPE)  of  coronavirus  in  the 
small  intestine  (Pensaert  & Haelterman  et  al . 1970). 

A coronavirus,  designated  coronavirus  1-71,  was  recovered  by 
Binn  and  his  colleagues  from  US  military  dogs  during  an  epizootic 
of  diarrheal  disease  in  Germany  (Binn  & Lazar  et  al . 1975).  Neo- 
natal dogs,  when  challenged  orally  with  this  coronavirus,  develop- 
ed an  acute  diarrhea.  Keenan  et^  al_.  have  reported  clinical, 
histologic,  histochemical , and  immunofluorescent  findings  in  this 
experimental  infection  (Keenan  & Jervis  et  al . 1976).  At  the 
peak  of  infection  (4  days  post-infection)  mucosal  changes  were 
most  striking  in  the  ileum  where  the  viral  antigen  was  easily 
identified  in  the  epithelial  lining.  This  made  feasible  ultra- 
structural  studies  on  canine  coronavirus-host  cell  interactions 
jn  vivo. 

Using  this  experimental  model,  we  have  studied  by  electron 
microscopy  changes  in  the  ileal  mucosa.  In  particular  we  have 
defined  the  intracellular  site  of  virus  replication  and  described 
the  CPE  in  the  intestinal  epithelial  cells  during  such  replication. 
The  results  are  discussed  in  comparison  with  other  enteric  viral 
infections. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 


The  tissue  utilized  in  this  study  was  obtained  from  pups  born 
of  bitches  free  of  canine  coronavirus  1-71  antibodies.  These  were 
some  of  the  same  pups  (Litter  1700)  whose  course  of  infection  and 
histologic  findings  have  been  described  in  detail  previously  (See 
Annual  Report,  1974-75,  Department  of  Veterinary  Microbiology). 

Viral  inocula  were  prepared  in  primary  dog  kidney  cell  cultures 
maintained  in  serum-free  medium  199,  the  50%  tissue  infective  dose 
(TCID50)  being  determined  by  standard  methods  (Binn  & Lazar  et  al . 
1975). 


Three  pups  were  challenged  orally  with  a 3 x 10^  TCIDcq  dose 
when  4 day-old;  one  control  pup  was  killed  with  phenobarbital  on 
day  0 just  prior  to  challenge  of  the  infected  pups,  one  infected 
pup  was  similarly  killed  on  day  2 post-infection  (PI)  and  the 
remaining  two  were  killed  on  day  4 PI,  since  histologic  and  im- 
munofluorescent antibody  (I FA)  observations  suggested  that  these 
stages  might  show  virions  penetration  and  the  most  severe  histologic 
changes  (Keenan  & Jervis  et  al . 1976).  A small  sample  of  the  terminal 
ileum  adjacent  to  those  used  for  histologic,  histochemical  and  IFA 
studies  was  collected  at  necropsy  for  electron  microscopy.  These 
tissues  were  fixed  and  processed  by  EM  techniques  which  have  been 
described  in  detail  elsewhere  (Takeuchi  & Jervis  et  al . 1969,  Takeuchi  & 

868 


Zeller,  1972).  Sections  2 pm  thick  for  Epon  embedded  tissues  were 
stained  with  toluidine  blue-pyronin  Y for  light  microscopy. 

RESULTS 


LIGHT  MICROSCOPY 


The  histologic  appearance,  based  on  the  study  of  paraffin 
sections,  of  noninoculated  control  and  of  1-71  canine  coronavirus 
inoculated  pups,  has  been  described  in  detail  elsewhere  (Keenan 
& Jervis  et  al.  1976).  In  brief,  at  2 days  PI  the  mucosa  of  the 
inoculated  pup  appeared  normal,  although  IFA  showed  the  presence 
of  antigen  in  some  cells  of  the  villous  epithelium.  At  4 days 
PI,  it  showed  distinct  structural  differences  from  that  of  the 
neonatal  control,  such  as  a shortening,  blunting,  and  fusion  of 
the  villi  and  lengthening  of  the  crypts,  with  a marked  increase 
in  the  cellularity  of  the  lamina  propria. 

Although  the  epithelial  cells  of  the  crypts  appeared  normal, 
except  for  a higher  than  normal  rate  of  regeneration,  the  epi- 
thelial cells  on  the  villi  were  flattened  and  occasionally 
vacuolated  due  to  the  presence  of  fat  inclusions.  IFA  showed  the 
presence  of  antigen  in  increasing  amounts  from  the  base  to  the 
tips  of  the  villi  in  practically  all  the  epithelial  cells  on  the 
villi.  In  this  report  will  be  described  only  the  LM  observations, 
made  on  2 pin  thick  sections  of  Epon  embedded  tissue  that  added 
significantly  to  the  information  obtained  from  paraffin  sections. 

At  magnifications  below  xlOOO  the  appearance  of  the  ileal  mucosa 
in  Epon  sections  was  comparable  to  that  seen  in  paraffin  sections, 
but  at  higher  magnifications  the  details  of  the  ileal  mucosa  were 
better  resolved.  When  compared  to  those  in  the  noninfected  ileum, 
(Fig.  13)  the  epithelial  cells  of  the  villi  of  the  ileum  in  the 
infected  animals  at  2 days  PI,  showed  only  occasional,  abnormal 
lipid  inclusions,  while  at  4 days  PI  they  were  all  irregular,  not 
as  tall,  with  disrupted  brush  border.  They  contained  also  numerous 
vacuoles  and  lipid  droplets  which  increased  in  number  and  size 
proceeding  toward  the  apex  of  the  villi.  These  droplets  were 
spherical  or  oval  and  occasionally  occupied  most  of  the  epithelial 
cell  cytoplasm  (Fig.  14).  In  occasional  epithelial  cells,  the 
brush  border  was  particularly  attenuated  and  the  cytoplasm  showed 
a distinct  abnormal  vacuolation.  Mucus  secreting  goblet  cells 
were  completely  discharged.  In  contrast  the  epithelial  cells 
lining  the  crypts  appeared  no  different  from  those  seen  in  the 
control  pup  mucosa.  The  lamina  propria  contained  increased  numbers 
of  lymphocytes,  macrophages,  and  focally,  a number  of  polymorpho- 
nuclear (PMN)  leukocytes.  The  blood  vessels  and  lacteals  were 
unremarkable. 


ELECTRON  MICROSCOPY  (EM) 

Due  to  the  sporadic  incidence  and  slight  character  of  the 
pathologic  changes  at  day  2 PI,  and  to  the  difficulty  of  recognizing 
virions  when  present  in  very  small  numbers,  EM  observations  reported 


Wm 


j 

I 


I 


Fig.  13-  Epithelium  of  ileal  villus  in  non-infected 
neonatal  dog.  The  enterocytes  are  uniformly  tall  and 
columnar  with  a regular  brush  border.  The  cytoplasm 
shows  apical  vacuolation,  and  fine  inclusions.  Goblet 
cells  (GO  are  interspersed  between  enterocytes.  Cf), 
Capillary.  Epon  section,  stained  with  toluidine 
blue-pyronin  Y;  xl ,600. 


>'  ! 1 1 V.U.i»S!i 


T9:  ft 


ipi 


ft  4 f jA  ^ t 

< i n*\l>  Hi? 

:^r-  ^ , ' *;  . v f^hL^ 


» 


1* 


Ase  Ac 


Fig. 14  - Epithelium  of  infected  ileal  villus  of  neonatal 
dog,  4 days  after  oral  challenge  with  coronavirus  1-71. 

The  enterocytes  are  low  columnar  or  cuboidal  with  a 
shortened  brush  border.  The  cytoplasm  contains  clear 
vacuoles  and  numerous  lipid  droplets.  Epon  section  stained 
with  toluidine  blue-pyronin  Y;  xl,600. 


871 


here  were  confined  to  tissues  obtained  from  pups  killed  on  day  4 PI. 

They  confirmed  the  LM  observations  described  above  and  revealed 
further  details  at  the  ul trastructural  level.  The  fine  structure 
of  the  ileum  of  the  noninfected  pup  was  similar  to  that  already 
described  in  detail  in  other  neonatal  mammals  (Stair  & Mebus 
et  al.  1973,  Staley  & Jones  et  al.  1968).  Briefly,  the  epithelial 
cells  of  the  villi  consisted  of  absorptive  cells  (enterocytes) 
and  of  goblet  cells,  while  those  in  the  crypts  included  undifferentiated 
columnar  cells  and  a small  number  of  goblet  and  argentaffine  cells, 
but  no  Paneth  cells  which  are  lacking  in  the  dog  (Trier,  1966).  In 
the  enterocytes  of  the  villi,  the  microvilli  were  regular  and  tall 
and  the  glycocalyx  poorly  developed,  while  the  apical  cytplasm 
contained  an  elaborate  system  of  tubules  and  vacuoles  (Fig. 15). 

At  4 days  PI,  the  infected  ileum,  virions  were  identified  only 
in  the  enterocytes  of  mid  and  apical  villus.  Virions  were  not  seen 
in  goblet  cells  or  in  the  crypt  epithelium.  Virus  particles  were 
found  in  the  intestinal  lumen,  topographically  close  or  attached  to 
altered  microvilli  of  the  enterocytes  (Fig. 16),  or  inside  the  apical 
pits  formed  by  the  invaglnated  microvillous  membranes.  Within  the 
cytoplasm  of  the  infected  cells,  virions  were  found  most  frequently 
singly  or  in  groups,  enclosed  in  vesicles  or  in  smooth  membranes 
vacuoles  of  various  size  and  shape  (Fig.  17  ).  Virions  were  also 
observed  in  cisternae  of  the  Golgi  apparatus  (Fig.is);  some  appeared 
to  be  in  cisternae  of  the  rough  endoplasmic  reticulum  (ER)  and  more 
rarely,  in  the  dilated  perinuclear  space  (Fig.19).  Few  virions  were 
free  in  the  cytoplasm  (Fig. 18),  and  none  in  the  nucleoplasm. 

Viral  particles  were  mostly  circular  or,  much  less  frequently, 
elipsoidal  in  profile  (Fig. 17).  The  former  averaged  80  nm  in  diameter 
and  the  latter  were  75  to  80  nm  wie  and  180  to  200  nm  long.  Beth 
forms  consisted  of  an  inner  core  and  of  an  outer  envelope  formed 
by  two  single  membranes,  each  3-4  nm  thick,  separated  by  an  e’ectron 
lucent  zone  4-5  nm  thick.  The  inner  core  consisted  of  a central 
vesicular  matrix  surrounded  by  a peripheral  electron  dense  zone  10-20 
nm  thick  which  was  often  closely  apposed  to  the  inner  leaflet  of  the 
outer  envelope. 

Various  stages  of  virus  replication  were  observed  in  few  favor- 
able sections,  in  association  with  vesicular  membranes  (Fig .20 ) . The 
earliest  event  in  viral  replication  appeared  to  be  the  formation  of 
crescents  from  modified  portions  of  the  vesicular  membrane,  which 
invaginated  toward  the  interior  of  the  vesicles.  At  the  same  time 
a dense  layer  developed,  topographically  close  to  the  cytoplasmic 
aspect  of  the  crescent  membrane.  This  dense  layer  was  approximately 
10-20  nm  thick  and  v/as  separated  from  the  outer  leaflet  of  the 
vesicular  membrane  by  a space  4-8  nm  wide.  As  the  crescent  of  the 
vesicular  membrane,  together  with  underlying  dense  layer  continued 
to  invaginate  toward  the  vesicular  space,  its  edges  appeared  to  pull 
together.  Thus,  the  underlying  dense  layer  came  to  be  enclosed  by 
the  membrane  and  was  transformed  into  the  inner  core  of  the  virion. 

In  few  instances,  it  was  possible  to  identify  invaginations,  already 


‘I  ( /-VX” 

* f wv< 

4 


Fig.  15-  Luminal  aspect  of  enterocyte  near  apex  of 
ileal  villus  in  non-infected  neonatal  dog.  The 
microvilli  are  slender,  regular  and  tall.  The 
glycocalyx,  attached  to  the  microvillous  membrane, 
is  underdeveloped.  The  plasmalemma  between  the 
microvilli  invaginates.  Note  numerous  tubules  and 
vacuoles  in  the  apical  cytoplasm.  x75,000. 


Fig.  16  - Luminal  aspect  of  infected  enterocyte  near 
apex  of  villus  of  neonatal  dog,  4 days  after  challenge 
Microvilli  are  shorter  than  in  the  control,  irregular, 
and  blunt.  Many  of  the  tubules  and  vacuoles  present 
in  the  control  have  disappeared.  In  this  obliquely 
cut  section,  virions  are  present  between  microvilli, 
and  enclosed  in  membrane-bound  vesicle?;  in  the  apical 
cytoplasm.  x52,000. 


Virion  containing  vacuoles  in  cytoplasm  of 
enterocyte,  ileal  mid-villus.  Note  the 
es  in  size  and  shape  of  viral  particles, 
ondria;  L,  lipid  particles.  x62,000. 


Fig.  18-  Golgi  region  of  infected  enterocyte,  ileal 
mid-villus.  A virion  is  enclosed  within  a Golgi 
cisterna  (thin  arrow)  and  others  appear  to  lie 
free  in  the  cytoplasm  (arrowheads) . A vacuole 
(thick  arrow)  containing  a number  of  virions  is 
adjacent  to  a lipid  droplet  (L).  M,  mitochrondria. 
x48,000- 


876 


5”  W 


urn 


Fig.  19-  Portion  of  infected  enterocyte,  ileal  mid-villus 
Virions  are  present  in  the  dilated  perinuclear  space. 

N,  nucleus.  x84,000. 


rounded,  attached  to  the  vesicular  membrane  only  through  a short 
stalk  (Fig.  20),  or  in  the  process  of  pinching  off  into  the  vesicular 
lumen.  From  these  findings  we  have  concluded  that  this  process 
represents  the  budding  of  the  virion.  This  budding  process  was 
never  found  on  the  luminal,  lateral  or  basal  aspects  of  the 
plasmalemma  nor  in  the  Golgi  and  ER  cisternae  and  in  the  peri- 
nuclear spaces  of  the  epithelial  cells. 


The  infected  cells  showed  variety  of  cytopathic  effects  (CPE). 
In  general,  their  cytoplasmic  matrix  was  much  paler  than  that  of 
the  noninfected  cells.  Alterations  of  the  microvilli  were  common 
and  included  shortening  and  blunting  (Fig. 16).  In  some  instances 
they  seemed  fused  together,  while  in  others  they  were  reduced 
to  simple  wavelike  projections  of  the  plasma  membrane.  The  glyco- 
calyx  became  indistinct.  In  the  cytoplasm  there  were  numerous, 
homogenously  electron  dense,  lipid  droplets  which  ranged  from  20 
to  1000  nm  in  diameter  and  were  enveloped  by  single  membranes 
(Fig.  16-18  ).  Similar,  but  mostly  single,  lipid  droplets  were 
seen  occasionally  also  in  the  nucleoplasm  of  very  severely  infected 
cells;  otherwise  the  nuclei  were  uncr urged. 


Most  of  the  mitochondria  were  transformed  from  their  original 
rod  and  tubular  shapes  to  rounded  or  oval  shapes.  They  showed  a 
condensed,  electron  opaque  matrix  with  deranged  cristae  and  distinct 
intercristal  spaces.  The  rough  ER  exhibited  a reduced  number  of 
ribosomes  and  dilated  cisternae.  The  cisternae  of  the  Golgi 
apparatus  and  of  the  ER  and  especially  the  perinuclear  space  (Fig. 19) 
were  also  dilated.  Phagosomes  and  multi  laminar  membranes  were 
present  in  some  infected  cells. 


In  addition,  two  different  characteristic  structures  were 
identified  in  the  cytoplasm  of  the  infected  cells;  these  were  dense 
filamentous  structures  and  membrane -bound  bodies.  The  first  consisted 
of  dense  material  sequestered  by  filaments  arranged  in  reticular 
fashion  and  forming  aggregates  which  varied  in  size  from  cell  to 
cell  (Fig. 21);  they  were  found  in  the  vicinity  of  vesicles  containing 
virions,  or  even  in  the  absence  of  virions. 


The  second  structures,  characterized  as  membrane-bound  bodies, 
consisted  of  portions  of  cytoplasmic  matrix  enveloped  by  a system  of 
membrane-enclosed  cisternae,  which  appeared  to  develop  around  them, 
and  so  isolating  them  from  the  surrounding  cytoplasm  (Fig. 17).  The 
membrane-bound  bodies  ranged  from  70  to  200  nm  in  diameter  and  were 
usually  seen  in  the  vicinity  of  viral  particles.  In  certain  sections, 
they  appeared  to  be  completely  disconnected  from  the  surrounding 
cytoplasm  and  looked  like  round  or  oval  cytoplasmic  bodies  separated 
from  the  cytoplasm  by  a system  of  cisternae  (Fig.  22).  The  cisternae 
often  ontained  finely  granular  material  or  else  could  be  obliterated 
by  fusion  of  their  two  membranes.  Neither  filamentous  or  membrane- 
bound  structures  appeared  to  contain  virions. 


Some  heavily  infected  cells  were  apparently  in  process  of 
detaching  from  the  adjacent  epithelial  cells  and  shedding  into  the 
lumen  (Fig.  22  ).  In  other  cells,  were  seen  ballooning  of  the  micro- 

878 


I 


~ • -»t— , r 


s* 


_ 4 

-V/  ^ 

'i  *V» 


Fig.  20-  Viral  replication  by  budding  on  membranes 
of  dilated  vesicles,  infected  enterocyte;  1_,  portion 
of  membrane,  lined  on  its  outer  aspect  by  a dense 
layer,  begins  to  invaginate  in  the  form  of  a crescent; 
2,  the  crescent  further  invaginates  inward  and  the 
dense  layer  closes  forming  a thick  walled  ring. 
Incompletely  formed  virions  seem  to  be  connected  to 
the  vesicular  membrane  with  thin  stalks  (arrows) . 
x98,000. 


879 


Fig  21  - Portion  of  infected  enterocyte,  ileal  mid-villus. 
A dense  filamentous  structure  is  closely  associated  with 
cisternae  of  the  smooth  ER  (arrows).  Arrowheads  indicate 
virions.  L,  lipid  droplets;  M,  mitochondrion.  x46,000. 


880 


rv» 


MM 


' ' IT  %rjr+* 


villi,  and  bleb  formation  of  the  apical  cytoplasm  toward  the  lumen 
(Fig.  23).  In  these  cells  the  plasma  membrane  migh‘.  be  disrupted 
resulting  in  release  of  the  cytoplasmic  content,  including  free 
virions,  virions  containing  vesicles,  and  lipids,  into  the  intestinal 
lumen  (Fig.  24  ) . 

DISCUSSION 

The  present  EM  study  has  established  that  the  intraepithelial 
coronavirus  1-71  is  localized  within  the  enterocytes  of  the  small 
intestine  of  the  neonatal  dog.  This  observation  correlates  well 
with  those  based  on  IFA,  reported  previously  by  Keenan  et  aK 
(Keenan  & Jervis  et  al . 1976).  IFA  findings  have  indicated  that 
specifically  fluorescing  coronavirus  antigen  is  present  in  the 
epithelium  of  the  upper  two  thirds  of  the  villi.  The  EM  evidence 
has  ruled  out  definitely  the  possibility  that  the  coronavirus  might 
also  be  found  in  the  goblet  cells  which  are  interspersed  with  the 
enterocytes  in  the  villus  epithelium. 

In  the  enterocytes,  the  coronavirus  1-71  appears  to  replicate 
only  by  budding  of  smooth  membranes  of  cytoplasmic  vesicles  and 
vacuoles.  This  observation  confirms  those  made  on  dog  embryo  cell 
cultures  infected  with  the  same  1071  coronavirus  used  in  this  study 
(Binn  & Lazar  et  al . 1975)  and  also  bears  a close  resemblance  to 
those  described  during  in  vitro  studies  of  other  coronaviruses 
(Becker  & McIntosh  et  al . 1976,  David-Ferreira  & Manaker,  1965, 

Oshiro  & Schieble  et  al . 1971).  In  an  EM  study  of  the  small  bowel 
loops  of  swine  infected  with  T6E  virus  Pensaert  et  a]_.  (Pensaert 
& Haelterman  et  al . 1970)  have  suggested  that  the  TGE  virus  replicates 
in  the  Golgi  apparatus,  smooth  membrane-bound  vesicles,  and  also 
in  the  microvillus  membrane;  in  the  latter  case,  replication  would 
be  accompanied  by  direct  viral  release  into  the  intestinal  lumen. 

In  the  present  EM  study  of  a canine  1-71  coronavirus  infection, 
although  we  have  seen  virions  in  close  association  with  the  micro- 
villi, the  cisternae  of  Golgi  apparatus,  and  in  the  perinuclear 
space,  we  have  not  identified  budding  in  any  host  membranes  other 
than  the  smooth  membranes  of  cytoplasmic  vesicles  and  vacuoles. 

The  coronavirus  particles  appear  to  penetrate  the  enterocytes 
from  the  luminal  surface,  at  the  base  of  the  microvilli,  where  they 
seem  to  be  enclosed  in  the  tubular  invaginations  of  the  surface 
membrane.  These  virion-containing  tubules  or  vacuoles,  in  the 
terminal  web  region,  are  strikingly  similar  to  the  virion-containing 
tubules  seen  in  the  enterocytes  of  neonatal  rats  ileal  loops 
infected  with  an  adenovirus  (Worthington  & Bonnie  et  al  1973)  and 
of  neonatal  pig  jejunal  loops  infected  with  TGE  virus  (Pensaert  & 
Haelterman  et  al . 1970).  In  fact  Pensaert  et  al_.  (Pensaert  & 

Haelterman  et  al  1970)  and  Wagner  et  al . (Wagner  & Beamer  et  al . 

1973)  have  suggested  that  the  TGE  virions  are  taken  up  by  pino- 
cytosis  and  then  transported  inward  into  the  epithelial  cytoplasm. 
Unlike  the  enterocytes  of  the  adult  intestine,  their  neonatal 
counterparts,  are  capable  of  absorbing  large  amounts  of  macro- 
molecular  substances  (Kraehenbuhl  & Campiche,  1969);  it  is  conceivable. 


881 


* -JJ  1 

r • 4«, 

O J • " **?>», 


Fig.  22  - Infected  enterocytes  in  process  of  shedding  from  ileal  epithelium 
at  mid-villus.  Two  infected  cells  (1  and  2)  are  still  connected  by  the 
interdig i tating  lateral  plasmalemma  and  the  cell  junctions  (th_in  arrows) 
Cell  2 is  almost  completely  detached  from  cell  3 except  at  point  marked 
by  thick  arrow.  Cell  4,  for  the  most  part,  has  been  extruded  in  the  lumen 
but  is  still  connected  to  cell  5 through  the  lateral  plasmalemma  and  the 
cell  junction  (thin  arrows).  Note  the  numerous  virions  (in  circles)  and 
the  severe  CPE  in  the  enterocytes.  BM,  basal  lamina.  x81,000. 


liWPriH.lt  inn  \lmm 


Fig.  23  - Luminal  aspect  of  infected  enterocyte,  ileal 
mid-villus.  Microvilli  are  irregular  in  height  and  width 
some  have  disappeared  and  others  show  ballooning.  To  the 
right,  the  apical  cytoplasm  shows  bleb  formation  which 
preceeds  repture  of  the  luminal  plasma  lemma.  Arrows 
inficate  virion-containing  vesicles,  xl 4 , 200 . 


Jr 

Si  -iiii 

' ' 1 

WJf 

* / v 'i 

Fig-  24  . Heavily  infected  enterocyte  from  ileal 
mid-villus  showing  release  of  cyto-components  into 
gut  lumen.  Cytoplasmic  content,  including  large 
lipid  droplet  (L)  and  numerous  free,  as  well  as 
membrane  enclosed  virions  are  discharging  into  the 
lumen.  Note  difference  of  cytoplasmic  density 
between  the  severely  infected  cell  and  the  adjacent 
cell  on  the  right,  which  is  less  severely  affected. 
Arrow  indicates  portion  of  the  disrupted  luminal 
plasma  lemma.  x38,000. 


884 


therefore,  that  penetration  of  the  coronavirus  might  be  facilitated 
by  the  physico-chemical  character  of  the  absorptive  cells  in  this 
crucial  neonatal  period  as  suggested  by  Wagner  et  a]_.  (Wagner  & 

Beamer  et  al . 1973). 

In  accord  with  this  surmise,  it  has  been  found  that  adult 
animals  are  less  severely  affected  by  coronavirus  infections. 

Adult  pigs,  infected  with  TGE,  develop  a milder  and  more  transient 
form  of  the  disease  than  the  neonatal  pigs  (Wagner  & Beamer  et  al . 
1973).  Likewise,  the  dams  of  the  coronavirus  infected  pups  used 
in  this  study  remained  asymptomatic  although  they  developed  humoral 
antibody  to  the  coronavirus  (Keenan  & Jervis,  et  al . 1976).  The 
fact  that  the  coronavirus  1-71  was  first  isolated  from  adult  German 
Shepherd  dogs  during  a diarrheal  epizootic  (Binn  & Lazar  et  al . 1975), 
may  not  contradict  the  above  findings,  since  German  Shepherd  dogs 
are  known  to  be  more  susceptible  to  certain  diseases  than  other 
breeds  (Hildebrandt  & Huxsoll  et  al . 1973).  Resistance  in  the 
adult  animal  may  be  also  closely  related  to  the  increased  competence 
of  its  immune  system  which  may  triger  a more  rapid  and  effective 
production  of  intraluminal  antibodies  than  in  the  young. 

The  CPE  revealed  by  EM,  correlate  very  closely  with  the  histo- 
chemical  findings  reported  previously  (Keenan  & Jervis  et  al . 1976). 
The  decreased  alkaline  phosphatase  activity  in  the  brush  border  is 
but  an  expression  of  the  disruption  of  the  microvilli,  while  the 
loss  of  acid  phosphatase  activity  in  the  apical  cytoplasm  may  reflect 
the  disappearance  of  the  network  of  tubules  and  vacuoles  so  prominent 
in  the  normal  neonatal  dog.  Similarly  the  decrease  in  the  activity 
of  marker  enzymes  for  the  ER  and  mitochondria,  glucose-6-phosphatase 
and  NAD  diaphorase,  respectively,  reflect  the  CPE  in  these  organelles. 

The  formation  of  lipid  droplets  in  the  cytoplasm  is  one  of  the 
CPE  seen  in  the  enterocytes.  Lipid  droplets  are  easily  identified 
even  at  the  LM  level  and  appear  to  increase  in  size  and  number  as 
the  number  of  intracellular  virions  increases.  Similar  intracellular 
lipid  droplets  have  been  reported  in  the  enterocytes  of  the  small 
and  large  intestines  of  various  animals,  under  different  pathologic 
conditions,  including  acute  infections  with  virus  (Adams  & Kraft, 
1967),  bacteria  (Takeuchi  & Formal  et  al  1968),  protozoa  (Takeuchi  & 
Phillips,  1975)  and  noninfectious  lesions  (Jervis  & Donati  et  al . 

1969,  Jervis  & Sheahan  et  al.  1972).  Intraepithelial  lipid  droplets, 
therefore,  cannot  be  considered  specific  for  viral  infections,  but 
rather  a result  of  non-specific  acute  response  of  enterocytes  to 
stimuli.  In  fact  it  has  been  suggested  that  cytoplasmic  lipid 
droplets  may  be  a morphologic  expression  of  intracellular  disturbances 
in  fat  metabolism  or  of  abnormal  intracellular  lipid  transport 
(Takeuchi  & Formal  et  al . 1968).  Similarly,  other  CPE  such  as 
alterations  of  microvilli  and  mitochondria,  and  dilatation  of  ER 
have  been  commonly  seen  in  enterocytes  of  the  small  intestine  during 
the  course  of  a variety  of  diseases  of  the  gut  (Takeuchi  & Formal 
et  al.  1968,  Takeuchi  & Sprinz,  1967).  Thus,  these  changes  again 
represent  non-specific  alterations  of  the  enterocytes  produced  by 
injurious  agents. 


885 


In  contrast,  two  other  structures  in  the  cytoplasm  of  the 
infected  cells,  identified  as  filamentous  structures  and  membrane- 
bound  bodies,  appear  to  be  CPE  characteristic  of  a viral  infection, 
if  not  specifically  of  a coronavirus  infection.  In  fact,  the 
filamentous  structures,  illustrated  in  Fig.  9,  resemble  the 
"reticular  inclusions"  described  by  David-Ferreira  and  Manaker 
(David-Ferreira,  Manaker  1965)  in  mouse  liver-derived  cultured 
cells  infected  with  a mouse  hepatitis  virus.  These  investigators 
have  raised  the  possibility  that  the  reticular  inclusions  might  be 
the  site  of  replication  of  the  viral  nucleoprotein.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  membrane-bound  structures  illustrated  in  Fig.  10,  are 
very  similar  to  the  bodies  enclosed  in  "membrane-bounded  channels" 
illustrated  in  Fig.  2 of  the  study  by  Dales  et^  al_.  (Dales  & Eggers 
et  al . 1965)  on  the  development  of  poliovirus  in  HeLa  cells;  polio- 
virus has  been  frequently  found  within  these  bodies.  In  this  in 
vivo  study,  however,  it  has  not  been  possible  to  find  viral  particles 
within  either  the  filamentous  or  the  membrane-bound  structures  and 
to  relate  them  to  viral  replication. 

The  present  EM  observations  have  provided  additional  information 
on  the  mode  of  viral  release  from  host  cells  into  the  intestinal 
lumen.  There  seem  to  be  two  processes  involved;  one  is  accelerated 
cell  desquamation  of  infected  cells  from  the  villus  epithelial 
lining  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  11,  the  other  is  the  distruption  of 
the  luminal  plasma  membrane  with  discharge  of  the  cytoplasmic  contents 
as  illustrated  in  Fig.  13.  In  the  former,  shedding  of  infected  cells 
into  the  lumen  appears  to  be  followed  by  the  breakage  of  their  cell 
membrane  with  subsequent  release  of  virions.  Shedding  of  infected 
cells  is  commonly  seen  in  the  small  intestine  infected  with  adeno- 
virus (Takeuchi  & Hashimoto,  in  press),  TGE  virus  (Pensaert  & 
Haelterman  et  al . 1970),  and  reovirus  (Stair  & Mebus  et  al.  1973). 

In  the  case  of  direct  viral  discharge  into  the  lumen,  virion- 
containing  vesicles  and  vacuoles  as  well  as  free  virions,  are  ex- 
pelled through  the  disrupted  luminal  plasma  membrane  of  the  host 
cell,  as  well  illustrated  by  Adams  and  Kraft  (Adams  & Kraft,  1967) 
and  also  described  by  Wagner  et  al_.  (Wagner  & Beamer  et  al.  1973). 

It  is,  therefore,  evident  that  the  coronavirus  1-71  shares  with  other 
enteric  viruses  similar  release  mechanisms  from  the  epithelial  cells 
into  the  lumen. 


CONCLUSION  & RECOMMENDATION 


rfd 


In  both  adenovirus  and  corona^i 
experimental  animals,  the  FA,  LM  a 
information  on  several  improtant  a^ 
virus  and  host  cell  as  yet  undiscl 


Further  studies  on  the  interaq 
and  host  cells  in  vivo  model  by  FA 


irus  infections  of  the  gut  in 
EM  studies  have  provided  new 
pects  of  the  interaction  between 
dsed  in  vitro  observations. 


tion  between  these  enteroviruses 
and  EM  techniques  should  provide 


the  precise  mechanism  of  penetration  of  the  gut  epithelial  cell  by 
viral  agents  and  also  information  immune  response  of  the  gut  mucosa 
to  these  enteroviruses. 


886 


IV.  IMMUNE  RESPONSE  OF  THE  GUTS 


A . Studies  on  the  Effects  of  Shigella  Immunization 

Numerous  studies,  confined  principally  to  immunologic  observations, 
have  been  made  regarding  the  effects  of  parenteral  or  oral  immunization 
against  dysentery  with  a live  or  killed  shigella  vaccine.  In  collabo- 
ration with  the  Department  of  Applied  Immunology,  histologic  and  immuno- 
pathologic  studies  of  responses  of  the  gut  mucosa  to  parenteral  immunization 
with  shigella  bacilli  are  being  carried  out.  Preliminary  observations 
indicate  that  parenteral  immunization  fails  to  prevent  invasion  of  the 
mucosa  by  orally  administered  shigellae,  but  appears  to  prevent  clinical 
dysentery. 

In  order  to  clarify  these  important  observations,  we  continue  these 
studies  by  electron  microscopy  and  immunofluorescent  methods. 

B . Studies  of  Immune  Responses  by  Simple  Antigens 

In  order  to  obtain  fundamental  information  on  the  immune  process 
in  the  gut,  there  has  been  established  an  experimental  model  in  rabbits 
and  guine  pigs,  based  on  parenteral  immunization  with  simple  antigens 
such  as  bovine  serum  album  (BSA)  or  horseradish  peroxidase  (HRP).  When 
an  immune  status  is  produced  in  these  animals,  they  are  given  the  same 
antigen  in  a gut  loop.  Preliminary  results  demonstrate  that  the  acute 
immune  reaction  in  the  gut  is  morphologically  similar  with  either  protein 
or  shigella  immunization.  These  acute  immune  responses  are  characterized 
by  severe  edema,  acute  inflammation  and  hemorrhage  of  the  bowel  at  the 
early  stages  (Fig.  25-29)  and  at  a later  stage  by  severe  structural 
changes  of  the  gut  mucosa  including  necrosis  and  severe  inflammatory 
exudation  into  the  lumen  (Fig.  31-34). 

New  studies  of  the  gut  with  oral  immunization  have  begun  in  order 
to  comoare  effects  of  parenteral  immunization  with  those  of  oral 
immun' zation.  Further  studies  by  electron  microscopy  and  immunopathology 
may  clarify  the  basic  mechanisms  of  parenteral  and  oral  immunization 
and  contribute  to  the  development  of  successful  methods  of  immunization 
against  enteric  pathogens. 


887 


CONTROL 


Fig.  25  - Control  ileal  Iood, 
horseradish  peroxidase  (HRP) 


rabbit  parenteral ly  hyper- immunized  by 
as  an  antigen. 


Fig.  26  - Experimental  ileal  loop,  rabbit  parenterally  immunized  by 
HRP  at  1 hour  after  intraluminal  administration  of  HRP.  Edema  is 
obvious  at  the  submucosa,  otherwise  the  bowel  is  unremarkable. 


V"v  '-riz 


. /■  •>  r ' . : 

-■  t-  ■ 

• •v  * • • 


1 HOUR 


**  HQUftS* 


Fig.  27  - Ileal  loop,  parenterally  immunized  rabbit  at  2 hours  post 
intraluminal  administration  of  HRP.  The  submucosa  shows  marked 
edema  and  clumps  of  cellular  infiltrates.  The  lacteals,  venules, 
capillaries  and  arterioles  are  dilated.  Fine  vacuolation  is  present 
in  the  circular  muscle  coat.  Neutrophilic  infiltration  is  obvious 
at  the  perivascular  area  of  the  sebmucosa  in  higher  magnification. 
(Fig.  28) 


4 HOURS 


Fig.  29  - Ileal  loop,  parenterally  immunized  rabbit  at  4 hours  post 
intraluminal  inoculation  of  HRP.  Crypt-villus  ratio  remains  unaltered. 
The  number  of  goblet  cells  is  reduced.  Hemorrhage  is  diffuse. 

Fig.  30  - Higher  magnification  of  venule  in  the  submucosa  shows 
attachment  of  numerous  granulocytes  to  the  endothelium. 


HlH> 





{ ' tv.>v 


7 HOURS 


Fig.  31  - Ileal  loop,  parenterally  immunized  rabbit  at  7 hours 
post  intraluminal  inoculation  of  HRP.  Structural  changes  are 
evident  in  villi  which  are  short  and  often  disintegrated. 
Hemorrhage  and  cellular  infiltrates  are  extensive  involving 
the  entire  wall  of  the  ileum.  Submucosal  vasculatures  are 
heavily  infiltrated  by  numerous  granulocytes  and  RBC  (Fig.  32) 


ii<**ryiiMw39£iwZ3 


Fig.  33  - Ileal  loop,  parenterally  immunized  rabbit  by  HRP  at  17  hours 
post  inoculation  by  HRP.  Structural  changes  are  severe;  the  villi  are 
flat,  fused  and  show  intensive  necrosis.  Inflammatory  exudate  containing 
numerous  RBC  and  granulocytes  is  present  in  gut  lumen,  however,  the 
epithelial  lining  remains  intact  (Fig.  3',. 


5*  i 

V.  COLLABORATIVE  STUDIES  ON  TRYPANOSOMA  AND  RICKETTSIAL  INFECTIONS 


A.  Trypanosoma  Infection 


I.  Ultrastructure  of  Trypanosoma  Rotatorium. 


Recent  application  of  the  freeze-etching  technique  to  the 
study  of  biological  specimens  has  added  important  information  on 
the  intricacies  of  various  cell  membranes  and  cytoplasmic  organelles, 
in  particular  those  of  protozoa,  not  previously  disclosed  by  other 
electron  microscopic  techniques  (Henley,  Lee  and  Takeuchi,  1975). 

In  search  of  new  information  on  the  ultrastructure  of  trypanosoma 
we  have  been  studing  Trypanosoma  rotatorium  by  the  freeze-etching 
technique  (FE)  of  electron  microscopy.  In  this  work,  we  attempt  to 
describe  its  ultrastructure  as  revealed  by  FE  and  to  correlate  it 
with  observations  made  by  the  thin-sectioning  technique  (TS). 
Particularly,  attention  has  been  given  to  the  complexity  of  the 
flagella  attachment  to  the  organism. 

Freeze-etched  surface  replicas  of  rotatarium  revealed  the 
organism  to  be  a rectangular  profile  25y  to  30y  in  length  and  15y 
to  20y  in  diameter,  with  one  of  the  longer  sides  appearing  smooth 
and  the  parallel  opposite  appearirg  serated.  Higher  magnification 
of  the  serated  side  showed  the  continuity  of  the  pellicle  with  that 
of  the  flagella  (ly  in  diameter)  via  the  undulating  membrane 
(336y  in  diameter).  The  external  pellicle  is  0.336y  in  diameter 
and  is  sparsely  dotted  with  ribosomes.  The  flagella  pocket  was 
found  to  be  an  invagination  of  the  pellicle  with  a "collar  region" 
formed  at  the  point  where  the  pellicle  invaginated  into  the  cell's 
cytoplasm.  Enclosed  by  the  pellicle  is  a homoqenously  lumpy  cyto- 
plasm. Numerous  tubular  and  ovoid  inclusions  of  unspecified  origin 
are  found  in  the  cytoplasm.  Near  the  anterior  end  of  the  cell  are 
numerous  lipid-like  globes,  2.5y  to  3.5y  in  diameter.  The  nucleus 
is  sometimes  lobed,  sometimes  elonqated,  depending  on  the  plane  of 
fracture,  and  is  6.5y  in  diarnei"  • 

B.  Rickettsial  Infection 

1 . Studies  on  the  Mode  of  Transmission  anc  the  Distribution 
of  Rickettsia  Tsutsugamushi  in  the  Tissues  o*  the  Vector 
and  the  Host 

In  collaboration  with  the  Department  of  Hazardous  Microorganisms, 
DCD&I,  WRAIR,  we  intend  to  clarify  the  mode  of  transmission  of 
rickettsial  organism  between  the  vector  chigger  and  the  host  mouse 
and  to  follow  subsequent  spread  of  the  organism  in  the  vector  and 
host  tissues  by  histologic  and  electron  microscopic  tehniques. 

We  are  currently  establishing  a satisfactory  method  of  histologic 
and  EM  procedures  for  the  vector  chigger. 


Utilizing  histology,  immunofluorescent  and  electron  microscopy, 
scrub  typhus  infection  is  being  studied  in  immunized  mice.  (Details 
in  Annual  Report,  1975-76,  Department  of  Hazardous  Microorganisms) 


i 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  123  Histopathologic  Manifestations  of  Military  Disease 
and  Injuries 

Literature  Cited. 

Publications : 

1.  Takeuchi,  A.,  Jervis,  H.  R. , Formal,  S.  B.:  Animal  Model 

of  Human  Disease.  Human  Shigella  Dysentery  Animal  Model:  Monkey 

Shigellosis.  Am.  J.  Pathol.  81_:  251-254,  1975. 

2.  Takeuchi,  A.:  Electron  Microscopy  Observations  on  Penetration 

of  the  Gut  Epithelial  Barrier  by  Salmonella  typhimurium.  Am.  Soc. 
Microbiol.  44:  174-181,  1975. 

3.  Takeuchi,  A.  and  Hashimoto,  K. : Electron  microscopy  study 

of  experimental  enteric  adenovirus  infection  in  mice.  Inf.  Imm. 

13:  569-580,  1976. 

4.  Takeuchi,  A.  and  Phillips,  B.  P.:  Electron  microscope 

studies  of  experimental  Entamoeba  histolytica  infection  in  the  guinea 
pig.  II.  Early  cellular  and  vascular  changes  accompanying  invasion 
of  the  lamina  propria.  Virch.  Arch.  B.  Cell  Path.  20:  1-13,  1976. 

5.  Takeuchi,  A.,  Binn,  L.  N.,  Jervis,  H.  R. , Keenan,  K.  P., 

Hildebrandt,  P.  K. , Valas,  R.  B.,  Bland,  F.  F.:  Electron  microscope 

study  of  experimental  enteric  infection  in  neonatal  dogs  with  a canine 
coronavirus.  Lab.  Investigation  34:  539-549,  1976. 

6.  Takeuchi,  A.,  Keenan,  K.  P.,  Jervis,  H.  R. , Binn,  L.  N.,  and 

Hildebrandt,  P.  K. : Penetration,  replication,  and  release  of  coronavirus 

particles  in  the  infected  neonatal  small  intestinal  epithelium.  Fed. 

Proc.  35:  394,  1976. 

7.  Henley,  G.  L.,  Lee,  C.  M. , and  Takeuchi,  A.:  Freeze-etching 

Observations  of  Trophozoites  of  Pathogenic  Entamoeba  histolytica. 

Z.  Parasitenk.  48:  181-190,  1976. 

8.  Colvin,  R.  and  Dvorak,  H.:  Fibrinogen/Fibrin  on  the  surface 

of  macrophages:  Detection,  distribution,  binding  requirements,  and 

possible  role  in  macrophage  adherence  phenomena.  J.  Exp.  Med.  142, 
1378-1390,  1975. 

9.  Colvin,  R.  B.  and  Dvorak,  H.  F.:  Cell-mediated  hypersensitivity. 

II.  Kinetics  of  fibrinogen/fibrin  accumulation  and  vascular  permeability 
changes  in  tuberculin  and  cutaneous  basophil  hypersensitivity  reactions. 

J.  Immunology  JJ4_:  377-387,  1975. 


895 


10.  Kurman,  R.  J.,  Mclntire,  K.  R.,  Colvin,  R.  B.,  Scardino,  P.T 

and  Waldmann,  T.  A.:  Cellular  localization  of  alpha  fetoprotein  and 

human  chorionic  gonadotropin  in  testicular  neoplasms  using  an  immuno- 
peroxidase  technique.  Fed.  Proc.  35:  492,  1976. 

11.  Hyman,  L.  R. , Colvin,  R.  B.,  Bernard,  E.  and  Steinberg,  A.  D 

Major  histocompatabil ity-1 inkpd  susceptibility  to  autoimmune  tubulo- 
interstitial nephritis  (TN)  in  guinea  pigs  (GP).  Fed  Proc.  35;  824, 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


l 0*  T C RR(V 

75  07  01 


• UNO  OR  Si.MmARV 

K . »•  v 


Ifc- 


10  NO  CODES*  RROGRRM  IKHtHT 

62760A 


h.  CONTRIBUTING 


iecuwtt* 

u 


PROJECT  NUMItR 

3a762766a922 


« IWAItnot  I CARDS  114F 

II  T I f L ( |RW«*  >1*  |fCM>«tp  CMmMmnI Tc3^* 

(U)  Infectious  Hepatitis 


I AUHCT  ACCII 

DA  OB  6463 


MEMMAMNI* 

NA 


76  06  30 


k OM  r N IMITR'N 

NL 


TASK  APIA  NUMBER 

m 


RIRORT  COM  not  f rMBut 

Dl)  DHhF.(AH)tJt> 


Bfc  SMCCIEIC  DATA 
CONTAACTOK  ACCCSI 

C3  rii  □ 


LEVEL  or  SUM 
A.  nil  UNIT 


MORK  UNIT  NUMK« 


175" 


tCiEMTiriC  AMO  TECHNOLOGICAL  A 


II  START  DATE 

69  07 


Bioloov  003500  Clinical  Medicine 

•**  a rrrrrr^rrrr  - 


U THmAtTo  COMMlTti«>n  OATi 

76  06 


IT  CONTRACT  ft  ANT 
A DA  TCI/I  TRACTIVE 
K NUMBER  * 

C.  Tv  ME 

A NINO  OR  ABANO 


■ ■MIRATION 


A AMOUNT; 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


It  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORO AMI  I ATMJM 


T 


IB  RESOURCE!  IS  TIMA  TC 

A M ROE tSU ORAL  MAN  VMS 

A TURna«*NMN*) 

RISC  AL 

MHBCIDIMB 

75 

1 

50 

i 

YEAR 

76 

1 

..««•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington  DC  20012 


•“l  Joy,  COL  R.  J.  T. 

202.r.57.6=355JL 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

it  ti.M57FM.tt mi 

(U)  Liver  Disease;  (U)  Hepatitis; 


IE  rONpINN  AGENCY 

DA  I 


m MERrORtMMC  ORMANI|A  MM 


SB  MRE^RMANCE  MEtNOO 

C.  In-House 


•••■Malter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicine 
Washington  DC  20012 


PMHCt».L  In.llTlt.TOa  (,aMM  MAM  HU  I .a* 

Knodell,  MAJ  R.  G. 
mm**.  202-576-2208 

■OCUL  IICuWTV  ACCOUNT  NUttMA  | 

MIOCI.  T I IIIVIBTIOATOM 

mu‘,'  Conrad,  Dr.  M.  E. 
Flannery.  LIC  E.  P. 


J2£l. 


(U)  Australia  antigen 


||  TCCMMICAL  0*,f  CtIVl.*  It  ..PMCi...,  .V  -1  * T.  . t U m>W#.  M^flttat  Ip  fW  PWH>  Mai  at  aaa*  wt*  fatjallp  Claa.lti.lla.  Cap.  , 

23.  (U)  Viral  hepatitis  has  been  a major  cause  of  morbidity  in  military  populations  and 
a significant  hazard  in  the  military  blood  program.  Investigations  were  undertaken  re- 
lated to  its  etiology,  epidemiology,  and  prevention. 

24.  (U)  A randomized  double-blind  study  was  undertaken  to  determine  if  gamma  globulin 
with  high  ariti-HBs  titer  provides  protection  against  transfusion  hepatitis  and  if  trans 
fused  blood  positive  for  HBsAg  only  by  radioimmune  assay  (but  not  by  other  methods  of 
testing)  causes  hepatitis. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06.  From  Aug  72  to  Dec  74  all  volunteers  undergoing  cardiac  bypass 
surgery  at  WRAMC  or  LAMC  received  either  high  titer  anti-HBs  gamma  globulin,  conven- 
tional gamma  globulin,  or  an  albumin  placebo  solution.  Only  6 percent  of  patients  de- 
veloping either  icteric  hepatitis  or  elevated  transaminases  had  HBsAg-related  hepatitis 
as  measured  by  radioimmunoassay  (RIA) . Fifteen  patients  (4  percent  of  group)  were 
transfused  with  blood  HBsAg  positive  by  RIA  but  negative  by  counter immunoelectrophore- 
sis;  one  of  these  developed  type  B hepatitis  and  4 had  a serologic  response.  Both  con- 
ventional and  high  titer  anti-HBs  globulin  were  efficacious  in  decreasing  incidence  of 
icteric  hepatitis  (p  = 0.03)  and  total  hepatitis  (p  = 0.02)  cases.  There  was  no  signi- 
ficant difference  in  protective  effect  of  the  two  gamma  globulin  preparations.  Publica- 
tions from  this  research  include  R.G.  Knodell  et  al,  Etiological  spectrum  of  post- 
transfusion hepatitis,  Gastroent.  69:1278-1285,  1975;  M.E.  Conrad  and  R.G.  Knodell, 
Viral  Hepatitis,  JAMA  233:1277-1279,  1975;  R.G.  Knodell  et  al,  Efficacy  of  prophylactic 
gamma-globulin  in  preventing  non-A,  non-B  post-transfusion  hepatitis,  Lancet  1:557-561, 
1976.  This  project  is  being  terminated  in  order  to  centralize  all  WRAIR  work  in  hepati- 
tis. After  1 Jul  76  all  hepatitis  work  will  be  done  by  DCD&I.  For  technical  report  see 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Peport,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 

M IMIlrAtlMI  MfMM  BfT*A  RPWNl 


00,'”.“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITION!  OP  TMlI  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  TOR  Ml  I All  A 
AND  I4BB-I  I MAR  BS  IFOR  ARMY  USE)  ARB  OBSOLETE 

H97 


; 


V.  ...  , ..... 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Work  Unit  126  Infectious  hepatitis 
Investigators 

Principal:  MAJ  Robert  G.  Knodell,  M.D.,  MC 

Associate:  Marcel  E.  Conrad,  M.D.,  University  of  Alabama 

LTC  E.  Patrick  Flannery,  M.D.,  MC,  Letterman 
General  Hospital 

Allen  L.  Ginsberg,  M.D.,  George  Washington 
Medical  School 

Objectives : To  determine  if  gamma  globulin  with  high  anti-HBs  titer 

provides  protection  against  t>  nsfusion  hepatitis  and  if  transfused 
blood  positive  for  HBsAg  on,  by  radioimmune  assay  (but  not  by  other 
methods  of  testing)  causes  hepatitis. 

Technical  Approach:  During  past  years  there  had  been  a considerable 

incidence  of  hepatitis  among  patients  undergoing  cardiac  bypass  sur- 
gery at  WRAMC.  Estimates  of  the  incidence  of  hepatitis  in  this  group 
based  upon  detection  of  elevated  transaminase  determinations  3 months 
after  surgery  were  10-20%  of  patients.  It  was  believed  that  this  was 
caused  by  the  requirement  of  using  many  pints  of  blood  and  blood 
products  from  multiple  donors  in  these  patients. 

From  August  1972  to  December  1974,  all  volunteers  who  underwent  car- 
diac bypass  surgery  received  a 10  ml  injection  of  either  high  titer 
anti-HBs  gamma  globulin,  conventional  gamma  globulin,  or  an  albumin 
placebo  solution.  These  injections  were  administered  double  blind 
under  code.  Blood  was  drawn  from  the  volunteers  before  gamma  globu- 
lin injection,  weekly  after  surgery  while  the  patient  was  hospital- 
ized, and  3,  6,  and  9 montns  after  surgery.  Determinations  for  HbsAg, 
anti-HBs,  SGPT,  and  serum  bilirubin  were  done  on  each  blood  specimen. 
In  addition,  a history  was  obtained  from  each  patient  at  intervals 
after  surgery.  All  blood  used  for  transfusion  was  tested  by  radio- 
immune  assay  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs.  The  biologic  materials  used  in 
this  study  included  a high  titer  anti-HBs  lot  of  gamma  globulin  pre- 
pared by  the  Massachusetts  State  Laboratories  and  currently  useo 
under  NHLI  contract  in  several  national  studies,  a lot  of  gamma 
globulin  used  in  60,000  soldiers  in  Korea,  and  a placebo  solution 
used  in  40,000  U.S.  soldiers  in  Korea  without  known  complications. 

All  solutions  were  tested  in  accordance  with  U.S.P.  regulations. 


898 


Progress  and  Results:  This  has  been  a collaborative  double  blind 

study  conducted  at  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center  and  at  Letterman 
Army  Medical  Center.  Since  the  inception  of  the  study,  354  patients 
undergoing  cardiac  bypass  surgery  at  either  WRAMC  or  LAMC  volun- 
teered as  participants  in  the  study.  Each  patient  received  under 
code  either  10  ml  of  high  titer  anti-HBs  gamma  globulin,  conven- 
tional gamma  globulin,  or  an  albumin  placebo  solution.  There  were 
no  known  adverse  reactions  to  the  administration  of  either  the  gamma 
globulin  or  placebo  solutions.  Transaminase  elevations  were  observed 
in  17%  of  patients  3-6  months  after  surgery.  Only  10  patients  had 
clinical  icteric  hepatitis.  Only  6%  of  patients  with  either  icteric 
hepatitis  or  elevated  transaminase  determinations  had  HBsAg-related 
hepatitis  as  measured  by  radioimmunoassay.  Four  percent  of  the 
patients  were  transfused  with  blood  that  was  HBsAg  positive  when 
tested  by  radioimmunoassay;  all  blood  was  HBsAg  negative  when  tested 
by  counterimmunoelectrophoresis.  Of  this  group  of  15  patients,  only 
one  patient  developed  type  B hepatitis  while  4 others  had  a serologi- 
cal response  only.  In  the  majority  of  hepatitis  cases  hepatitis  B 
virus  could  not  be  implicated,  and  different  viral  agents  must  be 
hypothesized.  Both  conventional  and  high  titer  anti-HBs  globulin 
were  efficacious  in  decreasing  the  incidence  of  icteric  hepatitis 
(p  = 0.03)  and  total  hepatitis  (p  = 0.02)  cases.  When  the  gamma 
globulin  groups  were  combined,  p value  for  the  protective  effect  of 
gamma  globulin  versus  placebo  for  icteric  hepatitis  was  0.003  and 
0.007  for  total  hepatitis.  There  was  no  significant  difference  in 
the  protective  effect  of  the  two  gamma  globulin  preparations. 


Conclusions:  This  study  has  documented  that  posttransfusion  hepa- 

titis B now  represents  a minority  of  hepatitis  cases  following  blood 
transfusion  and  emphasizes  the  importance  of  defining  additional 
hepatitis  etiological  agents.  Demonstration  of  the  efficacy  of  pro- 
phylactic gamma  globulin  in  preventing  non-A,  non-B  posttransfusion 
hepatitis  in  cardiac  surgery  patients  provides  a means  for  reducing 
both  the  severity  and  total  transfusion  of  hepatitis  by  blood  trans- 
fusions. Additional  important  information  concerning  chronic  liver 
disease  after  non-A,  non-B  hepatitis  will  be  obtained  in  long-term 
followup  of  study  patients. 


I 


"TT 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 


Work  Unit  126  Infectious  hepatitis 


Literature  Cited. 


Publications : 


1.  Knodell,  R.  G. , Conrad,  M.  E. , Dienstag,  J.  L. , and  Bell, 

C.  J.:  Etiological  spectrum  of  post- transfusion  hepatitis.  Gastro- 

enterology 69:  1278-1285,  1975. 


2.  Knodell,  R.  G. , Co-, rad,  M.  E. , Ginsberg,  A.  L. , Bell,  C.  J., 
and  Flannery,  E.  P.:  Efficacy  of  prophylactic  gamma-globulin  in 

preventing  non-A,  non-B  post-transfusion  hepatitis.  Lancet  I: 
557-561,  1976. 


miii  1 1 r ' mWm  I 


I 


f - wjm 


11.  TITLC  -1 A f4mHtr  ClAM* lUmmMm  C Nl>r 

(U)  Biochemical  Methodoioev  and  laboratory  Ai 

llama 

rion 

1}  SCIENTIFIC  ANO  TfCMNOLOOICAL  AREA** 

008300  Inorganic  Chemistry  003500  Cl  inice 

3 Meri  i r i ne  

11  |T*RT  6AYI  TTs^IITIMATEO  CONNtiTION  OATS 

66  10  1 76  06 

DA 



IS.  RSRFONMAMCt  Ml  \ HO D 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A OAT**/*r»tC’IVt:  NA  ■■R1AATION 

k *uatCft* 

C TTMI  4 AMOUNT- 

4 A IN  O OF  AN  AMO:  (.CUM.  AMT. 

IS  NCMOUNCII  tSTIMATK 

A PROFUSION  AL  MAN  V Rt 

A FUNDS  (tm  NmbAJ 

FISCAL 

VIA  A 

"NICIDIN* 

75 

6 

90 

CURRINf 

1 6 

6 

1.17 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 
• iummarv^cTv^ 


I OAU  RR(V  tUN'RY  KINO  OR  lUMMART 

75  07  01  1-.. 


13  HO  CODE t * 


PROGRAM (LEMCNT 


fc.  CONTRIBUTING 


627G0A 


OH*  tCCUMTr 

u 


RWJICT  NliMHR 


3A762760A322 


rJmcTIcciMlST 

1V\  GA  6532 


T RIIRAMNO* 

NA 


76  06  30 


bn  ONrn  INITM'N 1st 

LiiL H 


rntromr  countat  trwmoi. 

DD  LjK*E(AH)bJb 


IRfCIFIC  DAT*  If  LCV1 L OR  (Ulf 
IONTRACTOR  ACC  LSI 

Q JJO  A.  *OU  UNIT 


MONK  UNIT  NUMNN 


M£l. 


'“Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


RIIRONIItLf  INDIVIDUAL 

...i  Jov,  COL  R.  J. 
202-576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

II.  kIvNOro*  CaCM  ■/*  I DIam/ImiIn  c»m»; 

(H)  Automation;  (U)  Toxicology;  (U)  Drugs  of  Abuse:  i A ns  Xromai  ogr-aphv 


loiter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
l<I<viiv  of  Biochemistry 
•Washington,  X 20012 

..I.CI.AL  in ,11 T IQ  A TOP  IMMH  MAN  HU  ».  tuMi 

»*“*■•  Viruree.  LTC  C.C. 

’in'""'  ’02-576-2211 

SOCIAL  StCWOlTY  ACCOUNT  NUHMN 
AiSOCI  ATI  INUIITIOA'OAI 

«“*■  Bass,  B.  G. , MS;  Neeley,  MAJ,  W.E. 
Fazvak.  L. . BS L& 


II  TCCHNICAL  Ofjf  CTIV1.*  14  ARNNOACM.  14  RROGRIM  CF-miMl  Hamlin* 4 Mr  R»I»N  <«l  K •••*  •<*  |ocvll»  ClMRfScM'fan  C«M*1 

23.  (U)  The  technical  obiective  of  this  work  unit  ’ o develop  and  establish  modem 

automated  methods  for  qualitative  and  quantitativ  ivjiucal  analyses  of  military 
importance  in  medical  laboratories  and  to  adapt  systems  for  use  in  support  of 

combat  medical  operations. 

24.  (U)  This  work  unit  is  terminated  with  this  ^porting  period. 

25.  GO  "5  07  - '’6  06  Work  was  continued  on  the  development  and  testing  ■ t micro- 
analyzers  for  hospital  and  field  applications,  and  on  the  adaptation  of  electronic 
programmable  calculators  to  high  speed  continuous  flow  analyzers.  For  technical 
report,  see  Walter  Reed  Aimv  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 
30  Jun  76. 


DD.Sr.1498 


PKCV IOWI  EDITION*  Or  THIS  FORM  ARC  OBSOLETE.  OD  FORMS  MfcSA.  I NOV  SS 
ANl>  MS!  I » MAP*  «s  (FOR  ARMY  USD  AIRS  OBSOLETE 

901 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  128  Biochemical  methodology  and  laboratory  automation 


Investigators. 

Principal:  LTC  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC 

Associate:  MSG  Vaughn  G.  Ayer;  Billy  G.  Bass,  M.S.;  Larissa 

deBaare,  M.D.;  John  I.  Davis,  B.S;  James  E.  Doolittle, 

A. A.;  MAJ  Thomas  P.  Gibson,  M.C.;  SFC  Lovelyn  Hall; 

Leo  Kazyak,  M.A.;  SP4  Leighton  C.  Makanui;  Edward  J. 
Matusik,  B.S.;  Jean  E.  (Lewis)  Matusik,  B.S.;  SP5 
Michael  E.  McKay;  SFC  Evelyn  Moore;  MAJ  William  E. 

Neeley,  M.C.;  Dominic  F.  O’Donnell;  Helen  C.  Sing,  M.S. 

The  objectives  of  this  work  unit  are  to  develop  and  exploit  new  lab- 
oratory methods  for  qualitative  and  quantitative  analyses  of  biochemical 
substances  in  support  of  military  medicine  and  to  apply  automation  to 
analytical  procedures  to  provide  rapid,  precise  and  accurate  results. 
During  the  reporting  period,  efforts  have  been  focused  on  the  following 
areas : 

1.  Development  and  evaluation  of  high  speed,  miniaturized  continuous 
flow  analyzer. 

2.  Application  of  electronic  programmable  desk  top  calculators  to  on- 
line clinical  laboratory  analyses. 

3.  Modification  of  conventional  continuous  flow  analyzers  to  achieve 
high  speed  and  high  precision  analyses. 

4.  Analysis  of  TAB  nerve  agent  antidote. 

1.  Development  and  evaluation  of  high  speed  miniaturized  continuous 
flow  analyzer. 

A four-channel,  high  speed,  microanalyzer  for  electrolytes  has  been 
operated  in  the  WRAMC  clinical  laboratory  for  6 months.  A 2-channel 
analyzer  for  BUN- creatinine  determinations  was  operated  and  evaluated 
in  the  laboratory  for  about  two  weeks  until  the  flow  cell  material 
(Lexan)  was  determined  to  be  inappropriate  for  use  with  picric  acid. 

A quartz  flow  cell  has  been  designed  and  tested  for  this  system.  A new 
flame  photometer  detector  system  and  circuit  has  been  designed  for 
measuring  the  ratios  between  sodium  and  lithium  and  between  potassium 
and  lithium.  The  advantages  of  this  instrument  are  high  speed,  low  cost, 
small  size,  improved  accuracy  and  precision,  reduced  sample  size  and 
greatly  reduced  the  reagent  requirements.  Ten  units  of  the  high  speed 
microanalyzer  were  constructed  at  the  US  Army  Medical  Engineering  Research 


and  Development  Laboratory.  These  units  have  been  placed  in  various 
local  laboratories  for  operational  evaluation.  A miniaturized 
continuous  flow  analyzer  has  been  coupled  to  a high  performance  liquid 
chromatograph.  This  effort  uses  the  high  resolution  separation  by  the 
liquid  chromatograph  to  separate  the  interfering  substances  from  the 
compounds  of  interest.  Preliminary  results  on  analysis  of  creatinine 
and  catecholamines  show  significant  improvements  in  specificity, 
sensitivity  and  speed  of  analysis. 

2.  Application  of  electronic  programmable  desk  top  calculators  to  on- 
line clinical  laboratory  analyses^ 


Work  has  continued  on  the  development  of  electronic  programmable  calcu- 
lators as  on-line  data  processors  in  the  clinical  laboratory.  Program 
improvements  have  been  made  to  reflect  changes  in  analyzer  circuitry. 
Using  the  H-P  9810A  calculator  equipped  with  a cassette  magnetic  tape 
memory,  point  to  point  values  of  analog  display  such  as  liquid  or  gas- 
liquid  chromatograms  were  recorded,  and  off-line  analyses  of  the  data 
points  were  made  for  sample  quantification  by  four  different  calculation 
techniques : 

(a)  Full  area  of  the  peak  by  point  to  point  integration. 

(b)  Full  area  by  product  of  peak  height  and  sum  of  half  widths  at 
one-half  of  peak  height,  £i.e.,  P-H  X (1/2  wrise  + 1/2  wfall)]. 

(c)  Half  area  by  product  of  peak  height  and  half  width  at  half  peak 
height. 

(d)  Peak  height . 

Quantification  of  high  performance  liquid  chromatograms  is  usually 
achieved  by  peak  height  measurements.  This  method  underestimated  con- 
centrations by  as  much  as  33%  (from  results  in  this  laboratory) . This 
discrepancy  is  due  to  the  fact  that  standards  are  prepared  in  aqueous 
solutions  and  give  gaussian  concentration  distributions,  but  serum 
specimens  present  broadened  distribution  curves  that  may  or  may  not  be 
gaussion  in  shape.  Standard  curves  generated  with  aqueous  solutions  and 
peak  height  values  may  underestimate  serum  concentrations.  Standard 
curves  generated  with  integration  methods  are  not  as  dependent  on  dis- 
tribution curve  shape  and  lend  themselves  to  a more  consistent  analysis 
when  applied  to  serum  specimens.  Methods  (a)  and  (b)  agree.  Method 
(c)  underestimates  concentration  by  1 - 101  compared  to  methods  (a)  and 
(b) . The  more  complex  quantification  technique  is  possible  with  using 
the  electronic  programmable  calculator  as  an  on-line  data  processor. 


903 


3.  Modification  of  conventional  continuous  flow  analyzers  to  achieve 
high  speed  and  high  precision  analyses. 

Work  has  continued  on  the  modification  of  conventional  continuous  flow 
analyzers  to  take  advantage  of  some  of  the  developments  of  the  micro- 
analyzer to  improve  the  speed  and  precision  of  analysis  of  equipment  that 
is  readily  available  in  most  clinical  laboratories.  Efforts  have  been 
focused  primarily  on  flow  cell  design  and  data  processing  with  an  on- 
line calculator.  A 1.0  mm  quartz  flowcell  has  been  built  and  tested, 
and  a 0.635  mm  quartz  flowcell  has  been  built.  New  procedures  have 
been  evaluated  to  eliminate  necessity  for  using  known  carcinogens  as 
reagents.  One  example  is  the  use  of  o-Dianisidine  for  glucose  measure- 
ments. A new  glucose  oxidase  (peroxidase  metho'  - a modification  of 
Trinder's  method  - has  been  evaluated.  A twc-foid  increase  in  analysis 
speed  with  lower  reagent  consumption  was  realized. 

4.  Analysis  of  TAB  nerve  agent  antidote. 

The  Division  of  Biochemistry  provided  the  analytical  support  for  the 
chemical  analysis  of  TAB  nerve  agent  antidote.  Materials  from  Cartrix 
Parenteral  Systems  included  Neat  compounds  used  for  the  production  of 
injectors,  and  filled  cartridges  not  yet  assembled  into  injectors. 
Methodology  was  established  and  evaulated  and  new  procedures  introduced. 

The  Neat  compounds  were  analyzed  by  the  ultra  violet  spectroscopy,  gas 
chromatography,  high  performance  liquid  chromatography,  and  thin  layer 
chromatography.  The  precision  of  the  analytical  methods  were  estimated 
to  be  1.51  for  TMB4,  2.31  for  atropine  sulfate,  4.01  for  benactzyine  HC1, 
and  4.4%  for  the  parabens.  The  Neat  compounds  met  the  analytical 
specifications. 

Cartridges  (26  Lots)  received  from  Cartrix  Parenteral  System  were 
analyzed  for  accuracy  of  formulation.  On  the  basis  of  the  26  lots 
analyzed,  if  these  are  representative  of  all  lots  of  injectors,  it 
was  estimated  that  951  of  all  injectors  will  be  between  89%  and  115% 
of  the  labelelled  potency  for  all  active  ingredients. 


904 


I 


* i 


i 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  128  Biochemical  methodology  and  laboratory  automation 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications: 


1.  Neeley,  W.E.,  Sing,  H.C.,  Yates,  T.:  Novel  dual-channel 

dializer  for  continuous  flow  analysis.  Clinical  Chemistry.  21_:  (8), 
1975. 


905 


,233 


J 


....... 


r 


IT  CMmcT/tMur 
ATCS/|M«C?IVC. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


i oay(  rrcv  iuWrt 

75  07  01 


A NINO  OR  tv  MM  ANY 

D . Change 


10  MO  cooes  * RROORAN  IlIMNT 

6 2 7 6 0 A 


A WRIMART 


0.  COMTNtauT'MQ 


CARDS  114  FI 

I.  TITLE  l^ftm*m  «(*  t—ntr  CNMittMHM  Cm*mf 


rzzzrzrr 

u 


u 


PROJECT  NUHMR 


3A762760A822 


i amrcTaccmIS^ 

DA  OB  6503 

NC  ON  AMMO* 

NA 


76  07  01 


OMr«  M>|TR*H 

NL 


TASK  ARIA  NUMB  IN 


01 


report  com  two l trmmc. 

DD  URhEfAR  tbJb 


|*W  IRICIRIC  OAT*  • fc'T 
COM  TRACT  ON  ACCI»  | 

Dt»  □ MO  | * 


IVIL  OR  HIM 


WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


129 


(U)  Epidemiology  of  Hepatitis  In  the  Military 


•C.ENTIRIC  A 


010100  MicroMology 

..  . : rr. 


ITARfSm 

7 3 07 


i liYBTYIv  ISRIfiSTni 
C0NT 


HA 


€■  Ml  RATION: 


A AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


'*•  RCtROMlIWLC  OOO  ORRAMlRATiON 


I 


him'  Walter  Reed  Array  Institute  of  Res 
. Washington,  D.C.  20012 

RRAA:*  ’ 


RCtPONtltLE  IN  IX  VI  DUAL 

,H1  -toy,  COL  Robert  J.T. 


W RESOURCE!  IITIBATI 

A RROREERtORAL  HAM  VRS 

A RUN  CM  fT"  RmmrRJ 

RlftCAL 

TEAR 

76 

2 

11 

77 

2 

22 

m REAEOR1MN4  OREARIlA 

^ 1 1 

202-576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 

HI,  tl.-ll.. 


rjacr 


, ,UMDfN0  AftftNCT 

DA  I 


ST  Hmommci  MftTnOD 

C.  In-House 


Division  of  Preventive  Medicine 
»:•  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


•THMCIftAL  IM  VII  Tift  AT  Oft  ' I—  MATT  ll  ft  1 juft 

,m,i  Segal,  Herbert  E. , LTC,  MC 
202-576-2480 


MCIAL  IICVftlTT  ACCOUNT  MUTAftlft 
AtAOCIATI  IM  VI I Tift  A TOO! 


> ami  Nowosiwsky,  Taras,  COL,  MC 

MAOft: 


nj»vN*M;>w.v.iv<«. 

(U)  Epidemiology;  (U)  Hepatitis  B;  (U)  Liver;  (U)  Virus  Diseases 


I.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  14  ARRROACM,  14  RAO  OREM  (RunUM  1*0*14*1  Mr  tinIh  Rnm*  •••>  •«  RM*  0R«aRflR  Cl— I Cm* • ) 

23.  (U)  To  define  and  study  the  prevalence,  incidence,  and  variables  of  hepatitis 
transmission  in  medical  care  provider  and  line  military  populations.  To  apply  this 
information  to  the  design  of  hepatitis  prevention  and  control  programs. 

24.  (U)  Contemporary  epidemiologic  methods  are  employed.  Multidisciplinary  collabora- 
tive approaches  are  utilized  and  new  methods  developed  as  required. 

25.  (U)  75  07-76  06  Analysis  of  occupational  and  assignment  data  from  the  two-year 
followup  study  of  the  1972  cohort  of  Army  health  care  personnel  and  association  of  those 
data  with  clinical  hepatitis  and  serologic  results  were  completed.  Analysis  of  data 
from  a one-year  prospective  study  of  Hepatitis  B antigen  and  antibody  acquisition  by 
personnel  newly  assigned  to  Fort  Hood  is  in  progress.  (These  studies  are  complementary 
to  work  described  under  DA  OB  6513,  Work  Unit  176,  entitled  "Mechanisms  of  Transmission 

f Hepatitis  Viruses.")  A protocol  for  the  study  of  chronic  hepatitis  following 
Hepatitis  B infection  was  revised  and  submitted.  For  technical  reports  see  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Report  1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $2,000  from  FT  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period 
1 Jul-30  Jep  J6. 


DD,"V“J498 


■<Kr 


Project  3A762760A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  129  Epidemiology  of  hepatitis  in  the  military 
Investiqators : 

Principal:  LTC  Herbert  E.  Segal,  MC 

COL  Taras  Nowosiwsky,  MC;  MAJ  Gilbert  R. 
Irwin,  MC;  SSG  Michael  C.  Callahan;  L. 
Charlene  Evans 

1 . Followup  Incidence  Study  of  Army  Health  Care  Personnel 
for  Hepatitis  B Antigen  and  Antibody 

Army  Medical  Department  officers  who  had  been  enrolled 
at  the  Academy  of  Health  Sciences,  Fort  Sam  Houston,  Texas 
between  July  and  October  1972  and  had  participated  in  the 
prevalence  study  previously  reported  were  eligible  for  this 
followup.  Newly  inducted  nurses  (ANC) , dietitians  and 
physical  therapists  (AMSC) , dentists  (DC) , physicians  (MC) , 
medical  administrators  and  allied  health  scientists  (MSC) , 
and  veterinarians  (VC)  had  attended  the  Basic  Officer  Courses 
at  the  Academy  upon  their  entrance  onto  active  duty.  Most 
of  these  officers  were  eligible  for  release  from  active 
duty  after  two  years  service.  More  senior  personnel,  re- 
presenting those  with  career  commitments,  had  been  enrolled 
in  the  Officer  Advanced  Course. 

Approximately  three  months  before  the  second  anniver- 
sary of  their  enrollment,  a mailing  was  sent  to  each  officer 
at  his  or  her  last  known  duty  station.  Included  in  the 
mailing  were  a letter  to  explain  the  purpose  of  the  study 
and  request  participation,  a questionnaire  to  elicit  informa- 
tion on  the  location,  dates,  and  description  of  duties 
performed  as  well  as  on  selected  professional  and  personal 
health-related  experiences,  and  blood  collection  and 
storage  tubes  to  process  and  ship  a serum  specimen  for 
HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  testing.  Return  of  the  questionnaire  and 
serum  specimen  was  requested  before  the  officer  was  released 
from  active  duty,  to  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  by  mail. 

Sera  were  tested  for  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen 
(HBsAg)  by  radioimmunoassay  using  the  Ausria  II  kit  (Abbott 
Laboratories) , with  specificity  for  HBsAg  confirmed  as 
previously  described.  Antibody  to  the  surface  antigen 
(anti-HBg)  was  determined  by  the  passive  hemagglutination 


907 


(PHA)  test  described  by  Vyas,  Serologic  evidence  of 
nep^titis  B virus  infection  HBsAg  or  anti-HBs  positivity, 

( HBV  positivity)  was  then  correlated  with  health-related 
assignment  and  occupational  variables  listed  in  the 
questionnaire. 

RESULTS 

Two  thousand  and  seventy-five  officers  were  considered 
eligible  for  followup,  the  remainder  having  been  reportedly 
released  from  active  duty  prior  to  the  scheduled  mailing 
date  (Table  1) . Slightly  fewer  than  a third  of  all  mailings 
sent  were  returned  acceptably  completed,  that  is  with  a 
usable  questionnaire  and  serum  specimen.  Completion  rates 
varied  by  Corps,  the  overall  rate  declining  from  43.5 
percent  to  26.1  percent  as  the  mailings  proceeded.  Sera 
submitted  by  officers  after  they  were  released  from  active 
duty  are  not  considered  in  this  report,  and  are  tabulated 
as  non-responses. 


Table  1. 

Followup 

Response  Rates 

by  Corps 

Corps 

Total 

Eligible 

Released  from 
Active  Duty 

Total 

Mailings 

No . ( % ) 

Responders 

ANC 

569 

120 

449 

203 

(45.2) 

AMSC 

48 

12 

36 

16 

(44.4) 

DC 

460 

108 

352 

85 

(24.1) 

MC 

846 

63 

783 

228 

(29.1) 

MSC 

646 

236 

400 

121 

(30.3) 

VC 

61 

6 

55 

26 

(47.3) 

TOTAL 

2630 

545 

2075 

679 

(32.7) 

Serologic  evidence  of  hepatitis  a infection  was  detected 
in  20  (2.9%)  of  those  responding  ile  2),  being  found 

both  in  officers  with  known  preexisting  seropositivity 
(gioup  "A")  as  well  as  in  those  seroconverting  sometime 
after  their  enrollment  in  the  initial  prevalence  study 
(group  "B") . Twenty-two  initially  seropositive  officers 
lacked  detectable  antibody  on  followup  (group  "C") . Among 


908 


all  officers  seropositive  initially  (groups  "A"  and  "C") 
anti-HBs  positivity  persisted  in  42.1%  of  those  with  anti- 
body detected  with  titers  of  > 1:32  and  in  21.4%  of  those 

with  titers  of  1:16.  The  majority  of  officers  tested 
were  seronegative  on  both  occasions  (group  "D") . 


Table  2.  Initial  and  Followup  Serologic  Results* 


Group 

( initial : 

followup  results) 

No . ( %)  officers 

"A" 

positive : 

positive 

11  (1.6) 

"B" 

negative : 

positive 

9 (1.3) 

"C" 

positive : 

negative 

22  (3.2) 

"D" 

negative : 

negative 

637(93.8) 

Total 

679(99.9) 

* All  positive  results  are  for  anti-HB  excepting  one 
officer  in  Group  B who  was  HBsAg  positive. 

Officers  seroconverting  during  the  two-year  study 
period  (group  "B")  are  listed  in  Table  3.  None  of  them 
reported  an  illness  compatible  with  a diagnosis  of 
hepatitis.  An  additional  seven  seronegative  officers 
(included  in  group  "D")  gave  a history  of  clinical  hepatitis 
without  diagnosis  of  metabolic  disorders  of  the  liver  or 
infectious  mononucleosis  during  the  period  under  study 
(Table  4) . Two  of  those  reported  having  been  HBsAg  positive 
during  their  illness.  Combining  these  two  groups,  fifteen  of 
the  sixteen  were  nurses  (ANC) , dentists  (DC) , or  physi- 
cians (MC) , indicating  a relative  risk  (rr)  for  personnel 
serving  in  these  Corps  of  5.2,  compared  with  officers  in 
nondirect  patient  care  fields. 


Table  3.  Professional  Characteristics  of  Officers  KBV 
Seroconverting  During  the  Two-year  Followup 

Officer  Corps  Specialty  Assignment  Area 


1 Medical  Pathology  United  States 

Continued 


909 


Tabie  3. 


Professional  Characteristics  of  Officers  HBV 
Seroconverting  During  the  Two-year  Followup 

Officer  Corps  Specialty  Assignment  Area 


2 

Medical 

Internal  Medicine 

United 

States 

3 

Medical 

Anesthesiology 

United 

States 

4 

Medical 

Otolaryngology 

United 

States 

5 

Medical 

Otolaryngology 

United 

States 

6 

Medical 

General  Medicine/ 
Pediatrics 

Germany 

7 

Nurse 

Medical  Intensive 
Care 

United 

States 

8 

Nurse 

General  Surgery/ 
Orthopedics 

United 

States 

9 

Medical  Service 

Experimental 

Psychology 

United 

States 

Table  4.  Professional  Characteristics  of  Officers 

Becoming  111  with  Hepatitis  During  the  Two-year 
Followup 


Officer 

Corps 

Specialty 

Assignment  Area 

10 

Medical 

General 

Medicine 

Germany 

11 

Medical 

General 

Practice 

United  States 

12 

Medical 

General 

Medicine 

Germany 

13* 

Dental 

General 

Dentistry 

United  States 

14* 

Nurse 

General 

Medical 

United  States 

15 

Nurse 

General  Medical 
Emergency  Room 

United  States 

16 

Nurse 

General 

Medical 

United  States 

* Reported  HBsAg  positivity  coincident  with  illness. 


910 


Physicians  were  best  represented,  3.9  percent  sero- 
converting  or  experiencing  clinical  hepatitis,  followed  by 
nurses,  2.5  percent,  dentists,  1.2  percent,  and  allied  health 
scientists,  0.8  percent.  Seroconversion  or  clinical  hepati- 
tis among  physicians  occurred  in  two  of  four  otolaryngologist- 
responders,  four  of  40  general  medical  officers,  one  of 
six  pathologists,  one  of  13  anesthesiologists,  one  of  56 
internists,  and  none  of  26  general  surgeons.  Of  all  person- 
nel assigned  to  Germany,  three,  8.5  percent,  seroconverted 
or  became  clinically  ill,  compared  with  13  or  2.5  percent 
of  all  those  stationed  in  the  United  States  (rr  = 3.4). 

Almost  all  officers  assigned  to  Corps  whose  officers 
provide  direct  patient  care  responded  to  the  questionnaire 
that  they  actually  did  serve  that  function  (Table  5) . Of 
those,  74  percent  "cared  for  hepatitis  patients,"  85  percent 
"drew  or  handled  blood  or  blood  products,"  63  percent  "con- 
taminated themselves  with  blood  or  blood  products,"  and  35 
percent  "performed  laboratory  work"  on  one  or  more  occa- 
sions . 


Table  5.  Questionnaire  Responses  of  Direct  Patient  Care 
Providers* 


Question 


No. (%)  Sero-  95% 

converting  or  Relative  Confidence 
Total  111  Risk  (rr)  Limits 


Provide  direct 
patient  care? 
yes 
no 


14(2.9) 

1 (10.0) 


Care  for  hepatitis 
patients? 

yes  356 

no  14  0 


9(2.5) 

6(4.3) 


Draw  or  handle 
blood? 

yes 

no 


14(3.4) 

1(1.2) 


0.44-207 


Contaminated  with 
blood? 

yes  304 

no  192 


8(2.6) 

7(3.6) 


Continued 


% 


' YCp  5*-VrW«^lL.  MWi  I ’ 


911 


Table  5.  Questionnair  Responses  of  Direct  Patient  Care 
Providers* 


No, (%)  Sero-  95% 

converting  or  Relative  Confidence 
Question  Total  111  Risk  (rr)  Limits 


Perform  laboratory 
work? 

yes  166  8(4.8)  2.3  0.72-7.4 

no  330  7(2.1) 

♦Excludes  officer  #9  not  at  risk  of  performing  these  functions. 

There  appears  to  be  risk  of  seroconversion  or  clinical 
illness  attendant  to  the  drawing  or  handling  of  blood  or 
blood  products  and  to  the  performance  of  laboratory  work. 

The  relative  risk  for  officers  who  both  drew  or  handled 
blood  or  blood  products  and  performed  laboratory  work  was 
4.2.  Additional  questionnaire  data  suggested  risk  for 
officers  receiving  blood  transfusions  (rr  = 11.4)  but  not 
for  officers  in  contact  with  hepatitis  patients  outside  the 
medical  care  setting  (rr  = 0.2).  None  of  the  15  direct 
care  oriented  officers  seroconverting  or  experiencing 
clinical  illness  reported  receiving  gamma  globulin  during 
the  two-year  period  covered  by  the  questionnaire,  compared 
with  8 percent  of  the  remaining  481  direct  care  oriented 
officers . 

2 . Epidemiologic  Studies  of  Hepatitis  B at  Fort  Hood,  Texas 

A one-year  prospective  study  of  enlisted  personnel  newly 
arrived  at  Fort  Hood  during  the  February-April  1974  period 
was  completed.  Each  of  the  2333  personnel  in  this  cohort 
was  administered  a demographic  and  health  experience  question- 
naire and  had  serum  collected  for  Hepatitis  B surface 
Antigen  (HBsAg) , antibody  to  the  surface  antigen  (anti-HBs) , 
and  antibody  to  the  core  antigen  (anti-HBc) . The  cohort 
was  followed  at  four  month  intervals  by  questionnaire  and 
rebleed;  personnel  studied  at  4,  8,  and  12  months  after 
arrival  numbered  1915,  1210,  and  900  respectively.  Corieia- 
tion  of  demographic  and  health  histories  with  serologic 
data  is  in  progress.  Examination  of  the  usefulness  of  anti- 
HBc  assay  in  the  serologic  study  of  Hepatitis  B is  reported 
elsewhere  (Project  3A161101A91C,  Work  Unit  105,  Mechanisms 
of  Transmission  of  Hepatitis  Viruses) . 


912 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 
^TJmman^cTv^ 


I.  OATE  WRIV  lUM'RV 

75  07  01 


4 KINO  or  SUMMARY 


D.  Change 


10  NO  COOH* 


M.  RRWAAY 


V CONTRIBUTING 


RROORAN  iLtMCNT 

62760A 


CARDS  114F 


U 


I.  •OIMMWCUNIT^ 

u 


project  numhr 

3A762760A822 


tTmucyj^eIeIc!^ 

DA  OB  6500 


««44*D*»fl^ 

NA 


76  07  01 


> Mr*  M4T4*M 

NL 


TASK  ANEA  NUMIEft 


01 


II  TITLE  (PTMti  rtA  ,,«***,  C c«4U>* 

(U)  Gastrointestinal  Diseases  of  Military  importance 
010 100  Microbiology  008800  Life  Support  002600  Biology 

eitmated  cSTHmS  oZri 


report  comrwoL  btwbdl 

DD-DR*EfAH)tJ6 


k »R(CIFIC  DATA 
MTU  ACTON  ACC  CM 

3 T«l  D HO 


l level  or  cun 
A.  MCI  IICMT 


SFORK  UNIT  NUHMR 


130 


I |r ART  6A Tt 

73  07 


IT  CONTRACT  ORANT 
N OATft/CrrCCTIVC.  NA 


CONT 


C TYPE. 

A.  KINO  OR  ANARO: 


txPlRATlON 


4 AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


11  AtlPONtlBLl  OOO  ONOANI  CATION 


name  * Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Aooncu:*  Washington v D.C.  20012 


•S  RSSOURCS*  ESTIMATE 

A PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

k FUN  OS  (ti»  AmmmA) 

fiscal 

YEAR 

76 

7 

2 75 

77 

8 

335 

as  PSRF 

• 

i 

o 

~ | | 

RE»PON*IBLE  INDIVIDUAL 


TELEPHONE: 


JOY,  COL,  R.J.T. 
(202)  576-3551 


Forei 


intelligence  not  considered. 

(rmtf  mu  -t»  i:. jh. 


A TUMMM4  AOEACV 

DA  i 


14  AEAP^AHAMCE  METHOD 

C.  In-House 


Division  of  Medicine 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IMVtt  TIC  A TOR  fFoMlaA  MAR  II  U I.  AMAalc  /mi  UnMmv 

»«■*  BOEDEKER,  MAJ,  E.C. 

T4I.4AKMI  (202)  576-2582 

■OCIAL  4ICUAITV  ACCOUNT  MUM04A 


A4EOCIATE  IHVIITIAATOA, 

aaoei  CHARNEY,  MAJ,  A.N. 
DONOWITZ,  MAJ,  M. 


DA 


UlUl  (U)  Diarrheal  Diseases;  (U)  Salmonellosis;  (U)  Intestinal 
Absorption;  (U)  Shigellosis;  00  Intestinal  cell  Surface;  (U)Chplera;  (U)  Immunology 

TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,  14  ARRBOACM,  II  PROORSU  IMHAiN  ithmllH»4  Mr  mMw  Ntl**  l*l  ft  M*A  »IB  fumltw  CImiIRsiiIm  Cm*  ) 

23  (U)  Research  efforts  in  this  department  will  continue  to  be  directed  toward  gastroin- 
testinal diseases  of  military  importance.  In  particular,  the  focus  is  on  the  enteropatho 
genic  diarrheal  diseases,  Salmonellosis  and  Shigellosis  and  pathogenic  E.  coli.  These 
have  critical  military  relevance  since  they  represent  a major  factor  in  troop  mobility. 

24  (U)  Studies  will  continue  to  employ  several  in  vivo  and  in  vitro  models.  These  in- 
clude perfusion  models  using  rhesus  monkeys  and  rabbits,  in  vivo  rat  ileal  loop  models 
Ussing  chamber  studies  and  subcellular  membrane  fractions.  Lymphocyte  function  (antibod; 
mediated  cellular  cytotoxicity)  is  being  studied  in  vitro. 

25  (U)  75  07-76  06  Shigella  enterotoxin  activates  rabbit  ileal  mucosal  adenylate  cyclase 
activity  in  the  presence  of  sufficient  ATP.  Methylprednisolone  (MP)  increases  mucosal 
Na-K-ATPase  activity  and  water  and  electrolyte  transport  in  rat  intestine  without 
affecting  adenylate  cyclase.  MP  can  prevent  and  reverse  the  net  secretion  of  water  and 
electrolytes  Induced  by  cholera  toxin.  Cecal  inoculation  of  Shigella  in  Rhesus  monkeys 
results  in  dysentery  alone  without  the  changes  in  jejunal  secretion  seen  after  oral 
inoculation.  Antibody-dependent  cellular  cytotoxicity  of  Shigella  by  human  peripheral 
blood  lymphocytes  has  been  shown.  A model  for  adherence  of  pathogenic  E.  coli  to 
intestinal  epithelial  membranes  has  been  developed.  For  technical  report  see  Walter 
Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $98,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul- 
30  Sep  76. 


PREVIOUS  EDITION*  OP  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  OD  FORMI  I ASS  A 
AND  USE-1.  I MAR  S*  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARC  OBSOLETE 


•x  ** 


Project  3A762760A822  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Task  01  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  130  Gastrointestinal  Diseases  of  Military  Importance 
Investigators 

Principal:  Edgar  C.  Boedeker,  MAJ,  MC 

Associates:  Alan  N.  Chamey,  MAJ,  MC;  Dennis  P.  Collin,  CPT,  MSC; 

Mark  Donowitz,  MAJ,  MC;  Ralph  A.  Giannella,  M.D.; 

Ester  P.  Jordan,  Ph.D.;  Marshall  D.  Kinsey,  MAJ,  MC; 
Richard  P.  MacDermott,  MAJ,  MC;  Alton  A.  Reeder,  LTC,  MC; 
Yuan-Heng  Tai,  Ph.D. 


Description 

The  research  activities  in  this  Department  have  continued  to  focus  on 
the  toxigenic  and/or  invasive  enteropathogenic  diarrheal  diseases 
caused  by  Salmonella,  Shigella,  E.  coli  and,  to  a lesser  extent,  Cholera. 
Three  basic  sets  of  questions  are  being  asked  about  the  pathogenesis  of 
these  diseases. 

a.  Pathophysiology  of  Intestinal  Transport  - What  enzymatic  and 
hormonal  mechanisms  mediace  bacterial-induced  secretion  of  water 

and  electrolytes  by  the  intestine?  What  are  the  normal  mechanisms 
for  salt  and  water  absorption?  How  do  absorptive  and  secretory  mechanisms 
interact?  Do  they  share  any  pathways?  Can  pharmacologic  agents  increase 
salt  and  water  absorption  in  the  face  of  infection  or  decrease  secretion 
induced  by  bacterial  toxins? 

b.  Role  of  Hosl  Immune  Mechanisms  - How  do  disease  causing  bac- 
teria interact  with  the  normal  cellular  (lymphocyte,  macrophage,  poly- 
morphonuclear leukocyte)  and  humoral  (antibody)  immune  defense  mechanisms 
in  the  intestine?  What  are  the  most  effective  means  of  inducing  active 
cellular  and  humoral  immunity  to  enteric  infection  (i.e.,  how  can  an 
effective  vaccine  for  enteric  infection  be  produced)?  What  factors 
(antibody,  complement)  enable  lymphocytes  to  kill  enteric  bacteria 

in  vitro?  Are  these  factors  of  equal  importance  in  an  in  vivo  model  of 
enteric  infection? 

c.  Role  of  Intestinal  Surface  Characteristics  - How  do  disease 
causing  bacteria  interact  with  the  surface  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract? 
What  characteristics  of  this  intestinal  surface  permit  disease  causing 
bacteria  to  adhere  to  and  colonize  the  small  intestine?  What 


914 


7:.f T"' 


Si 


characteristics  of  the  intestinal  surface  permit  specific  interactions 
with  toxins  produced  by  bacteria?  Can  specific  interactions  of  bacteria 
or  their  toxins  be  altered  by  orally  administered  agents? 

Progress  and  Results 


Sodium  potassium-activated  adenosine  triphosphatase  (Na-K-ATPase)  is 
associated  with  electrolyte  transport  in  many  tissues.  To  help  delineate 
its  role  in  intestinal  transport,  changes  in  rat  intestinal  electrolyte 
and  water  transport  induced  by  injecting  methylprednisolone  acetate 
(MPA)  or  deoxycorticosterone  acetate  (DOCA)  were  correlated  with  changes 
in  Na-K-ATPase  activity  in  the  jejunum,  ileum  and  colon.  MPA  increased 
Na  and  H2O  absorption  and  Na-K-ATPase  activity  in  parallel  in  all  seg- 
ments. DOCA  increased  Na-K-ATPase  and  transport  in  the  colon.  Perme- 
ability, Mg-ATPase  and  Adenylate  Cyclase  activities  were  unchanged  by 
either  drug.  These  data  are  consistent  with  a primary  role  for  Na-K- 
ATPase  in  intestinal  transport  (14). 

Cholera  toxin  induced  net  water  and  electrolyte  secretion  and  increased 
adenylate  cyclase  activity  in  rat  ileum.  Utilizing  the  model  of  in- 
creased intestinal  water  and  electrolyte  absorption  induced  by  MPA  (14) , 
the  relationship  of  the  mucosal  enzyme  systems  Na-K-;'TPase  and  Adenylate 
Cyclase  and  their  associated  transport  processes  was  studied.  MPA, 
administered  prior  to  exposure  of  intestine  to  cholera  toxin,  could 
promote  net  absorption  of  water  and  electrolytes,  without  affecting 
adenylate  cyclase.  In  addition,  MPA  could  reverse  ongoing  net  secretion 
induced  by  cholera  toxin.  Thus,  MPA  can  prevent  and  reverse  the  secretory 
effects  of  cholera  toxin  by  selectively  stimulating  a coexisting  absorp- 
tive process  (15,16). 

Systematic  study  of  Na-K-ATPase  in  the  above  studies  led  to  two  technical 
advances  in  the  measurement  of  this  enzyme.  An  in  vitro  inhibitor 
of  Na-K-ATPase  was  discovered  in  a commonly  used  preparation  of  ATP  (17). 
An  automated  ATPase  assay  capable  of  measuring  60  samples  per  hour  with 
a high  degree  of  precision  and  essentially  no  sample  carry-over  was 
developed  (1) . 

Shigella  Dysenteriae  I is  one  of  several  bacteria  which  produces  an 
enferotoxin  capable  of  stimulating  intestinal  water  and  electrolyte 
secretion.  The  mechanism  whereby  Shigella  enterotoxin  induces  intestinal 
secretion  has  been  debated.  When  studied  in  vitro  in  rabbit  ileal  mucosa 
in  a modified  Ussing  chamber,  the  enterotoxin  caused  net  sodium  secretion 
but  short  circuit  current  did  not  change  and  no  change  in  mucosal  cyclic 
adenosine  monophosphate  (cyclic  AMP)  levels  could  be  demonstrated  (19). 


This  suggested  that  cyclic  AMP  might  not  be  a mediator  of  Shigella 
enterotoxin  action.  However,  in  separate  studies  (18),  activation 
of  Adenylate  Cyclase  in  the  same  time  was  clearly  demonstrated  when 
substrate  (ATP)  concentrations  above  the  Km  of  Adenylate  Cyclase  were 
employed.  These  concentrations  of  ATP  are  greater  than  those  required 
to  show  Adenylate  Cyclase  activation  by  cholera  toxin.  These  latter 
observations  strongly  suggest  that  Shigella  enterotoxin  action  may 
be  mediated  by  the  Adenylate  Cyclase-cyclic  AID'  system  and  provide 
explanation  for  the  failure  of  previous  investigators  to  make  similar 
observations . 

The  differences  between  cholera  enterotoxin  and  shigella  enterotoxin 
were  emphasized  in  studies  of  their  effect  in  rat  colon.  Previously, 
no  effect  of  cholera  toxin  on  colonic  secretion  had  been  shown.  A 
net  increase  in  cecal  excretion  of  water  and  electrolytes  was  observed 
with  cholera  toxin  but  not  with  Shigella  toxin  (2).  E.  coli  entero- 
toxin also  failed  to  have  an  effect. 

Most  shigella  organisms  do  not  produce  an  identifiable  enterotoxin. 
Shigella  flexneri  2a  is  an  invasive  enteric  pathogen  in  which  entero- 
toxin has  not  been  identified.  Previous  studies  have  shown  that  oral 
inoculation  of  S.  flexneri  in  rhesus  monkeys  results  in  dysentery 
alone  or  diarrhea  plus  dysentery.  Dysentery  alone  is  associated  with 
invasion  of  the  colon  and  transport  abnormalities  only  in  the  colon. 

The  occurrence  of  diarrhea  correlates  with  transport  abnormalities 
in  the  jejunum  as  well,  but  without  jejunal  invasion.  To  determine 
whether  jejunal  transport  abnormalities  seen  following  oral  inocu- 
lation resulted  from  a direct  interaction  between  the  organisms  and 
the  jejunal  mucosa  or  from  an  indirect  effect  of  colonic  invasion 
and  inflammation,  rhesus  monkeys  were  injected  by  direct  cecal 
inoculation.  Sixty- four  per  cent  of  animals  developed  clinical  disease 
and  94%  of  these  developed  dysentery  alone.  Bacterial  invasion  and 
colonization  was  limited  to  the  colon  and  sodium  and  water  transport 
remained  normal  in  the  small  bowel.  Thus,  the  watery  diarrhea 
seen  with  shigella  seems  to  require  an  interaction  between  the  jejunal 
mucosa  and  shigella  organisms  (3,20). 

The  pathogenesis  of  the  increase  in  ileal  secretion  caused  by  Salmo- 
nella Typhimurlum  (Strain  TML — an  invasive  organism),  was  investigated 
in  rabbit  ileal  loops.  Although  this  organism  does  not  elaborate  a 
traditional  enrerotoxin,  TML  infected  mucosa  demonstrated  a marked 
increase  in  Adenylate  Cyclase  activity  and  cyclic  AMP  levels.  Indo- 
methacin  pretreatment  abolished  both  secretion  and  Adenylate  Cyclase 
activation  (4).  The  effect  of  indomethacin  suggests  that  prostaglandins 
may  be  intermediates  in  Salmonella  activation  of  Adenylate  Cyclase. 


916 


The  possible  role  of  changes  in  intestinal  permeability  in  the  pathoge- 
nesis of  Salmonella  Typhimurium  (TML)  diarrhea  was  investigated  in 
rhesus  monkeys.  Normal  animals  demonstrated  a gradient  of  diminishing 
pemeability  from  jejunum  to  ileum  to  colon.  Salmonella  injection  did 
not  increase  permeability  for  any  segments,  despite  extensive  invasion 
of  the  ileal  and  colonic  mucosa  and  increased  secretion  of  water  and 
electrolytes.  This  study  shows  that  changed  mucosal  permeability  is 
not  a factor  in  Salmonella  diarrhea  (21). 

The  two  preceding  studies  indicate  that  the  diarrhea  accompanying 
enteric  infection  may  be  related  to  specific  chemical  or  hormonal 
mediators  of  fluid  and  electrolytf  secretion.  This  prompted  investi- 
gation of  intestinal  fluid  and  electrolyte  movement  induced  by  endo- 
crine syndromes  or  chemical  media  ?rL . 

Clinical  studies  in  three  patients  with  carcinoid  syndrome  and  diarrhea 
using  triple  lumen  jejunal  perfusion  demonstrated  net  fluid  secretion. 
Methysergide  (an  atagonist  of  5-hvdroxytryptomine  (5HT)),  was  effective 
in  reversing  the  secretory  state  in  some  patients  (22).  A model  for 
chronic  elevation  of  blood  5HT  was  developed  in  the  rabbit  (23).  This 
was  achieved  by  daily  injection  of  5HT  in  oil.  The  major  secretory 
effect  was  seen  in  the  ileum  where  there  was  increased  secretion  of 
H2O,  Na,  K and  HCO3.  5HT-induced  secretion  is  not  associated  with 
activation  of  the  Adenylate  Cyclase-cyclic  AMP  system. 

A study  on  the  effect  of  the  laxative  dioctyl  sodium  sulfosuccinate 
in  the  rat  cecum  was  published  (24).  In  this  model  net  secretion  was 
associated  with  increased  mucosal  cyclic  AMP  levels.  An  editorial  or 
the  mechanisms  involved  in  laxative  action  was  published  (25). 

Factors  responsible  for  the  host  cellular  immune  response  to  enteric 
bacteria  remain  to  be  clarified.  To  investigate  active  destruction  of 
bacteria  by  host  immunocytes,  human  peripheral  blood  lymphocytes  were 
isolated.  In  vitro,  in  the  aDsence  of  complement,  lymphocytes  will 
kill  80%  to  90%  of  antibody  coated  shigella.  Normal  human  lymphocyte^ 
alone,  or  lymphocytes  from  patients  recovering  from  Shigella,  did  not 
kill  bacteria,  indicating  that  sensitization  of  lymphocytes  does  not 
result  in  direct  cell  mediated  killing  of  the  bacteria  (28).  Similar 
experiments  with  meningococci  demonstrated  antibody  dependent  cellular 
cytocoxicity  as  a potential  mechanism  of  destruction  of  these  bacteria 
(29). 

The  phenomenon  of  cellular  cytotoxicity  was  investigated  in  a series 
of  studies  using  chromium  labeled  Red  Blood  Cells  (RBCs)  as  the  target 
cells.  Plant  lectins  including  the  mitogenic  E-phytohemagglatinin  (E-PHA) 


917 


an<:  the  non-mitogenic  Wheat  Germ  Agglutinin  (WGA)  produced  marked 
cytotoxicity  of  human  lymphocytes  for  autologous  (human)  RBCs.  All 
subpopulations  of  lymphocytes  (T,B  or  Null)  were  effective  (26,5). 

Further  studies  investigating  the  induction  by  lectin  of  cytotoxicity 
of  human  lymphocytes  for  RBCs  of  several  species  showed  that  lectin- 
induced  lymphocytotoxicity  is  related  to  a prearmed  lymphocyte  which 
seeks  out  and  kills  the  appropriate  target  cell  (27,6).  In  a separate 
system,  the  ability  of  a calcium  ionophore  (A23187)  to  induce  cytotox- 
icity of  lymphocytes  for  autologous  RBCs  was  investigated.  The  data 
indicate  a calcium-dependent  mechanism  in  certain  cellular  cytotoxic 
processes  (7).  The  analogies  between  the  RBC  system  and  cytotoxicity 
for  enteric  bacteria  are  being  explored. 

A defect  in  the  ability  of  lymphocytes  from  patients  with  Common 
Variable  Hypogammaglobulinemia  (CVH)  to  synthesize  immunoglobulin 
was  demonstrated  in  vitro.  The  data  indicate  the  lymphocytes  of  CVH 
patients  are  able  to  suppress  immunoglobulin  synthesis  in  normal 
lymphocytes,  suggesting  an  abnormality  of  regulatory  T cells  which 
suppress  B cell  activation  (8). 

Initial  interaction  between  the  intestine  and  a variety  of  nutrients 
(e.g.  vitamins)  and  toxic  factors  (e.g.  bacterial  enterotoxins , bac- 
terial cell  surfaces)  is  mediated  by  receptors  at  the  surface  of  the 
intestinal  epithelial  cell.  It  is  likely  that  these  receptors  are 
glycoproteins  or  glycolipids.  Since  plant  lectins  are  known  to  bind 
to  specific  cell  surface  oligosaccharide  structures,  the  ability  of  a 
series  of  plant  lectins  to  bind  to  intestinal  cell  surface  membranes 
(brush  borders)  was  investigated.  Wheat  Germ  Agglutinin,  ricinus 
communis  agglutinin  and  E phytohemagglutinin  all  bound  to  proximal 
and  distal  guinea  pig  brush  border  with  about  10^  binding  sites/mg 
of  brush  border  protein  (9) . 

In  order  to  investigate  the  influence  of  plant  lectins  on  a well 
characterized  intestinal  cell  surface  binding  reaction,  the  binding 
of  intrinsic  factor  vitamin  B-j^  complex  (IF-Bi^)  was  chosen.  Pre- 
incubation of  E phytohemagglutinin  with  distal  brush  border  resulted 
in  competitive  inhibition  of  subsequent  IFB^  binding  (9).  This 
suggests  that  E phytohemagglutinin  interacts  specifically  with  the 
intestinal  cell  receptors  for  IFB^* 

Since  the  proteins  and  glycoproteins  of  the  intestinal  cell  surface 
(brush  border)  membrane  are  insoluble  when  isolated  free  of  phospholipid. 
Solubilization  of  these  molecules  is  necessary  to  investigate  their 
role  in  the  processes  of  toxin  binding  and  bacterial  adherence.  A 
systematic  study  of  the  ability  of  anionic  and  nonionic  detergents 


918 


to  solubilize  Brush  Border  membrane  protein  was  undertaken.  Solubi- 
lization of  different  molecular  species  was  dependent  on  detergent 
concentrations.  Selective  solubilization  of  membrane  proteins  and 
glyproteins  using  Triton  X-lOO^and  also  sodium  deoxycholate,  was 
achieved  (10,30).  The  role  of  these  molecules  in  lectin  binding 
and  bacterial  adherence  is  being  investigated.  The  model  for  bac- 
terial adherence  being  utilized  is  that  of  a South  Carolina  Strain 
of  E.  coll,  which  causes  diarrheal  disease  in  rabbits  and  aggluti- 
nates rabbit  brush  borders  in  vitro. 


A clinical  study  on  the  metabolism  of  deoxycholic  acid  in  a group 
of  patients  with  alcoholic  cirrhosis  was  reported.  In  order  to 
explain  the  low  levels  of  the  secondary  bile  acid  deoxycholic  acid 
in  bile  of  patients  with  cirrhosi  disappearcnce  of  l^C  labeled 
deoxycholic  acid  from  stools  of  p ..ieats  with  cirrhosis,  quantitative 
and  qualitative  determination  of  fecal  bile  acids  and  in  vitro  ability 
of  fecal  bacteria  to  metabolize  cholic  acid  were  studied.  Our  in  vitto 
data  suggested  that  unpaired  conversion  of  cholic  acid  to  deoxycholic 
acid  by  intestinal  bacteria  best  explains  low  deoxycholic  acid  in 
cirrhotic  bile  (11) . 


In  additional  studies  on  the  same  group  of  patients  with  cirrhosis., 
biliary  lipid  secretion  rat.es  were  measured  to  determine  whether 
decreased  secretion  of  bile  acids  might  result  in  decreased  deoxy- 
cholic acid  levels.  These  studies  demonstrated  a decreased  secretion 
of  cholic  acid  and  its  bacterial  product  deoxycholic  acid  in  cirrhotics 
(12). 


A sensitive  radioimmunoassay  for  chenodeoxycholic  acid  has  been 
developed  (13)  which  permits  measurement  of  serum  levels  of  this  bile 
acid.  In  a clinical  study  using  this  technique  elevations  or  serum 
chenodeoxycholic  acid  were  found  to  correlate  with  pruritus  in  patients 
with  hyperthyroidism  (31, 

Conclusions  and  Recommendations 


Work  in  this  department  has  shown  that  Na-K-ATPase  activity  is  closely 
correlated  with  water  and  electrolyte  transport  in  the  intestine.  It 
has  further  been  shown  that  pharmacological  modification  of  Na-K-ATPase 
activity  can  prevent  or  reverse  the  net  fluid  and  electrolyte  secretion 
caused  by  cholera  toxin.  It  appears  that  two  separate  and  oppositely 
directed  transport  processes  in  the  intestine  can  be  modulated  inde- 
pendently. These  studies  offer  hope  of  eventual  pharmacological 
treatment  of  infectious  diarrhea. 


ZH  .-Tv.  TiX  . ' • 


Observations  that  humoral  mechanisms  rather  than  simply  invasion  and 
inflammation  may  be  responsible  for  fluid  and  electrolyte  secretion 
in  infectious  diarrhea  have  been  extended.  Alteration  of  intestinal 
permeability  has  been  shown  to  have  no  role  in  Salmonella  diarrhea. 
However,  Salmonella  infection  has  been  shown  to  activate  the  Adeny- 
late Cyclase-cyclic  AMP  system. 

In  contrast  to  observations  published  previously  by  other  investi- 
gators, Shigella  toxin  has  been  shown  to  cause  activation  of  intes- 
tinal Adenylate  Cyclase. 

The  molecular  composition  of  the  intestinal  cell  surface  has  been 
further  defined.  Plant  lectins  have  been  shown  to  bind  specifically 
to  intestinal  surface  membranes  and  many  cell  surface  proteins 
and  glycoproteins  have  been  solubilized  and  characterized.  A system 
for  studying  bacterial  adherence  to  intestinal  surface  membranes 
has  been  set  up  and  the  mediator  of  this  interaction  is  being  studied. 

The  ability  of  human  lymphocytes  to  kill  antibody  coated  enteric 
bacteria  has  been  identified.  The  isolation  and  characterization 
of  subpopulation  of  human  lymphocytes  with  particular  surface  charac- 
teristics and  patterns  of  response  is  continuing. 

The  major  aim  of  the  Department  continues  to  be  the  elucidation  of 
the  fundamental  mechanism  of  normal  and  pathologic  intestinal  secre- 
tion and  absorption.  It  is  becoming  increasingly  clear  that  infec- 
tious diarrhea  is  related  to  specific  functional  alterations  in  intes- 
tinal cells  and  not  to  general  cell  destruction.  If  the  hormonal 
mediators,  enzymatic  activities,  specific  toxins  or  cell  receptors 
involved  in  enteropathic  diarrhea  can  be  defined,  specific  pharma- 
cologic reversal  or  alteration  of  these  mechanisms  can  be  hoped  for. 

In  addition,  the  factors  involved  in  host  immunologic  resistance 
to  enteric  bacteria  is  being  pursued  with  emphasis  on  defining  the 
mechanisms  of  cell  killing  and  the  subpopulation  of  immunocytes  in- 
volved. 


1.  Collin,  D.P.,  Davis,  J.I.,  and  Charney,  A.N.:  An  Im- 

proved Automated  Determination  of  Na+-K+-Activated 
Adenosine  Triphosphatase.  Manuscript  submitted  to 
Biochimica,  Biophysica  Acta. 

2.  Donowitz,  M.  and  Binder,  H.J. : Effect  of  Bacterial  Entero- 

toxins  on  Fluid  and  Electrolyte  Transport  in  the  Colon. 

Journal  of  Infectious  Disease.  In  Press. 

3.  Kinsey,  M.D.,  Formal,  S.B.,  Dammin,  G.J.,  and  Giannella,  R.A.: 
Fluid  and  Electrolyte  Transport  in  Rhesus  Monkeys  Challenged 
Intracecally  with  Shigella  flexneri  2a.  Infection  and 
Immunity.  In  Press. 


4.  Kinsey,  M.D.,  Dammin,  G.J.,  Formal,  S.B.,  and  Giannella,  R.A.: 
The  Role  of  Altered  Intestinal  Permeability  in  the  Pathogenesis 
of  Salmonella  Diarrhea  in  the  Rhesus  Monkey.  Gastroenterology. 
In  Press. 

5.  MacDermott,  R.P.,  Nash,  G.S.,  Saint,  J.G.,  Clark,  E.A. , 

Zaras,  A.G.,  and  Boldt,  D.  : Autologous  Human  Cellular  Cyto- 

toxicity Induced  by  Mitogenic  and  Non-Mitogenic  Lectins. 

Journal  of  Immunology.  In  Press. 

6.  MacDermott,  R.P.,  Nash,  G.S.,  and  Boldt,  D. : Prearmed  Effector 

Cells  and  the  Target  Cell  Specificity  of  Lectin  Induced 
Cellular  Cytotoxicity.  Manuscript  submitted  to  the  Journal 

of  Immunology. 

7.  MacDermott,  R.P.  and  Nash,  G.S.:  Calcium  Ionophore  A23187 

Induced  Cellular  Cytotoxicity  of  Autologous  Human  Red  Blood 
Cells.  Abstract  submitted  to  1976  Leukocyte  Culture 
Conference. 


921 


T>» 


J 


i ▼T’ 


8. 


Waldmann,  T.A. , Broder,  S.  , Krakauer,  R.  , MacDermott,  R.P., 
Durm,  M. , Goldman,  C.,  and  Meade,  B. : The  Role  of  Suppressor 

Cells  in  the  Pathogenesis  of  Common  Variable  Hypogammaglobu- 
linemia and  the  Immunodeficiency  Associated  with  Myeloma. 
Federation  Proceedings.  In  Press. 


9. 


Boedeker,  E.C.  and  Boldt,  D.A. : Effect  of  Plant  Lectins 
on  Binding  of  Human  Intrinsic  Factor-Vitamin  B12  Complex 
to  Guinea  Pig  Brush  Borders.  Manuscript  in  Preparation. 


10. 


Boedeker,  E.C.,  Higgins,  Y.K.,  Donaldson,  R.M.,  Jr.,  and 
Small,  D.M. : Selective  Solubilization  of  Enzyme  Proteins 

from  Microvillus  Membranes  (MVM)  Using  Non-Ionic  and  Anionic 
Detergents.  Manuscript  in  Preparation. 


11. 


Knodell,  R.G.,  Kinsey,  M.D. , Boedeker,  E.C.,  and  Collin,  D. 
Deoxycholate  Metabolism  in  Alcoholic  Cirrhosis.  Gastro- 
enterology. In  Press. 


12. 


Boedeker,  E.C.,  Kinsey,  M.D.,  and  Knodell,  R.G.  : Decreased 

Hepatic  Synthesis  of  Cholic  Acid  May  Contribute  to  Absent 
Levels  of  Deoxycholic  Acid  in  Cirrhosis.  Presentation  at 
5th  William  Beaumont  Gastrointestinal  Symposium,  March  1976 — 
Manuscript  in  Preparation. 


13. 


Collin,  D.P.,  Kinsey,  M.D.,  and  Donowitz,  M. : Determination 

of  Chenodeoxy cholic  Acid  (CDC)  in  Hyperthyroid  (HT)  Patients 
by  Gas  Chromatography  (GLC)  and  Radioimmunoassay  (RIA) . 
Clinical  Chemistry.  (Abstract)  In  Press. 


Publications 


14. 


Chamey,  A.N.,  Kinsey,  M.D.,  Myers,  L.  , Giannella,  R.A.  , 
and  Gots,  R.E.:  Na+-K+-Activated  Adenosine  Triphophatase 

and  Intestinal  Electrolyte  Transport.  The  Journal  of 
Clinical  Investigation  56:  653-660,  1975. 


15. 


Chamey,  A.N.  and  Donowitz,  M. : Prevention  and  Reversal  of 

Cholera  Toxin-Induced  Intestinal  Secretion  by  Methylpredniso- 
lone  (MF) . Gastroenterology  70:  All/869,  19?6  (Abstract). 


16. 


Chamey,  A.N.  and  Donowitz,  M. : Prevention  and  Reversal 

of  Cholera  Enterotoxin-Induced  Intestinal  Secretion  by 
Methylprednisolone  Induction  of  Na^-K^-ATPase.  Journal 
of  Clinical  Investigation  57:  1590-1599,  1976. 


922 


"1 


.ZZ'Z'Zi'SPT 


■J 


v V 


17.  Charney,  A.N.,  Silva,  P.,  and  Epstein,  F.H.:  An  in  vitro 

inhibitor  of  Na-K-ATPase  present  in  an  adenosinetriphosphate 
preparation.  Journal  of  Applied  Physiology  39:  156-158,  1975. 

18.  Charney,  A.N.,  Gots,  R.E.,  Formal,  S.B.,  and  Giannella,  R.A. : 
Activation  of  Intestinal  Mucosal  Adenylate  Cyclase  by 
Shigella  Dysenteriae  I Enterotoxin.  Gastroenterology  70:  1085- 
1090,  1976. 

19.  Donowitz,  M. , Keusch,  G.T. , and  Binder,  H.J.:  Effect  of 

Shigella  Enterotoxin  on  Electrolyte  Transport  in  Rabbit  Ileum. 
Gastroenterology  69:  1230-1237,  1975. 

20.  Kinsey,  M.D.,  Formal,  S.B.,  Dammin,  G.J.,  and  Giannella,  R.A. : 

The  Importance  of  Oral  Inocjlation  in  the  Pathogenesis  of 
Shigella  Diarrhea.  Gastroenterology  70:  A44/902  1976  (Abstract). 

21.  Giannella,  R.A. , Gots,  R.E.,  Charney,  A.N.,  Greenough,  W.B.,  III, 

and  Formal,  S.B.:  Pathogenesis  of  Salmonella-Mediated  Intestinal 

Fluid  Secretion.  Gastroenterology  69:  1238-1245,  1975. 

22.  Donowitz,  M. , and  Binder,  H.J.:  Jejunal  Fluid  and  Electrolyte 

Secretion  in  Carcinoid  Syndrome.  Digestive  Diseases  20:1115-1122, 
No.  12,  1975. 

23.  Donowitz,  M. , and  Charney,  A.N. : Effect  of  Chronic  Elevation 

of  Blood  Serotonin  on  Intestinal  Transport.  Gastroenterology 
70:  A22/880,  1976  (Abstract). 

24.  Donowitz,  M. , and  Binder,  H.J.:  Effect  of  Dioctyl  Sodium 

Sulfosuccinate  on  Colonic  Fluid  and  Electrolyte  Movement. 
Gastroenterology  69:  941-950,  1975. 

25.  Binder,  H.J.,  and  Donowitz,  M. : A New  Look  at  Laxative 

Action.  Gastroenterology  69:  1001-1005,  1975. 

26.  MacDermott,  R.P.,  Nash,  G.S.,  Saint,  J.G.,  Clark,  E.A., 

Zaras,  A.G.,  and  Boldt,  D. : Autologous  Lectin  Induced  Lympho- 

cytotoxicity  of  Human  Red  Cells.  Federation  Proceedings  35: 

233,  1976  (Abstract). 

27.  MacDermott,  R.P.,  Nash,  G.S.,  Clark,  E.A.,  Saint,  J.G.,  and 

Boldt,  D. : Target  Cell  Specificity  in  Lectin  Induced  Lympho- 

cytotoxicity . Clinical  Research  XXIV:  332A,  1976  (Abstract). 


923 


MacDermott,  R.P.,  Summers,  P.L.,  Reeder,  A. A.,  Lowell,  G.H., 
and  Formal,  S.F.:  Antibody-Dependent,  Cell-Mediated 

Cytotoxicity  of  Shigella.  Gastroenterology  70:  A52/91G, 

1976  (Abstract). 

Lowell,  G.H,,  Smith,  L.F.,  MacDeraott,  R.P.,  and 
Artenstein,  M.S.:  Lymphocyte-Mediated  Antibody-Dependent 

Killing  of  Meningococci  (rage).  Federation  Proceedings  35: 
738,  1976  (Abstract). 

Boedeker,  E.C.,  Higgins,  Y.K.,  Donaldson,  R.M.,  Jr.,  and 
Small,  D.M.:  Selective  Solubilization  of  Enzyme  Proteins 

from  Microvillus  Membranes  (MVM)  Using  Non-Ionic  & Anionic 
Detergents.  Gastroenterology  70:  A7/865,  1976  (Abstract). 

Kinsey,  M.D.,  Donowitz,  M. , Wartofsky,  L.,  Boehm,  T.M. , and 
Collin,  D.P.:  The  Correlation  Between  Pruritus  and  Elevated 

Serum  Chenodeoxycholic  Acid  (CDC)  Levels  in  Hyperthyroidism. 
Gastroenterology  70:  A44/902,  1976  (Abstract). 


10  NO  COOfS*  PROGRAM  ELIMCNT 


i SCUnTiriC  MO  Tf CNNOLOGICAL  »«»r 

_ 003500  Military  Psychiatry 


[Pll  Redacted] 


> 
y 
\ 


RESEARCH  AMD  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

I 0*Tf  PMf  y SUM*  NT  ^TuMMAR^^^^" 

75  07  01  K.  Comp.  U 


b CONTRIBUTING 


62758A 


CONTR.BUTIMG  Cards  114F 


PROJECT  NUMBER 


3A762758A823 


ll  T L I pIMi*  BlA  |fCM«^  ClHilllMilai  C**RJ* 

(U)  Military  Psychiatry 


asemcv  AcrcMiOM* 

DA  OA  6470 


760630 


00 


report  control  irmroi 

Dl)  PH^F.(AH) 6i« 


« VORA  SECURITY* 

J RE  GRADING^ 

IB  CM 

SrM  IRSTR’N 

Bk  BFCCIBtC  OATA  • 

B LEVEL  OR  BUM 

U 

NA 

N 

1. 

CMTRACTOR  ACC  til 

0rn  Dm 

A BOBS  UNIT 

ROPP  UNIT  NUMBER 


030 


1)  START  DATE 

54  09 

IA.  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  DATE 

76  06 

IB  RUNtMNG  AOtNCT 

DA  | 

IA  PCHPORMAHCf  METHOD 

C.  In-House 

IT  ON  TRACT  GRANT 
A OATBS/I  » RfC  f IV« 
h NuHir H * 

e **RE 

■ NO  OR  ABARO 

IMPtRATIOM 

4 AMOUNT 
f.  CUM  AMT. 

IB  RESOURCE t EBTIMATI 

A PROFCBBlOMAL  MAN  VRB 

A FUN  DA  fjn  MuihR) 

FISCAL 

TEAR 

75 

4 

30 

76 

4 

110 

>1  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORGARlIATiOR 

1 

K PERRORAMRG  OROANHATIOM 

i 

1 

«...[•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

HAKE  * 

Walter  Reed  Army 

Institute  of  Researcl 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

Division 

of  Neuropsychiatry 

ADDRESS  * 

ADORE  BE 

Washington,  D.C. 

20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVlBTI«ATOR|R«MaA  MM  «|/|  AuRW<  JMIIN Umj 

RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAME 

Marlowe 

, D.H., 

Ph.D. 

«*«•■  Joy,  COL  R.J.T. 

"‘■•-o*.  (301)427-5210 

(202)576-3551 

SOCIAL 

SECURITY  ACCOUNT  HUMBER  1 

GENERAL  UBE 

ASSOCIATE  IN  VEBTlOA  TORS 

KAMI: 

Pearson , 

MAJ  D.W. 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

NAME: 

Rothberg, 

J.M., 

Ph.D. 

»I  KlfBORM  (***•*•*  BACH  »l*  !•••*<*  n _ . , , , \ , , , 

(U)  Drug  Abuse  Prevention;  (U)  Epidemiology; 
(U)  Military  Psychiatry;  (Dl  Demography 


II  TECHNICAL  ORiECTlVC.*  1«  APPROACH.  IB  PROGRESS  rPM>»««*  l»Mt  *<  *«l  **f*#rapA«  IRaiIMIi  mAh  PN«»R  •»  •«*  fccwlfr  CJPRR<E<R<<RR  C*p*  J 

23.  (U)  The  mission  of  this  unit  is  to  identify  psychiatric,  psychologic,  sociologic 
and  organizational  factors  which  predispose  the  soldier  to  perform  ineffectively  or 
develop  psychiatric  illness  and  to  develop  more  effective  preventive  treatment 
techniques. 

24.  (U)  The  research  methods  of  psychology,  sociology,  clinical  psychiatry,  anthro- 
pology, and  social  work  are  used  to  identify  and  modify  factors  that  contribute  to 
Ineffective  military  performance. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  This  work  unit  has  been  terminated  at  the  end  of  FY  76.  The 
military  family  and  adolescent  dysfunctioning  study  which  describes  the  families  of 
problem  adolescents  who  seek  help  at  an  Army  out-patient  psychiatric  service,  is  in 
the  final  stages  of  data  analysis  and  write  up.  The  mental  health  care  utilization 
pilot  study  examined  patterns  of  mental  health  care  and  the  utilization  of  mental 
health  facilities  by  active  duty  personnel  and  their  dependents.  The  Career  Outcome 
Study  is  a study  of  the  military  and  medical  careers  of  urine  positive  and  negative 
soldiers.  A cohort  selected  from  three  basic  training  posts  has  been  followed  for  24 
months.  Techniques  of  personnel  and  IPDS  record  analysis  have  been  developed.  The 
Social  Adjustment  and  Multiple  Interactive  Determinants  of  Stress  Study  will  study 
t he  way  in  which  social  factors  and  social  support  systems  affect  responses  to 
chronic  stress  using  hemodialysis  and  kidney  transplant  patients  as  well  as  control 
groups  as  participants  in  the  study.  For  technical  report  see  WRATR  Annual  Progress 
Report  1 July  75  - 31  June  76.  Non-drug  related  aspects  of  the  research  are  con- 
tinuing under  new  work  units  032  and  079. 


coolft  loti 


DO,  J 498 


S£t 


IRAior*!  «m»o»«l 


PREVIOUI  COITIONS  OF  Thil  fORM  ARC  OBSOLETE  DO  FORM!  1 ABB  A 
AND  1 ABB'  I I MAN  «B  IFOR  ARM*  UBC)  ARC  OBSOLETE 

925 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 

Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  030  Military  Psychiatry 


Investigators. 
Principal : 
Associate : 


COL  Harry  C.  Holloway,  MC 

David  H.  Marlowe,  Ph.D.;  CPT  George  D.  Bishop,  MSC; 
MAJ  T.  Peter  Bridge,  MC;  Linda  J.  Cunningham,  BA; 
Rosemary  A.  Diliberto,  MSW;  MAJ  Juan  M.  Garcia,  MC; 
MAJ  Steven  P.  Gilbert,  MC;  CPT  Eugene  E.  Grossman, 
MSC;  Glenn  T.  Gurley,  BA;  E6  Nelson  S.  Henry;  MAJ 
William  Hollinshead,  MC;  MAJ  Larry  H.  Ingraham, 

MSC;  Ellen  N.  Levine,  MS;  E4  James  M.  Maedke;  MAJ 
John  H.  Newby,  Jr.,  MSC;  William  G.  Palm,  MA:  MAJ 
David  W.  Pearson,  MC;  E5  Stephen  A.  Perkins,  MAJ 
Daniel  Redmond,  MC;  E5  Alberto  J.  Rivas;  Joseph 
M.  Rothberg,  Ph.D.;  CPT  Robert  J.  Schneider,  MSC; 
Boyd  Stephenson;  LTC  Albert  Tahmoush,  MC;  SSG 
Charles  I.  Taylor 


Description 

This  work  unit  has  been  terminated  due  to  the  reorganization  of 
the  Division  of  Neuropsychiatry.  Much  of  the  research  will  be  carried 
forward  in  the  new  Psychiatric  Epidemiology,  Preventive  Psychiatry  and 
Follow-up  Medical  Evaluation  work  units  for  FY  77.  The  Military 
Psychiatry  work  unit  included  the  following  investigations:  Military 

Family  and  Adolescent  Dysf unctioning  Study;  Studies  of  Individual  and 
Group  Responses  to  Chronic  and  Acute  Stress,  the  Career  Outcome  Study, 
Studies  of  Psychiatric  Epidemiology  in  Active  Duty  Populations,  Demo- 
graphic Analysis  of  the  WRGH  Psychiatric  Patient  Study,  Utilization 
of  Operationalized  Anchor  Points  with  the  Brief  Psychiatric  Rating 
Scale  Study,  and  Follow-up  Studies  of  Human  Volunteers  Who  Ingested 
Psychoactive  Substances. 

1.  The  Military  Family  and  Adolescent  Dysf unctioning  Study 

Description 

a.  The  Military  Family  and  Dysf unctioning  Study  describes  the 
families  of  problem  adolescents  who  seek  help  at  an  Army  outpatient 
psychiatric  service.  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  differentiate 
one  family  from  another  in  terms  of  the  internal  family  relationships, 
the  external  social  relationships,  and  to  classify  the  problems 
described  behaviorally. 


b.  The  military  family  has  been  described  as  being  subiected 
to  considerably  more  fami^^dislocation  and  separation  from  the  father 
than  the  civilian  family.  The  possibility  that  separation,  frequent 
moves,  and  changing  inter  familial  roles  may  contribute  to  the  disorgan- 
ization and  dissolution  of  the  military  family  is  of  clinical  interest. 
Data  collected  from  this  probject  may  contribute  to  the  development  of 
new  primary  and  secondary  preventive  programs  within  Army  psychiatry. 

c.  In  order  to  accomplish  the  study  objectives  a number  of 
data-gather ing  techniques  have  been  employed.  These  techniques  include 
questionnaii es.  structured  and  semi-structured  individual  and  group 
interviews,  1 ndividual  diaries  and  structured  and  unstructured  video 
taped  family  transactions.  A self  administered  questionnaire  pertain- 
ing to  aspects  of  the  study  contained  in  the  three  major  sections  has 
been  developed  and  currently  is  being  tested,  for  feasibility  and 
validity  in  further  studies. 

d.  The  study  is  divided  into  three  main  sections:  the 

problem  section,  the  social  networks  section,  and  the  family  activity 
section.  Sub-sections  at  the  study  direct  their  attention  to:  patterns 

of  interaction  and  communication  among  family  members  during  structured 
and  unstructured  time  periods,  non-compatable  role  relationships  within 
families  and  the  effects  of  recent  life  events  on  the  behavior  of 
family  members.  In  relation  to  the  latter,  all  research  subjects  were 
administered  an  instrument  which  measured  the  occurrence  of  recent 
events  wichin  the  family  milieu. 

Progress 


The  data  collection  portion  of  the  study  has  been  completed  and 
detailed  data  analysis  has  begun.  Provisionally,  a number  of 
impressions  have  emerged  which  seem  worthy  of  reporting  at  this  time. 

The  data  appear  to  indicate  that  the  primary  problems  involved  in 
adolescent  dysfunction  and  its  stressful  effects  on  the  military  family 
are  more  readily  referable  to  the  social  milieu  of  the  family  than  to 
intrinsic  pathology  within  the  family  unit.  Characteristically  the 
families  have  indicated  stress  within  the  family  unit  as  generated  by 
(J ' vague  and  unclear  patterns  of  communications  and  (2)  failure  of 
families  to  negotiate  or  re-negotiate  and  abide  by  behavioral  norms 
consistent  with  psycho-social  and  maturational  changes  occuring  during 
adolescence.  In  an  effort  to  resolve  problems,  family  members  tend  to 
move  toward,  away  from  or  against  individuals  within  the  family  demon- 
strating the  problem  behaviors.  The  data  further  indicate  (1)  a 
general  lack  of  confluence  between  the  social  networks  of  parents, 

(2)  high  levels  of  "perceived  isolation"  in  families  with  female  iden- 
tified patients  and  (3)  fragmented  patterns  of  interaction  among  family 
members  i.e.,  parents  tend  to  go  their  separate  ways  in  relation  to 
leisure-time  pursuits  outside  of  the  home  and  there  is  a tendency  for 
family  members  to  isolate  themselves  in  different  parts  of  the  home 


! I 


even  though  other  family  members  may  be  present.  Analysis  of  the 
recent  life  events  data  on  9 identified  patients  and  the  15  siblings 
shows  that  the  SRE  distinguishes  symptomatic  from  non-symptomatic 
subjects  at  a significant  level  (p=0.01)  and  in  the  predicted  direc- 
tion, i.e.,  the  identified  patients  accumulated  higher  scores  during 
the  6 months  prior  to  intake  at  the  Child  Guidance  Clinic  than  their 
siblings.  It  was  also  noted  that  parents  showed  a tendency  to  under- 
report significant  events  reported  by  their  children  (both  patient  and 
siblings).  We  have  yet  to  trace  out  the  relationship,  if  any,  between 
the  patterns  of  family  interaction,  the  structure  of  their  social  net- 
work relationships,  family  activities,  and  variations  in  role  behaviors 
within  family  units. 


Description 


Neuropsychiatric  casualties  have  represented  a major  source  of 
manpower  loss  and  related  costs  in  military  operations  in  every  armed 
conflict  in  which  the  U.S.  har.  been  involved  in  this  country.  These 
disturbances  appear  to  be  more  closely  related  to  sustained  performance 
and  intense  pulsed  combat  than  to  any  clear  defect  in  the  affected 
soldier  Therefore  Military  Psychiatry  has  maintained  a longstanding 
interest  in  and  committment  to  stress  research.  The  symptomatic  re- 
sponses to  stressful  events  are  in  part  determined  by  the  "coping 
styles"  of  the  individuals  undergoing  stressful  events;  that  is,  one 
man's  stress  is  another  man's  challenge,  and  in  part  to  the  social 
milieu  in  which  an  individual  experiences  a stressful  event,  the  most 
dramatic  example  being  panic  and  flight  by  a group  of  soldiers  vs.  con- 
tinued advance  in  the  face  of  seemingly  insurmountable  odds.  At 
present  we  have  only  the  barest  appreciation  of  how  the  social  milieu 
organizes,  shapes,  and  reinforces  responses  to  stressful  events  and 
processes  interact  with  the  coping  styles  of  the  individuals 
who  respond  to  stress.  Two  studies,  one  analogue  and  the  other  a simu- 
lation, have  been  initiated  to  explore  these  issues.  The  first  con- 
centrates on  chronic,  life-threatening  stress  experienced  by  renal 
transplant  and  hemodialysis  patients.  The  objective  of  this  research 
is  to  describe  the  events  experienced  by  these  patients,  theii  coping 
styles,  and  the  responses  of  such  sgc^al  support  systems  as  their 
families  and  the  care-giving  staff.  Assessment  of  these  parameters 
will  be  made  in  terms  of  outcome  of  treatment  and  social  adjustment. 

The  second  study  is  being  conducted  in  collaboration  with  the  Depart- 
ment of  Medical  Psychophysiology  at  WRAIR  and  the  U.S.  Army  Research 
Institute  of  Environmental  Medicine.  Subjects  for  this  study  will  be 
artillary  fire  direction  control  teams  from  the  82nd  Airborne  Division 
who  will  be  brought  to  the  laboratory  in  Natick  to  perform  their 
military  mission  in  a simulated  battlefield  scenario  that  requires 
continuous  performance  over  several  days  under  conditions  approaching 
and  exceeding  work  capability  for  successful  performance.  Measures 
will  be  taken  of  group  performance,  physiological  functioning,  and 
group/individual  rsponses  to  the  performance  demands. 


928 


Progress 


Contacts  with  hemodialysis  and  renal  transplant  patients  as  well 
as  suitable  controls  have  been  made  and  follow-through  interviewing  and 
observation  has  begun.  Attaining  the  full  complement  of  20  research 
participants  has  been  hindered  by  administrative  changes  that  have 
reduced  the  number  of  qualified  patients  at  WRAMC.  Thus  far  5 sub- 
jects and  their  spouses  have  been  seen  and  evaluated.  With  respect 
to  the  Fire  Direction  Control  project,  two  teams  will  play  out  the 
scenario  at  Natick,  MA. , in  February  and  April  1977.  Members  of  the 
department  will  observe  both  runs,  collect  relevant  questionnaire 
data  on  the  participants,  and  describe  the  ecological  context  of 
the  experiment  as  well  as  the  sequence  of  events  and  coping  strategies 
of  the  groups.  These  descriptive  studies  will  provide  an  empirical 
basis  for  deciding  on  the  suitability  of  such  laboratory  simulations 
for  future  studies  of  work  groups  under  stress. 


3.  The  Career  Outcome  Study 

Description 

A cohort  of  drug  users  who  entered  the  Army  during  1972-1973  was 
defined  in  order  to  prospectively  study  their  individual  military  and 
medical  careers.  Since  the  Army  draws  from  civilian  age  group  at 
highest  risk  for  drug  abuse,  urinanalysis  screening  for  illicit  drugs 
was  routinely  done  at  the  reception  stations  and  all  positives  were 
to  have  been  medically  evaluated.  This  study  was  designed  to  assess 
the  long  range  behavioral  Implications  of  urine  positivisity  at  the 
reception  station  and,  indirectly,  to  evaluate  the  medical  evaluation 
procedure.  After  matching  against  the  Army  personnel  files,  the 
cohorts  consist  of  1967  individuals  with  positive  urines  and  2432 
negative  urine  controls.  The  rate  cf  matching  was  slightly  over  80% 
for  each  cohort. 

Progress 

a.  Retention  on  active  duty:  The  time  course  of  the  attri- 

tion rates  for  the  two  groups  was  similar  with  44%  of  the  (U-pos)  and 
53%  of  the  (U-neg)  group  remaining  on  active  duty  after  their  first  24 
months.  The  groups  were  initially  18.6%  and  15.0%  draftee  at  the  time 
of  entry  into  the  service. 

b.  Medical  impact:  Provisional  analysis  of  the  combined 

hospitalization  and  personnel  data  (episodes  per  mean  strength)  shows 
that: 

(1)  The  total  hospitalization;  ratv.p  during  the  1st  6 

months  of  service  were  over  4 titiis  greater  than  the 
total  hospitalization  rates  during  the  4th  6 months 
of  service,  for  each  g;  )up. 


929 


(2)  Ti.e  respiratory  disoar  ' hospita..  iza.  ion  rates  was 
almost  30  times  great  -r  during  the  1st  6 months  if 
service  than  the  respiratory  disease  hospitalize 
tion  rate  during  the  4th  b month  period,  for  each 
group. 

(3)  The  (U-pos)  group  had  1/3  more  hospitalizations  than 
the  (U-neg)  group. 

(4)  The  (U-pos)  group  had  1/7  more  hospitalizations  than 
the  (U-neg)  group  after  discounting  all  drug  caused 
hospitalizations. 

(5)  The  (U-pos)  group  hau  1/2  more  hospitalizations  for 
mental  disease  than  the  (U-neg)  group. 

(6)  The  , ' •-  ) group  had  1/4  fewer  hospitalizations  for 

mental  disease  than  the  (U-neg)  group  after  dis- 
counting sit  drug  cuased  hospitalizations. 


4.  Studies  of  Psychiatric  Epidemiology  in  Active  Duty 
Populations 

Description 

Utilizing  material  available  in  the  Individual  Patient  Data 
System  a series  of  p lot  analysis  have  been  completed.  These  pro- 
visional studies  concerned  with  the  distribution  and  affects  upon 
The  Army  Medical  Departments  resources  of  psychiatric  and  psycho- 
somatic disease  represent  the  initia^  ghase  of  the  Depart men* 1 s 
program  in  Psychiatric  Fpidemiology. 

Progress 

following  provisional  summaries  have  thus  far  been  -o  jet 
Th  ■ data  arc  considered  provisional  unti1  IPDS  tabulations  " 
cvs  ■’  Table  fcr  conf.ir  ration.  Further  summaries  are  ir.  proctn>., 

a.  Alcohol,  Drug  and  Psychiatric  Data  Summary 


b.  Hospital  and  Total  Days  Lost  Data  Summary 

c.  RVN  Intentially  Self  Inflicted  Wound.  Data  Samma r v 

d.  NP  Case  Registry;  counts  of  individuals,  episode?, 
records,  hospital  days  and  non  effective  days  for  selected  diagnasr i 
categories  by  sex  by  region  by  year  for  selected  active  duty  Army 
hospital  disposition  records. 

e.  Sexual  Deviation  Summary 


I 


. t_-d  i al  iini.i  x Data  ’ nmarv 

H'  t>o /A ] col.o2  Dio-.  use/Symplom  Data  Summary 


5.  Demographic  Analyst.;  c f WRGH  Patient  Populations  1S73-5 

Description 

Data  on  all  admissions  to  the  Psychiatric  Service  at  WRAM  for 
the  period  1973-5  originally  gathered  by  COMPSY  (Computer  Sunuort 
in  Military  Psychiatry)  has  been  turned  over  by  MISO,  WRAMC,  to 
members  of  the  Department  of  Psychiatry.  The  analyse.-  planned  are 
designed  to  determine  whether  demographic  factors  affect  patterns  of 
diagnosis  and  disposition  of  psychiatric  patients. 

Progress 

The  data  are  presently  ieing  arrayed  and  analyzed.  It  is 
ant ! ipated  that  the  project  will  be  completed  by  the  end  of  7T. 


i 

i 

m 


6.  Utilization  of  Operationalized  a-  !.o.v  rc'nts  with  the  Hi  ief 
Pcvcuiatric  Fating  Scale 

Description 


This  study  is  being  carried  out  in 
Institute  of  Mental  Health,  it  involves 
furction  of  operationalized  anchor  points 
reliability  with  a frequently  used  patie 
sJs  is  that  presence  of  c'ucii  anchor  pot 
greater  diagnostic  consensus  among  phys: 


o1 1 • fcoraticT.  w4th  the  National 
an  at  ^mp;  re  evaluate  the 
. .nation  to  inter-judge 
at  uk  scale.  The  hypothe- 
• vhe  scaie  will  lead  to 


Progress 


Videotaped  interviews  nave  been  conducted,  under  an  tun  Protocol 
and  two  of  these  selected  for  showing  to  a panel  of  40  psychiatrists, 
both  military  and  civilian.  30  psychiatrists  have  tnus  far  partici- 
pated in  the  study.  Completion  of  the  study  is  anticipated  before  the 
end  of  7T. 


7.  Follow-up  Studies  of  Human  Volunteers  Who  Ingested  Psychoactive 
Substances  (LSD) 


Description 


At  the  Mandate  of  tne  Surgeon  General,  he  Division  of  Neuro- 
psychiatry, WRAIR,  was  tasked  with  the  development  of  a research  plan 
and  protocol  to  determine  whether  or  not  there  have  been  long-term 
medical  or  psyechoLogical  sequelae  following  exposure  of  human 
volunteers  to  LSD. 


931 


<l  V • *■ 


Progress 


As  per  the  tasking  letter  assigning  the  WRA1R  this  project,  an 
operations  plan  was  devised,  a pilot  group  of  28  former  subjects, 
mecially  evaluated  by  HSC  at  WRGH,  and  a second  pilot  plan  formulated. 
Contact  letters  have  been  sent  to  488  former  participants  in  Army 
Psychoactive  drug  experiments  and,  at  present,  218  individuals  are 
awaiting  examinations  while  attempts  are  being  made  to  contact  others. 
Special  psychological  and  psychiatric  examination  modules  have  been 
designed  as  has  a comprehensive  physical  examination  system.  Control 
groups  have  been  chosen.  The  follow-up  evaluation  study  will  enter 
its  second  pilot  pahse  in  7T  and  should  commence  as  a full  scale 
operation,  with  the  cooperation  of  Hospitals  in  Health  Services 
Command,  during  FY  77. 


932 


garapp^f 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 
Work  Unit  030  Military  Psychiatry 
Literature  Cited. 


References : 


1.  Baker,  S.L.  et.al:  Impact  of  father  absence  on  personality 

factors  of  boys:  I.  an  evaluation  of  the  military  family's  adjustment. 

Paper  presented  at  American  Orthopsychiatric  Association  Meeting, 
Washington,  DC,  March  1967. 

2.  Baker,  S.L.  et.al.:  Impact  of  father  absence:  III.  problems 

of  family  reintegration  following  prolonged  father  absence.  Paper 
presented  at  American  Orthopsychiatric  Association  Meeting,  Chicago,  IL, 
1968. 


3.  Pederson,  F.A.:  Relationships  between  father  absence  and 

emotional  disturbance  in  male  military  dependents.  Merill  - Palmer 
Quarterly,  12:321-322,  1966. 

4.  Pederson,  F.A.;  Sullivan,  E.J.:  Relationships  among  geographi- 

cal mobility,  parental  attitudes,  and  emotional  disturbances  in 
children.  American  Journal  of  Orthopsychiatry,  34:575-580,  1964. 

5.  Bridge,  T.P.;  "Suicide  Prevention  Centers:  an  ecological 
evaluation."  Accepted  for  publication  in  Journal  of  Nervous  and 
Mental  Disease. 

6.  Bridge,  T.P.;  "Distributed  adolescent's  recall  of  recent 
2vents"  Paper  presented  at  A.O.A.,  Atlanta,  GA. 

7.  Datel,  W.E.;  A summary  of  source  data  in  military  psychiatric 
epidemiology.  Alexandria,  Va. : Defense  Documentation  Center,  AD 
//A021265,  1976.  Prepared  while  author  was  on  assignment  to  Division 

of  Neuropsychiatry,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research. 

8.  Wells,  J.D.;  Need  assessment  in  human  sources  consolidation 
efforts.  Alcohol  and  Drug  Abuse  Conference,  U.S.A.  TRADOC,  Norkfolk, 

VA. 


Publications 


1.  Rothherg,  J.M.  A small  sample  application  of  discriminant 
analysis.  Abstracts  of  the  Advanced  Semina?;  on  Classif icaition  and 
Clustering,  1976,  University  of  Wisconsin  Mathematics  Research  Center. 


933 


mmm 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

>.  AMACY  ACfllMON* 

DA  OA  6456 

76  06  30 

1 OAT*  Mlv  luVAY 

75  07  01 

A KIND  OR  lUMMAAV 

1 IUMMAMY  bCTV*  |A  »OR«  IfCUMTV* 

u 1 u 

1 MIOMAMNC*  A Mtr«  INSTN'N 

MA  NL 

•lx  (ACCIRIC  DATA  • UVILOI  SUM 

CONTMACTOM  ACC  f SI 

Err.  □« 

10  NO  <ODES*  PROCRAH  (LfMCNT 

MMOJIC  • NUHBCM 

TASK  ARIA  MUMSCN 

■ OI*A  unit  mumhd 

<L  RAIMA  A Y 

62Z5SA 

3A76275PAP23 

00 

031 

b ..om  maul  img 

( < ONTAlMUTlMG 

CARDS  114F 

((j)  Military  Performance  and  Stress:  Factors  Leading  to 

Decrements  of  Performance  A Disease 

II  IOIrTIHC  AMO  TICMHOLOOICAI  AMIAt* 

Q162DQ  Stress  Physiology Q134QQ  Psychology QQ94QQ  Man-Machine  Relat 

1 1 ST  AMT  OA  f E 

_ £1_H7 

If  (ITMAT* O COMAtltlftM  OATC 

76  06 

tf  FUNDING  AGfMCV 

nA  1 

• • MI  M FORMA  NCI  m;Thoo 

■C.  In-House 

[Pll  Redacted] 


II  GtNCAAL  Utt 


< OMT MAC  GHAI 


NO  or  AMAMQ 


' DA 


f.  CUM  AMT 


if  fllfONtlKt  OOO  OROMIIlATlOH  ~ | 

“““’’Halter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  2 DO 12 


if  IPUNtlSi  t IMD'VIDU 

M AMf 


Joy,  COL  R.  J.  T. 
i , ■ rno—,  202-576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

■ • • ••-  ■ ■ "||  ■» — 


*•  MUURCII  It  TIMA  Tt 


IltCAL 

VI  AM 


75 


76 


A MOflMIfAl  MAN  VMf 


3.5 


T" 


A f UMOS  (»,  •*»•■*) 


130 


215 


“■‘Walter  Reed  Ai'iny  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
Washington,  DC  20012 

MMNCIMAL  IM  VI 1 1 16 A TOM  ffum/iA  MAJf  II  U t «uA^< 

**»■•  Hegge,  F.  W.  Ph.O. 

202-427-5521 

tOCIAl  fCCUMlTV  ACCOUNT  MUM  MI  M 
AMOCIATI  (M  VI  t TIO  A TOMf 

■ AM  Jennings,  CPT  J.  R. 

Wood,  CP i C.  C. 


(U)  tlertrophysiology;  (l))  Biorhythms;  (TTJ  PsychoDhysl ~ 

logy;  (U)  Operant  Conditioning;  (U)  Stress;  (U)  Performance;  (U)  Human  Volunteer 


II  TfCHMICAL  OMJlCTlVC.*  I a.  AAAMOACM,  ft  MMOOMIM  (MlmUMt  IwMrHVUA/  MmtfKV  |y  m»l«  PMM*  MU  *<  IMw'fr  ClMllflAllM  C*A  j 

23.  (U)  Stressful  environments,  physiological  conditions  and  performance  demands 
likely  to  produce  significant  deterioration  in  the  accomplishment  of  a soldier's 
mission  are  studied.  The  behavioral  and  physiological  functions  that  contribute  to 
deteriorated  performance  are  identified  and  therapeutic  and  prophylactic  strategies 
are  developed. 

24.  (U)  Using  psychophysiological  and  operant  methodology,  time  series  analyses, 
and  computer-based  control  and  analysis  techniques,  behavioral  and  physiological 
events  are  isolated,  analyzed,  and  controlled.  Endogenous  and  exogenous  factors 
contributing  to  behavioral  and  physiological  rhythmicity  and  performance  levels 
are  studied  under  specified  normal  and  stressful  conditions. 

25.  (U)  75  D7  - 76  06  This  work  ueit  has  been  terminated  as  a result  of  the  re- 

organization of  the  Division  of  Neuropsychiatry.  Work  was  accomplished  in  the  areas 
of  stress  effects  on  speech  recogn  ion,  and  the  role  of  cardiac  cycle  changes  in  a 
performance  task  involving  a tradeoff  between  speed  and  accuracy.  The  technology 
needed  for  the  monitoring  of  psychophysiologic  functions  under  field  conditions  was 
advanced.  For  technical  report,  s»e  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual 
Progress  Report,  1 JUL  75  - 3D  JUN  ’6. 


DD  '°"“„1493 


034 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYChlATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  031  Military  performance  and  stress:  Factors  '’eading  to 

decrements  oi  performance  and  disease 

Investigators. 

Principal:  Frederick  W.  Hegge,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  CPT  John  R.  Jennings,  MSC;  CPT  Charles  C.  Wood, 

MSC;  David  R.  Thorne,  Ph.D.;  Alison  L.  Lee; 

Stanley  Hall,  B.A.;  SP6  Theodore  M.  DeWitt 

Description 

An  understanding  of  the  biological  substrates  of  stress  and  per- 
formance decrement  is  important  both  to  military  psychiatry  and  to 
the  Derformance  of  normal  military  missions.  The  basic  research 
strategy  of  this  work  unit  is  psychophysiological  in  nature,  involving 
concurrent  measures  of  behavioral  processes  and  physiological  activity. 
Special  attention  is  paid  to  stressors  having  their  origin  in  continu- 
ous performance  requirements,  sleep  deprivation,  temporal  disorientation, 
and  drug  use.  Due  recognition  is  given  to  the  fact  that  performance  is 
not  a unitary  construct,  but  a continuum  of  human  activity  ranging  from 
simple  motor  behavior  to  the  most  complex  cognitive  activity.  Research 
is  oirected  to  the  experimental  delineation  of  interactions  between 
stressors  and  complex  performance  that  are  functional  analogs  of 
militarily  relevant  activities.  These  include  vigilance,  the  integra- 
tion of  multiple  sources  of  information,  and  decision  processes.  When 
necessary  for  scientific  clarity,  complex  performances  are  analyzed 
in  terms  oc  more  basic  processes  involving  sensorimotor,  attentional 
and  mnemonic  components.  A major  attempt  is  made  to  distinguish 
between  variations  in  performance  which  reflect:  a)  changes  in  an 

individual's  basic  sensitivity,  efficiency,  or  capacity  to  perform  a 
given  task;  and  b)  changes  in  the  response  biases,  response  criteria, 
or  strategies  employed  in  task  performance.  Whether  stress-induced 
performance  decrements  involve  one  or  both  of  these  components  can 
have  important  implications  for  an  understanding  of  stress-performance 
relationships  and  for  the  design  and  implementation  of  counteractive 
measures.  This  work  unit  is  terminated,  however,  non-drug  related 
aspects  of  the  research  are  being  continued  under  work  unit  039, 

Military  Stress:  Health,  Performance,  and  Injury  Factors. 

Progress 

1.  Development  of  Speed-Accuracy  Tradeoff  Functions  as 
Performance  Measures 

An  important  example  of  the  distinction  between  efficiency  and 
response  bias  components  of  performance  is  the  development  of  speed- 
accuracy  tradeoff  functions  for  use  in  choice  react  n time  (RT)  and 

other  experiments  which  measure  response  latency.  Ch,  :s  ’r  techniques 


935 


have  played  an  important  role  in  our  human  performance  research  for  a 
number  of  reasons.  First,  the  requirement  for  rapid,  accurate  execu- 
tion of  specified  behaviors  is  critical  to  successful  performance  of 
many  military  tasks.  Second,  by  varying  the  form  and  complexity  of 
the  decisions  required  in  choice  RT  tasks,  sensitive  measures  of  a 
wide  variety  of  human  information-processing  capabilities  can  be 
obtained.  Third,  choice  RT  procedures  permit  a decomposition  of  task 
performance  into  a series  of  conceptual  stages  or  processes  which  may 
be  influenced  to  varying  degrees  by  stress  and  other  varables  (34,  37). 

Despite  these  advantages,  choice  RT  procedures  as  traditionally 
employed  do  not  allow  efficiency  and  response  bias  components  of 
performance  to  be  distinguished.  For  example,  the  time  required  for 
an  individual  to  detect  the  occurrence  of  a target  signal  might  be 
increased  under  stress  for  either  of  the  following  reasons:  a)  because 
stress  decreases  basic  performance  efficiency;  or  b)  because  a more 
conservative  criterion  for  responding  has  been  adopted  under  the 
stressful  conditions.  These  two  alternative  explanations  would  require 
very  different  means  for  counteracting  the  stress-induced  decrement  in 
performance,  yet  conventional  experimental  procedures  are  powerless  to 
distinguish  between  them. 

Over  the  past  two  years  we  have  contributed  to  the  development 
of  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  functions  as  performance  measures  which 
are  capable  of  distinguishing  between  efficiency  and  response  bias 
effects.  These  measures  are  based  on  the  observation  that  individuals 
are  capable  of  trading  increases  in  speed  for  decreases  in  accuracy 
and  vice  versa  over  the  entire  range  from  chance  to  near-perfect 
accuracy  (e.g.,  23,  31,  35).  By  inducing  subjects  to  systematically 
vary  their  relative  emphasis  on  speed  versus  accuracy  (i.e.,  their 
speed-accuracy  criterion),  a complete  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  function 
may  be  derived  which  expresses  the  functional  relationship  between  RT 
and  accuracy  over  a wide  range  of  possible  criteria.  Such  functions 
may  be  thought  of  as  operating-characteristics  for  response  latency 
in  the  same  sense  that  the  functional  relationship  between  hit  rate 
and  false  alarm  rate  constitutes  an  operating-characteristic  for 
signal  detection  performance  (12,  36).  Changes  in  an  individual's 
speed-accuracy  criterion  are  represented  by  shifts  in  performance 
along  a single  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  function.  In  contrast,  changes 
in  performance  efficiency  are  represented  by  a shift  In  performance 
from  one  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  function  to  another. 

Two  papers  describing  our  initial  work  on  speed-accuracy  tradeoff 
functions  have  been  published  in  the  past  year.  The  first  (Pub.  8) 
presents  the  results  of  empirical  and  computer-simulated  comparisons 
of  alternative  procedures  for  computing  empirical  speed-accuracy 
tradeoff  functions.  This  paper  also  discusses  the  importance  of  the 
relationship  between  speed  and  accuracy  within  and  between  different 
speed-accuracy  criteria.  Some  theories  (e.g.,  33)  predict  that  the 
speed-accuracy  relationship  should  be  invariant  across  changes  in 


936 


I , 


criteria,  while  others  predict  different  functions  for  different 
criteria.  Our  data  which  are  summarized  in  Figure  1 demonstrate  that 
the  speed-accuracy  relationship  is  not  invariant  across  changes  in 
criteria.  This  figure  displays  five  different  speed-accuracy  trade- 
off functions,  each  obtained  under  different  speed-accuracy  criteria. 
As  these  functions  clearly  show,  the  relationship  between  accuracy 
and  RT  varied  systematically  across  criteria.  That  is,  accuracy 
appeared  to  be  more  closely  related  to  the  RTs  that  subjects  were 
attempting  to  achieve  than  to  the  actual  RTs  attained. 


The  second  paper  (Pub.  2)  describes  the  application  of  our  metho- 
dological developments  to  the  problem  of  assessing  the  effects  of  low- 
to-moderate  doses  of  alcohol  on  choice  RT  performance.  Although  pre- 
vious experiments  using  conventional  RT  methodology  have  produced 
conflicting  conclusions  regarding  alcohol  effects  (5),  the  use  of  the 
speed-accuracy  tradeoff  approach  revealed  a clear  decrease  in  perfor- 
mance efficiency  under  alcohol  which  was  monotonically  related  to 
alcohol  dose.  The  results  of  this  experiment  are  described  more  fully 
in  last  year's  Annual  Report. 


We  have  '•ontinued  to  investigate  both  conceptual  and  methodologi- 
cal aspects  of  the  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  procedure  with  the  goal  of 
maximizing  the  stability  of  the  data  obtained  while  minimizing  the 
time  and  experimental  effort  required.  These  characteristics  are 
highly  desirable  for  the  application  of  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  proce- 
dures to  the  study  of  continuous  performance  and  other  stress-related 
variables.  A significant  Improvement  has  been  achieved  by  changing 
the  reward  contingencies  from  the  "RT  deadline"  procedure  employed 
previously  to  a "RT  target"  procedure.  The  continuous  and  symmetric 
reward  function  of  the  latter  procedure  appears  to  generate  more 
stable  and  systematic  variations  in  performance  than  the  discon- 
tinuous reward  function  used  previously.  In  the  RT  target  procedure 
subjects  receive  monetary  reward  for  correct  responses  In  proportion 
to  the  similarity  between  obtained  RTs  and  the  specified  RT  target. 
Rewards  are  maximal  for  RTs  exactly  equal  to  the  target  value  and 
decrease  linearly  and  symmetrically  for  both  shorter  and  longer  RTs. 

By  systematic  variation  of  the  RT  target  values  in  different  blocks 
of  trials,  performance  over  the  full  range  of  speed-accuracy  criteria 
may  be  assessed. 


We  have  also  continued  to  investigate  the  question  of  invariance 
of  the  speed-accuracy  relationship  over  changes  in  speed-accuracy 
criteria.  The  conclusion  of  Wood  & Jennings  (Pub.  8)  that  the  speed- 
accuracy  relationship  is  not  invariant  over  changes  in  criteria  has 
been  confirmed  in  two  subsequent  experiments.  Together,  these  data 
provide  additional  support  for  our  previous  conclusion  that  accuracy 
is  more  closely  related  to  the  RTs  that  subjects  were  attempting  to 
achieve  than  to  the  actual  RTs  attained.  In  collaboration  with  Dr. 
Joseph  S.  Lappin  of  Vanderbilt  University,  we  will  reanalyze  data  from 


937 


7^- 


ISO  200  230  300  350  100 

REACTION  TIME  (™»e) 


Empirical  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  functi'j.  s 
derived  from  different  RT  deadl  ine  condi  I/:...' , 
Subjects  were  rewarded  for  correct  responses 
occurring  before  the  sDecified  deadline  values 
(175,  225,  275,  325,  and  375  msec,  respectively) 


I 


previous  «t>oer  iments  and  '.'or?,  rt  new  data  concern1' ng  the  relative  ef- 
fects of  variability  in  perfo  ranee  ef'iciency  ane  response  criteria 
on  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  functions.  These  results  should  increase 
:■  r uo-treland'r'j  Gf  t^e  prepartie  of  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  functions 
and  mc.«.e  , ssible  tieir  direct  app’ ’cation  in  continuous  performance 
and  related  experiments.  ' number  of  the  experi  lents  in  the  remainder 
of  this  renor+  will  illustrate  the  use  of  the  speed-accuracy  tradeoff 
and  related  signal  detection  4ec''niques  in  the  study  of  stress- 
performance  relationships.  Future  work  will  apply  these  procedures 
to  military  task  environments  such  as  the  team  performance  of  a Fire 
Direction  Center  as  described  in  Section  4 below. 


2_. Cardiac  Cycle  Effects  and  Speed-Accuracy  Trade-Off 


The  speed-accuracy  trade-off  design  was  applied  to  a potentially 
important  problem  in  stress  research  which  might  be  clarified  by  the 
improved  performance  measurement  inherent  in  the  design.  Certain 
neurophysiological  as  well  as  performance  studies  have  reported  a 
phasic  variation  in  an  organism's  arousal  or  capability  to  perform 
that  is  synchronized  with  the  cardiac  cycle  (2,  21).  Autonomic  feed- 
back from  cardiovascular  events  is  viewed  as  inhibiting  central  ner- 
vous system  activation,  'nder  relatively  normal  conditions,  evidence 
for  such  a central-autonomic  interaction  can  be  provided  by  changes  in 
performance  associated  with  changing  autonomic  tone  within  the  cardiac 
cycle.  Under  highly  stressful  conditions  producing  continuous  sympa- 
thetic hyperactivity,  a chronic  performance  decrement  might  be  observed. 
In  the  simplest  model  of  such  regulation,  sympathetic  nervous  system 
hyperactivity  would  lead  to  heightened  autonomic  afferent  input  to 
the  brain.  This  would  decrease  central  nervous  system  activity  and 
result  in  a performance  decrement. 


Our  initial  wor-k  on  this  problem  was  focused  on  attempting  to 
confirm  the  existence  of  changes  in  performance  or  cardiac  responsivity 
as  a function  of  the  timing  cf  task  related  events  relative  to  the 
cardiac  cycle.  The  term  "cardiac  cycle  time"  is  used  to  refer  to  the 
time  interval  between  the  R wave  of  the  electrocardiogram  and  the 
task-related  event  of  interest.  The  cardiac  cycle  time  of  stimulus 
onset  was  manipulated  to  investigate  three  specific  relationships: 


a)  cardiac  cycle  effects  on  choice  RT  performance; 


b) 

c) 


cardiac  cycle  effects  on  the  correlation  between 
anticipatory  cardiac  deceleration  and  RT; 


cardiac  cycle  effects  on  cardiac  inter  beat  intervals 
(IBIs)  during  and  imnediately  following  the  RT  stimulus. 


The  latter  two  relations  refer  to  the  well-established  cardiac  decel- 
eration which  occurs  immediately  prior  to  a temporally  predictable  RT 
stimulus  (16,  21).  The  Laceys'  (21,  22)  have  previously  reported  that 
this  cardiac  deceleration  is  correlated  to  RT  and  that  the  magnitude 


. . i r ... 

mi  ...I  w ...  A.,  i*..- 


m 


939 


of  this  correlation  Is  a function  of  the  timing  of  the  RT  stimulus 
relative  to  the  R wave.  In  addition  they  have  reported  that  the  IBI 
concurrent  with  the  RT  stimulus  is  lengthened  if  the  RT  stimulus  occurs 
early  as  opposed  to  late  in  the  IBI. 

In  the  current  experiment,  five  target  RT  conditions  were  employed 
with  RT  stimuli  presented  either  simultaneous  with  the  R wave  or  350 
msec  later.  Performance  was  assessed  using  RT,  accuracy,  and  speed- 
accuracy  tradeoff  measures.  The  results  failed  to  support  any  effect 
of  cardiac  cycle  time  on  any  performance  measure  or  on  the  correlation 
of  IBI  and  performance.  In  other  words,  none  of  the  performance- 
related  measures  differed  signl-lcantly  between  the  0 and  350  msec 
delay  conditions.  This  experiment  cannot  itself  disprove  the  functional 
significance  of  autonomic  feedback  for  central  nervous  excitability. 

In  combination  with  previous  reports,  however,  it  seems  unprofitable 
to  continue  study  of  this  effect  in  humans  until  further  physiological 
details  of  the  phenomenon  can  be  garnered  from  animal  preparations. 

Strong  support  was  found  for  the  effect  of  cardiac  cycle  time  on 
IBIs  concurrent  and  subsequent  to  the  RT  signal.  Figure  2 presents 
the  effect  cardiac  cycle  time  on  cardiac  IBIs  during  the  task.  The 
arrows  on  the  abscissa  indicate  the  occurrence  of  the  RT  stimulus. 

When  the  RT  stimulus  was  delayed  by  350  msec.,  the  shift  from  decel- 
eration to  acceleration  was  delayed  into  the  beat  following  the  stimu- 
lus. The  influence  of  this  delay  continues  to  be  seen  throughout  the 
next  three  beats. 

The  use  of  the  speed-accuracy  trade-off  design  allowed  a detailed 
assessment  of  the  above  cardiac  cycle  effect  and  also  produced  confirm- 
ing evidence  of  the  effects  of  attention  and  motor  demands  on  cardiac 
IBI.  The  speed-accuracy  design  required  Ss  to  pace  their  RT  to  various 
targets  producing  five  sets  of  RT  data  differing  in  mean  RT  for  each 
subject.  An  examination  of  these  data  showed  that  the  cardiac  cycle 
effect  differed  as  a function  of  RT.  Figure  3 illustrates  this  effect 
by  plotting  for  each  RT  grouping  beats  3,  4,  and  5 of  the  cardiac 
response.  Looking  particularly  at  the  point  when  cardiac  deceleration 
shifts  to  acceleration,  one  sees  that  this  point  successively  shifts 
to  later  times  throughout  the  initial  RT  blocks  of  the  0 delay  condi- 
tion. This  shift  is  largely  completed  prior  to  the  RT  blocks  of  the 
350  msec  delay  condition.  This  data  suggested  that  the  appropriate 
unit  of  time  for  the  expression  of  cardiac  cycle  time  effects  is  the 
time  interval  between  the  R wave  and  response  completion. 

In  addition  to  the  cardiac  cycle  effects  just  described,  the 
amount  of  anticipatory  cardiac  deceleration  and  accelerative  recovery 
also  varied  systematically  with  RT.  These  variations  suggested  atten- 
tional  and  motor  influences  on  the  cardiac  response.  The  requirements 
of  the  fast  targets  for  attention  might  be  presumed  to  be  higher  than 
that  for  relatively  slower  targets.  Cardiac  deceleration,  under  cer- 
tain conditions,  has  been  associated  with  attention  (6,  16).  In  the 


'JSSBSZX 


t*-  X *»*• 


(iai  jo  03SUJ)  I 1V39  - 1V39  “IVNIQdO 


942 


current  data  the  magnitude  of  deceleration  prior  to  the  stimulus  de- 
creased as  the  RT's  slowed  progressively.  A similar  trend  in  magnitude 
of  cardiac  acceleration  after  the  RT  was  observed:  acceleration  was 

maximal  at  short  RT  and  minimal  at  long.  This  appears  to  reflect  a 
coupling  between  IBI  and  motor  requirements  (30). 

An  interpretative  summary  relating  the  findings  to  neurophysiolo- 
gical studies  of  vagal  effects  on  IBI  may  be  useful.  Two  backgrourd 
findings  must  be  mentioned:  a)  cardiac  deceleration  in  similar  RT 
situations  is  due  almost  entirely  to  vagal  activation  (29)  and  b) 
vagal  input  to  the  pacemaker  is  known  to  occur  predominantly  in  the 
initial  one-third  of  the  cardiac  cycle  (7,  17,  19,  24).  With  these 
facts  in  mind,  it  appears  that  the  RT  task  sets  up  a clear  temporal- 
attentional  anticipation  of  the  stimuli.  This  state  induces  a cardiac 
deceleration  proportional  to  the  strength  of  the  anticipatory  state. 

The  deceleration  is  terminated  by  the  conjunction  of  task  completion 
(RT)  and  the  timing  of  completion  relative  to  the  R wave.  Decelera- 
tion is  terminated  immediately  at  task  completion  only  if  completion 
occurs  prior  to  the  major  vagal  input  for  the  beat.  The  strength  of 
accelerative  recovery  following  the  RT  is  then  viewed  as  a function 
of  the  motor  requirements  of  the  RT  performed. 

The  results  of  the  experiment  provide  a detailed,  consistent 
picture  of  the  psychophyslological  control  of  cardiac  IBI  during  an 
RT  task.  They  fail,  however,  to  show  significant  effects  of  IBI  or 
cardiac  cycle  on  RT  performance.  The  seemingly  direct  relationship 
between  the  current  cardiac  IBI  results  and  neurophysiological  evidence 
of  the  timing  of  vagal  influence  on  the  pacemaker  may  prove  to  have 
significant  applications.  These  would  center  around  use  of  the  RT 
technique  to  noninvasively  assess  vagal  tone  and  responsivity.  Tim- 
ing anomalies  in  the  cardiac  IBI  response  to  RT  tasks  might  reason- 
ably be  seen  as  indictlve  of  abnormalities  in  the  vagal  control  of 
the  heart.  It  is  conceivable  that  such  abnormalities  may  occur  under 
conditions  of  stress  as  well  as  under  conditions  of  physical  disease. 

3.  Efficiency  and  Response  Bias  Effects  in  Performance  Under 
Speed  Stress  " ’ 


Optimal  performance  in  a wide  variety  of  military  tasks  requires 
the  use  of  two  fundamentally  distinct  classes  of  information:  a)  the 
information  immediately  available  in  stimuli  which  are  present  con- 
currently during  task  performance;  and  b)  information  concerning  the 
probabilistic  structure  of  task-related  events  derived  from  an  indivi- 
dual's history  with  the  task.  The  relative  contributions  of  these 
two  classes  of  Information  were  Investigated  In  a speed-accuracy  trade- 
off design  which  imposed  varying  degrees  of  speed  stress  on  performance 
in  a two-alternative  RT  task.  The  RT  target  procedure  described  in 
Section  1 was  used  to  Induce  different  amounts  of  speed  stress  in 
different  blocks  of  trials.  Five  different  RT  targets  (150,  200,  250, 
300,  and  350  msec,  respectively)  were  employed.  The  probabilistic 


943 


structure  of  the  task  was  manipulated  by  varying  the  a priori  proba- 
bility of  the  two  stimulus  alternatives.  In  one  condition  the  stimuli 
were  equiprobable  { P(S « ) = P(SB)  = .50),  while  in  the  other  the 
probabilities  were  asymmetric  \P(SA)  = .30;  P(Sg)  - .70). 


In  agreement  with  a large  number  of  previous  experiments  (1), 
error  rate  decreased  significantly  in  the  asymmetric  probability  condi- 
tion. However,  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  functions  for  the  two  conditions 
were  not  significantly  different.  These  results  support  the  conclusion 
of  Lappin  & Disch  (23)  that  the  improvement  in  RT  and/or  accuracy  under 
asymmetric  probability  conditions  reflects  not  changes  in  performance 
efficiency  but  adjustments  in  subjects'  response  criteria. 

A comparison  of  accuracy  and  response  bias  measures  revealed  a 
systematic  decrease  in  accuracy  and  an  increase  in  response  bias  with 
increasing  amounts  of  speed  stress.  Under  relatively  mild  speed  stress, 
subjects  relied  primarily  upon  concurrently  available  stimulus  infor- 
mation to  control  performance.  Consequently,  there  was  negligible 
response  bias  induced  by  the  probabilistic  structure  of  the  stimuli 
under  these  conditions.  However,  as  speed  stress  increased  in  the 
faster  RT  targets,  subjects  relied  less  upon  concurrently  available 
stimulus  information  and  more  upon  the  probabilistic  structure  of  the 
task.  This  shift  in  strategy  was  reflected  in  an  increase  in  response 
bias  and  a decrease  in  accuracy  under  high  speed  stress  conditions. 


The  results  of  this  experiment  were  used  further  as  ar.  empirical 
test  of  the  relative  judgment  theory  (RJT)  of  psychophysical  discrim- 
ination recently  proposed  by  Link  (26,  27).  The  concepts  embodied  in 
this  theory  provide  a means  of  conceptualizing  the  present  results 
which  is  unavailable  in  alternative  theories.  The  RJT  approach  con- 
ceives of  discrimination  as  a process  of  accumulating  differences 
between  a given  stimulus  and  an  internal  reference  or  standard.  The 
accumulation  of  such  differences  is  represented  mathematically  as  a 
random  walk  process  which  begins  at  a starting  point  under  the  subject's 
control  and  terminates  at  one  of  n boundaries  representing  the  n response 
alternatives  in  a given  task.  The  distance  between  boundaries  is  also 
postulated  to  be  under  the  subject's  control. 

The  most  important  feature  of  RJT  in  the  context  of  the  present 
experiment  is  that  it  postulates  the  existence  of  two  distinct  types 
of  response  bias  or  response  criteria.  The  first  is  the  degree  of 
bias  toward  one  response  alternative  or  another,  represented  by  the 
location  of  the  starting  point  of  the  random  walk  process.  The  second 
is  the  total  accumulated  difference  required  before  a response  is 
generated,  represented  by  the  distance  between  the  terminating 
boundaries.  The  present  results  appear  to  require  both  of  these  types 
of  response  bias:  subjects  demonstrated  the  capability  of  varying  both 

the  amount  of  information  required  before  a response  was  generated  as 
well  as  their  bias  toward  or  against  each  response  alternative.  Al- 
though other  mathematical  approaches  may  ultimately  prove  more  appro- 
priate, the  dual  criterion  concept  inherent  in  RJT  represents  a 


944 


significant  departure  from  theories  such  as  classical  signal  detection 
theory  (12)  and  choice  theory  (28)  which  postulate  only  a single 
criterion. 

Empirical  tests  of  key  predictions  of  RJT  based  on  the  present 
data  support  the  descriptive  validity  of  the  approach.  RJT  predicts 
linear  relationships  between  RT  and  parameters  representing  the 
location  of  the  starting  point  and  terminating  boundaries.  The  latter 
can  be  directly  estimated  from  empirical  data.  Within  acceptable 
limits  of  statistical  error,  these  linear  predictions  were  verified 
in  the  present  data. 

In  summary,  this  experiment  provides  a clear  demonstration  of  the 
interaction  between  concurrently  available  stimulus  information  and 
information  concerning  the  probabilistic  structure  of  task-related 
events  in  the  control  of  performance.  Subjects  used  these  two  types 
of  information  differentially  under  different  conditions  of  speed  stress. 
These  results  suggest  that  an  important  source  of  error  in  military 
tasks  involving  heavy  time  pressure  is  an  excessive  reliance  on  ex- 
pectancies tc  the  exclusion  of  available  stimulus  information. 


Performance  decrement  and  Dhvsioloolcal  functions  in  members 


of  a Fire  Direction  Center  (FDC)  engaged  in  continuous, 
simulated  combat 


Data  analysis  of  an  initial  Fire  Direction  Center  exercise  is 
in  progress.  An  FDC  team  was  observed  in  collaboration  with  USARIEM, 
Natick,  Mass,  over  multiple  sessions  at  sea  level  and  altitude.  The 
FDC  team  was  engaged  In  continuous,  simulated  combat  problems  during 
the  sessions.  Heart  rate  data  collected  continuously  throughout  each 
session  were  assessed  for  changes  in  biological  rhythms  and  for  changes 
in  brief,  phasic  responses  occurring  during  fire  missions. 

Although  technical  difficulties  prevent  definitive  Interpretation, 
two  results  are  suggested  by  the  available  data.  First,  circadian 
rhythmiclty  seemed  to  be  suppressed  during  performance  at  altitude. 

This  effect,  which  was  probably  a joint  effect  of  fatigue  and  altitude 
sickness,  represents  a significant  change  in  the  physiological  func- 
tioning of  the  team  members.  The  decrease  in  amplitude  of  the 
rhythmicity  occurred  despite  the  fact  that  the  team  engaged  In  shift- 
work allowing  sleep  time  on  a rotating  basis.  Second,  cardiac  rate 
was  shown  to  Increase  during  fire  missions  although  clear,  time- 
locked  phasic  response  to  specific  events  could  not  be  identified. 

Data  analysis  has  not  progressed  sufficiently  to  indicate  whether  the 
cardiac  responsivlty  of  the  team  to  fire  missions  changed  with  con- 
tinued performance  and  altitude  stress. 

At  present  the  primary  value  of  this  data  lies  In  its  use  to 
develop  measurement  techniques  for  the  FDC  exercise  planned  in 
February.  Improvements  in  electronic  techniques  and  research  design 
should  allow  a clear  assessment  of  the  role  of  cardiac  changes  within 


945 


.MW— k III.'.  1.  I ' '.H.  I,i  1.1. 1.1 .11  - U.IU.I.I  .■TU 


performance  uecrements  due  .o  continuous  ^er forma  i.e  ann  jde 

stress . 

5 2cqsij  ivity  and  Response  S'.as  in  Speech  Discrimination 

Because  c che  obvious  importance  of  verbal  communication  in 
military  performance,  a series  of  experiments  has  been  designed  to 
investigate  the  relative  contribution  of  sensitivity  and  response  bias 
to  speech  recognition  performance.  In  the  first  experiment  in  this 
series,  ^he  ah-*  tty  to  classify  speech  stimuli  into  phonetic  cate- 
gories and  to  discriminate  within  and  between  av.egorip-,  has  l,een 
.-estigaied.  ' le  stimuli  were  computer-generated  syntneur  -oeeon 
stimuli  which  constituted  a continuum  from  one  jhoneme  cateoorv  to 
another  I msteners  were  presented  pairs  of  stimuli  which  were  either 
ident^e’  f'r  adjacent  stimuli  along  this  continuum  and  were  reouirea 
to  lisrrimirate  between  them.  An  important  finding  from  previous 
experiments  vas  verified;  namely,  that  sensitivity  was  hioher  at  the 
houndarw  between  phoneme  categories  than  within  either  category  (25). 

Ho  ->ve  a present  experiment  demonstrated  further  that  ie 
si-oerio^ity  of  discrimination  at  the  phoneme  boundary  was  associated 
vith  lar-'o  rhfln0es  in  response  bias  as  well  as  the  increase  in 
ronSitiv-  y Similar  results  were  obtained  when  the  acoustic  cues 
c0r  tre  ghfi.ipt i c distinction  were  removed  from  syllable  context  and 
we-o  categorized  linguistically.  These  later  results  sugaest 
that  the  n rallel  variations  in  sensitivity  and  response  bias  are 
not  limited  to  linguistic  stimuli  but  may  be  characteristic  of  a 
broader  class  of  information-processing  tasks.  A paper  describing 
these  results  is  now  in  press  (40).  Subsequent  experiments  have 
extended  these  questions  to  other  linguistic  stimulus  continua  and 
have  investigated  variables  such  as  extended  practice  and  linguistic 
expectancy  on  the  sensitivity  and  response  bias  effects.  These  experi- 
ments provide  additional  support  for  the  important  role  of  response 
bias  in  the  ccntro1  of  military  performance.  Together  with  the 
response  bias  effects  discussed  in  othe*'  sections  of  this  report, 
these  results  imply  that  strong  consideration  must  be  given  to  both 
the  beneficial  and  harmful  effects  of  response  bias  in  the  design  and 
implementation  <>f  military  tasks. 

6.  Performance  and  Autonomic  Activity  in  a Multiple  Task 
Environment 

The  reouirement  to  perform  two  or  more  tasks  at  the  same  time  is 
a common  stressor  which  frequently  produces  decrements  in  performance. 
Situational  factors  and  the  ability  to  allocate  our  attention  deter- 
- ! ne  whether  all  tasks  show  a decrement,  whether  performance  on  one  is 
maintained  at  the  expense  of  others,  or  whether  some  other  strategy  of 
resource  allocation  is  employed.  The  situation  in  which  one  task  is 
primary  and  one  secondary  provides  a means  of  studying  the  allocation 
of  erformance  resources  when  faced  with  concurrent  tasks.  Ongoing 
research  is  examining  the  temporal  course  of  cognitive  resource  alloca- 
ti  n n a serial  memory  task  with  a secondary  simple  RT  task.  Initial 


946 


wori<  demons  era ied  that  A cndnuej  consistently  witn  ootr  learning  and 
recall  t^ie1;;  PTs  were  'onqes-  when  tin'  reactior  sigr"  occurred 
simultaneously  with  item  onset  and  were  longer  on  recall  "rials  than 
on  learning  trials.  These  resumes  were  interpreted  in  terms  of 
selective  attention  witnir  a » mined  capacity  information  processing 
organism  (4,  10,  20).  in  triese  terms,  retrieval  of  information  from 
memory  and  initial  perceptua * registration  of  an  item  seemed  to  re- 
quire greater  selectivity  of  attention  than  other  aspects  of  the  task. 
Looking  at  the  cost  rather  tnar  toe  oenefit  side  of  this  selective 
attention,  one  could  expect  tnese  processes  to  be  relative  more  prone 
to  performance  decrement  tn°  n^esence  of  strong  compet-ig  tasks. 

The  effect  of  stress  or'  the  L, location  and  intensity  of  attention 
is  also  relevant  to  the  autonomic  components  of  stress  and  attention. 
Stress  may  have  multiple  effects  >n  the  processes  involved  in  selective 
attention.  It  may  decrease  the  i tensity  of  attention  available,  it 
may  reduce  the  capability  to  di si  ib  te  attention,  it  may  change  the 
relative  priority  of  different  tasks  or  it  may  change  the  criterion 
for  deciding  when  a task  is  done  and  thus  change  the  criterion  for 
shifting  attention.  Autonomic  nervous  system  functioning  has  been 
related  to  selective  attention  in  two  ways:  first,  arousal-like 

changes  have  been  said  to  narrow  the  focus  of  attention  and  induce 
shifts  in  the  criterion  for  reponding  to  a task  (4);  second,  specific 
patterns  of  autonomic  responses  have  been  observed  in  respon-.es  to 
tasks  requiring  attention  (6,  Id,  22). 

In  orde'"  to  exp  i of  c . ■ _ relationship  of  autonomic  active  and 
selective  attention  as  indexed  oy  the  secondary  simple  Rf  task,  an 
experimer.  was  desiarieo  to  collect  both  types  of  data  in  a multi -trial 
seria.  memorv  task.  Degree  of  attention  reouired  w*s  studied  by 
examining  cnanges  in  Ri,  cardiac  IB  I , and  respiration  o'er  !eanr.r-,> 
ria'i.  h rhe  suoiec  earns  an  item  over  tr'als,  the  resources 
(attenrionj  devotee  to  tna>.  item  should  decrease.  Initial  results 
suggest  a;  tha  consistent  RT  and  HR  changes  car  be  seen  du  nig 
learning  an.j  recall  triaio,  and  b)  that  RT  and  HR  are  also  responsive 
to  degree  uf  learning,  fir  anu  specific  conclusions  must  & I’ve!  i t 
coin.  iet; on  of  ;iu  study. 

"•-‘Cts  of  5pee J J> t ess  on  the  Processing  of  Mull. i pi e Sour 

of  Information 

A related  set  of  experiments  concerns  tasks  which  require  tne  pro- 
cessing ant  inteoration  multiple  sources  of  information.  Sue!1  tasks 
are  typical  of  mi  Titan  oer'-'ormance  requirements  and  may  be  particularly 
sensitive  to  SDeed  stress  ana  continuous  performance  requirements.  At 
individual's  ability  to  process  multiple  sources  of  information  has 
oeeri  shown  to  depend  or.  the  stimulus  properties  of  the  information 
source^  a.-.  w°i  i as  demands  in-nosed  by  the  specific  processing  tasks 
invoivec  (1C).  Previous  experiments  have  demonstrated  that  when  t.ask- 
releted  information  from  mu! time  sources  is  redunoant  (i.e.„  statis- 
tically correlated),  an  improvement  in  performance  is  offer  obtained 


947 


(relative  to  identical  tasks  without  redundant  information  sources. 

Such  "redundancy  gains"  in  performance  have  been  obtained  in  a variety 
of  tasks  using  both  simple  unidimensional  stimulus  continua  as  w'll  as 
multidimensional  stimulus  patterns  including  written  and  spoken  langu- 
age (e.g.,  9,  10,  39). 

We  have  previously  employed  a normative  mathematical  model  to 
study  the  process  of  combining  redundant  sources  of  Information.  This 
model  is  normative  in  the  sense  that  it  predicts  optimal  performance 
levels  achievable  under  a given  set  of  assumptions;  departures  from 
optimal  performance  can  then  be  used  as  measures  of  performance  im- 
pairment. The  basic  assumptions  of  the  model  involve  statistically 
independent  and  temporally  parallel  processing  of  multiple  sources  of 
information,  with  the  subsequent  response  based  on  whichever  component 
process  is  completed  first.  These  assumptions  are  represented  mathema- 
tically as  the  problem  of  determining  the  minimum  of  n independent 
: probability  density  functions.  A paper  describing  the  model  and  its 

empirical  application  has  been  published  (Pub.  5). 

Subsequent  experiments  have  used  the  normative  model  to  Investi- 
gate the  processing  of  redundant  sources  of  Information  under  speed 
stress  induced  by  the  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  design.  The  effects  of 
speed-stress  clearly  disrupt  the  total  amount  of  redundancy  gain  In 
performance  relative  to  conditions  of  minimal  speed  stress.  However, 
such  decreases  in  redundancy  gains  are  also  predicted  by  the  normative 
model  due  to  the  properties  of  the  RT  distributions  under  speed  stress. 
Analysis  of  the  data  now  In  progress  will  determine  whether  the  speed 
stress  effects  disrupted  performance  beyond  that  predicted  by  the 
model . 

8.  Autonomic  Correlates  of  Memory 

An  additional  project  is  directly  concerned  with  the  role  of  auto- 
nomic changes,  particularly  changes  in  cardiac  inter  beat  interval, 
in  the  amount  of  attention  required  by  different  cognitive  tasks  or 
processes.  This  work  procedes  from  previous  experiments  suggesting: 

, a)  that  memory  requirements  produce  relatively  more  cognitive  load  than 

; cognitive  manipulation  requirements;  and  b)  that  such  memory  require- 

ments also  produce  a consistent  Inhibition  of  cardiac  deceleration  and 
3 a maintenance  of  acceleration  (6,  16,  Pub.  1).  These  results  may  be 

1 set  in  two  general  contexts  differing  In  emphasis  but  not  neccessarily 

mutually  exclusive.  First,  the  apparent  cognitive  load  induced  by 
, memory  can  be  viewed  as  a stressor  and  the  cardiac  responses  are  then 

| seen  as  an  acute  response  to  this  stress.  Second,  the  autonomic  nervous 

i system  can  be  viewed  as  primarily  concerned  with  the  regulation  of  the 

< organism's  effort.  When  greater  effort  is  required,  such  as  by  the 

f memory  requirements,  heart  rate  responds  accordingly  reflecting  the 

t organism's  adjustment  to  Its  momentary  processing  load.  The  first 

view  would  suggest  a correlation  between  cardiac  IBI  and  performance 
| errors  and  might  also  predict  changes  in  response  bias  as  a result  of 

l the  induced  arousal.  The  second  view  would  suggest  that  cardiac  IBI 


.1.  IMP. nil  H'l) 


would  be  a function  of  task  load  even  under  conditions  of  error- 
free  performance,  and  might  predict  a positive  correlation  between 
cardiac  acceleration  and  memory  performance.  A complex,  but  perhaps 
realistic,  alternative  is  to  suggest  that  the  cardiovascular  control 
system  is  responsive  to  both  types  of  factors  and  responds  in  an 
interactive  fashion. 


An  experiment  is  in  progress  which  manipulates  memory  load  (number 
of  items  to  be  retained)  and  measures  performance,  heart  rate,  and 
respiration.  This  experiment  attempts  to  verify  the  memory-cardiac 
IBI  relationship  using  Improved  performance  measures  and  also  attempts 
to  gather  data  relevant  to  the  above  Issues.  A recognition  memory 
technique  is  used  which  allows  the  measurement  of  signal  detection 
parameters  reflecting  strength  of  recognition  memory  and  biases  toward 
certain  judgments.  Memory  load  is  varied  from  5 to  10  items,  thus 
spanning  a region  from  near  perfc  't  performance  to  error-prone 
performance. 


Initial  data  verified  the  presence  of  a consistent  cardiac  IBI 
response  to  the  memory  task.  Comparisons  between  memory  load  levels 
and  performance  levels  cannot  be  made  at  this  time. 


Measurement  Technology  for  Assessing  the  Effects  of  State 
Variables. 


The  term  "state  variable"  refers  to  a broad  class  of  variables 
that  produce  changes  in  the  physiological  state,  which  in  turn  modify 
behavior  (drugs,  stress,  disease,  etc.).  State  variables  are  sometimes 
distinguished  from  "learning  variables"  that  also  modify  behavior 
(training  procedures,  contingencies  of  reinforcement,  practice  effects, 
reinforcement  parameters,  etc.). 


The  behavioral  assessment  techniques  currently  employed  by  most 
laboratories  were  originally  devised  for  basic  research  on  iearnlng  vari- 
ables, and  later  adopted  for  applied  research  on  state  variables.  These 
procedures  have  proved  quite  valuable  but  In  general  they  have  not  been 
retailored  or  optimized  for  their  current  use,  and  in  some  instances 
have  not  capitalized  on  the  information,  Instrumentation  and  analytical 
techniques  that  have  emerged  since  their  creation.  The  department  has 
been  testing  techniques  designed  to  improve  traditional  procedures  for 
measuring  the  psychophysiological  effects  of  state  variables. 


Our  studies  have  been 
changes  In  timing  behavior 
discrimination).  Temporal 
chosen  dependent  variables 
behaviors,  Is  sensitive  to 
and  yields  orderly  results 


comparing  alternative  methods  for  measuring 
(time  estimation,  time  perception,  temporal 
discrimination  Is  one  of  the  most  frequently 
since  It  is  an  important  component  of  most 
many  environmental  and  physiological  factors, 
that  generalize  across  species. 


The  most  widely  used  procedure  for  establishing  and  monitoring  a 
temporal  discrimination  is  the  Differential  Reinforcement  of  Low  rates 


949 


Jit-W  'XiZiL.tt Z'ZiTSi.1-  ~~ 


(DRL),  a procedure  in  which  an  animal  or  human  is  trained  to  make 
responses  at  some  nominally  constant  rate.  Responses  spaced  more 
than  t seconds  apart  are  reinforced  while  shorter  inter-response  times 
(IRTsT  merely  restart  the  task.  This  procedure  generates  a distribution 
of  IRTs  clustered  about  the  criterion  value.  The  mean  of  this  distri- 
bution is  generally  decreased  by  excitatory  agents  (e.g.,  stimulants, 
anxiety)  and  increased  by  inhibitory  ones  (e.g.,  depressants,  fatigue). 

The  DRL  procedure  is  effective  but  has  two  undesirable  features, 
first  it  confounds  timing  responses  with  the  time  required  for  rein- 
forcement delivery  and  receipt.  This  contamination  is  asymmetric 
since  it  occurs  only  for  the  "correct"  responses,  the  proportion  of 
which  is  controlled  by  the  subject  not  the  experimenter.  This  arti- 
fact leads  to  several  analytical  problems  and  reduces  both  the  sensi- 
tivity and  face-validity  of  the  procedure.  The  second  undesirable 
feature  of  DRL  is  that  it  frequently  generates  a number  of  extralong 
IRTs  that  are  off  the  distribution.  The  arithmetic  mean  weights  these 
large  values  disproportionately  and  their  effect  is  to  constrain  or 
conceal  small  changes  in  the  mean  while  distorting  its  absolute  value. 

Both  of  these  faults  can  be  corrected  by  differentially  reinforc- 
ing response  duration  instead  of  Inter-response  times.  This  alternative 
procedure  (DRD)  has  an  added  advantage  In  that  it  still  allows  IRTs  to 
be  measured,  independently  of  duration,  yielding  a bonus  datum  for 
distinguishing  between  rate  and  accuracy. 

The  pilot  results  reported  in  last  year's  Annual  Report  have  now 
been  empirically  substantiated  for  both  long  and  Intermediate  timing 
intervals:  DRD  not  only  avoids  the  two  problems  noted  above  but  also 

generates  significantly  sharper  response  distributions  than  an  equiva- 
lent valued  DRL,  allowing  smaller  effects  to  be  detected  with  greater 
reliability.  The  study  will  be  extended  to  the  short  timing  Intervals 
possible  with  DRD  but  inappropriate  with  DRL,  where  the  use  of  shorter 
intervals  would  provide  the  additional  cost  advantage  of  yielding  more 
data  points  per  unit  time. 

Future  plans  are  to  develop  and  evaluate:  (a)  a simplified 

reacti on-time  procedure  that  can  be  trained  and  stabilized  more 
rapidly  than  the  current  techniques;  and  (b)  an  interactive  temporal 
baseline  that  separates  the  normally  confounded  contribution  of  time 
estimation  from  other  reinforcement  and  response  variables  in  temporal 
discrimination  tasks. 

10.  Statistical  Problems  in  the  Measurement  and  Analysis  of 
Psychophyslologlcal  Data 

a)  The  e-Adjustment  Procedure  for  Repeated-Measures  Analyses 
of  Variance 

Psychophysiologlcal  data  arising  from  experiments  In  stress 
and  other  areas  almost  always  Involve  multiple  measures  on  the  same 


950 


subject.  For  example,  successive  heart  beats  after  a stress-inducing 
event,  EEG,  and  skin  conductance  waveforms  all  involve  repeated  mea- 
sures on  the  same  individual.  Such  measures  are  statistically 
dependent  and  the  degree  of  this  dependency  changes  as  a function  of 
both  time  and  the  effects  of  stress  and  other  independent  variables. 

In  terms  of  the  frequently  applied  analysis  of  variance  model,  these 
data  can  be  characterized  as  a repeated  measures  design  with  nonhomo- 
geneity  in  the  variance-covariance  matrix.  Conventional  analyses 
performed  on  such  data  have  been  shown  to  result  in  an  excessive 
probability  of  incorrectly  rejecting  the  null  hypothesis  (Type  1 
error).  Two  univariate  adjustments  for  the  nonhomogeneity  problem 
based  on  adjustments  of  degrees  of  freedom  (df)  have  been  developed 
by  Box  (3)  and  Greenhouse  & Geisser  (11,  13).  A conservative,  but 
easily  computed  solution  simply  uses  df =1  in  the  numerator  and  the 
number  of  independently  observed  events  (e.g.,  subjects)  minus  1 in 
the  denominator.  A procedure  which  more  accurately  reflects  the  true 
Type  1 error  probability  involves  adjustment  of  df  by  a factor  e 
based  on  the  degree  of  homogeneity  in  the  variance-covariance  matrix. 

A brief  paper  was  recently  published  from  this  laboratory  (Pub.  3) 
pointing  out  the  failure  of  psychophysiologists  to  adequately  correct 
for  the  nonhomogeneity  problem.  A survey  of  the  1975  volume  of  Psycho- 
physiology showed  that  842  of  the  articles  failed  to  take  the  repeated 
measures  problem  into  account.  In  this  light,  the  paper  summarized 
both  the  homogeneity  problem  and  the  e-adjustment  procedure.  A Fortran 
program  for  computing  the  e correction  was  made  available. 

b)  Application  of  Principal  Components  Analysis  to 

Psychophysiological  Data 

The  statistical  dependencies  in  psychophysiological  data 
discussed  above  also  raise  the  question  of  the  intrinsic  dimension- 
ality of  the  data  Involved.  For  example,  consider  the  seven  sequential 
cardiac  inter-beat  Intervals  (IBIs)  measured  during  each  trial  in  the 
cardiac  cycle  time  experiment  described  In  Section  2 above.  Each 
seven-IBI  response  may  be  thought  of  as  a multivariate  observation  in 
seven  dimensions,  each  dimension  corresponding  to  a given  IBI.  If 
the  sequential  IBIs  are  statistically  independent  (i.e.,  uncorrelated), 
then  all  seven  dimensions  are  required  to  represent  the  data  structure 
completely.  However,  if  the  seven  dimensions  are  statistically  Inter- 
dependent (i.e.,  correlated)  as  is  often  the  case  In  psychophysiological 
data,  then  all  seven  dimensions  are  not  necessary  and  the  dimension- 
ality of  the  data  structure  may  be  reduced  accordingly. 

Principal  components  analysis  Is  a procedure  which  empirically 
assesses  the  number  of  statistically  Independent  dimensions  necessary 
to  account  for  an  n-dimenslonal  body  of  multivariate  data.  This  pro- 
cedure is  based  on  the  use  of  a classical  linear  model  to  describe 
the  n original  correlated  variables  in  terms  of  n uncorrelated  vari- 
ables in  the  following  manner: 


951 


Zj  = ajlFl  + a j 2F2  * •••  + ajnFn  = 1,2f 

where  z-  is  the  standardized  form  of  the  original  variable  j;  F,, 

F2,  ...  F , are  the  derived  uncorrelated  components;  and  a.-j,  aL,  • 
a.  are  weights  representing  the  contribution  of  each  componentJto  the 
original  variable  j.  The  principal  components  may  be  ordered  in  terms 
of  the  proportion  of  the  total  variance  of  the  original  variables  ac- 
counted for  by  each  component,  permitlng  a direct  estimate  of  the 
minimum  number  of  components  required  to  approximate  the  original 
variables  to  a desired  degree  of  accuracy. 

The  basic  principle  of  reducing  the  dimensionality  of  multivariate 
data  in  this  manner  was  first  suggested  by  Pearson  (32)  and  later 
developed  by  Hotelling  (14).  Our  application  of  this  approach  is  most 
closely  related  to  that  of  Tucker  (38)  who  employed  the  procedures  of 
Eckart  and  Young  (8,  15)  for  the  approximation  of  a matrix  of  rank  n 
by  a matrix  of  lesser  rank  m.  This  procedure  differs  somewhat  from 
the  approach  of  Hotelling  and  from  classical  factor  analytic  approaches 
in  that  the  variance-covariance  matrix  is  the  basis  of  the  component 
decomposition  instead  of  the  correlation  matrix  commonly  employed 
which  standardizes  each  variable  (i.e.,  zero  mean  and  unit  variance) 
prior  to  component  decomposition.  Following  the  principal  components 
solution,  the  resulting  vectors  are  rotated  using  the  VARIMAX  criterion 
(18). 

The  decomposition  of  psychophysiological  data  into  principal  com- 
ponents has  both  methodological  and  conceptual  advantages.  Methodologi- 
cally, it  provides  a means  of  approximating  a large  multidimensional 
body  of  data  using  only  a few  dimensions.  An  added  advantage  is  that 
such  dimensions  are,  by  definition,  statistically  independent.  As  an 
example  of  the  utility  of  the  procedure  in  reducing  dimensionality,  we 
have  found  that  the  sensory  evoked  potential  represented  by  120 
sequential  time  points  can  be  adequately  approximated  by  5 or  6 prin- 
cipal components.  In  one  example  the  first  two  components  accounted 
for  38%  and  28%  of  the  variance,  respectively,  while  the  first  six 
components  together  accounted  for  over  89%  of  the  total  variance  of 
the  original  variables. 

The  conceptual  advantage  of  principal  components  analysis  of 
psychophysiological  data  is  that  a particular  observed  variable  may 
reflect  the  contribution  of  multiple  underlying  processes.  For 
example,  in  the  cardiac  IBI  data  discussed  above  the  IBIs  occurring 
in  time  near  the  stimulus  and  response  may  reflect  both  the  amount  of 
pre-stimulus  anticipation  and  the  amount  of  effort  devoted  to  generat- 
ing a response.  Principal  components  analysis  permits  an  empirical 
assessment  of  the  number  and  form  of  statistically  independent  vari- 
ables which  contribute  to  the  observed  data. 

We  are  continuing  to  Investigate  the  most  useful  and  statistically 
appropriate  ways  of  applying  principal  components  analysis  to  psycho- 
physiological data.  The  cardiac  IBI  data  from  the  speed-accuracy 


952 


f 


tradeoff  experiment  described  in  Section  2 are  being  analyzed  exten- 
sively to  determine  whether  principal  components  related  to  attentive 
and  motor  processes  can  be  isolated.  Such  analyses  are  also  being 
applied  to  the  problem  of  extracting  revoked  potential  activity  re- 
lated to  human  performance  from  single  trial  EEG  waveforms.  Prelim- 
inary results  indicate  that  a greater  proportion  of  the  EEG  variance 
may  be  related  to  stimulus  processing  than  has  been  suggested  by 
conventional  signal  averaging  procedures. 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  031  Military  performance  and  stress:  Factors  leading  to 

decrements  of  performance  and  disease 

Literature  Cited. 

References : 

1.  Audley,  R.  J.:  Some  observations  cn  theories  of  choice 

reaction  time:  Tutorial  review.  In  S.  Kornblum  (Ed.),  Attention 

and  pe  -jimance  IV,  New  York:  Academic  Press,  1973. 


2.  Birren,  J.  E.,  Cardon,  D.  V.,  & Phillips,  S.  L.:  Reaction 

time  as  a function  of  the  cardiac  cycle  in  young  adults.  Science 
140:  195-196,  1963. 


3.  Box,  G.  E.  D.:  Some  theorems  on  quadratic  forms  applied 

in  the  study  of  analysis  of  variance  problems.  I and  II.  Ann. 

Math.  Stat.  25:  290-302  and  485-498,  1954. 

4.  Broadbent,  D.  E.:  Decision  and  Stress.  New  York:  Academic 

Press,  1971. 

5.  Carpenter,  J.  A.:  Effects  of  alcohol  on  some  psychological 

capacities:  A critical  review  with  special  reference  to  automooile 

driving  skill.  Quart.  J.  Stud.  Alcoh.  23:  274-314,  1962. 

6.  Coles,  M.  G.  H.,  & Duncan-Johnson,  C.  C.:  Cardiac  activity 

and'  information  processing:  The  effects  of  stimulus  significance  and 

detection  and  response  requirements.  J.  Exp.  Psychol:  Human  Percep. 

Perf.  1_:  418-428,  1975. 

7.  Dong,  E.,  Jr.,  & Reitz,  B.  A.:  Effect  of  timing  of  vagal 

stimulation  on  heart  rate  in  the  dog.  Cir.  Res.  27:  635-646,  1970. 

8.  Eckart,  C.,  & Young,  G.:  The  approximation  of  one  matrix 

by  another  of  lower  rank.  Psychometrika  1_:  211-218,  1936. 

9.  Garner,  W.  R.:  Information  integration  and  form  of  encoding. 
In  A.  W.  Melton  & E.  Martin  (Eds.),  Coding  Processes  in  Human  Memory 
Washington,  D.  C.  Winston,  1972. 

10.  Garner,  W.  R. : The  processing  of  information  and  structure. 

Potomac,  Md.,  Erlbaum  Associates,  1974. 

11.  Geisser,  S.,  & Greenhouse,  S.  W.:  An  extension  of  Box's 
results  on  the  use  of  the  F distribution  in  multivariate  analysis. 

Ann.  Math.  Stat.  29:  885-891,  1958. 


954 


12.  Green,  D.  M.,  & Swets,  J.  A.:  Signal  Detection  and 

Psychophysics,  New  York:  Wiley,  1966. 

13.  Greenhouse,  S.  W.,  & Geisser,  S.:  On  methods  in  the  analysis 

o*  profile  data.  Psychometrika  24:  95-112,  1959. 

14.  Hotelling,  H.:  Analysis  of  a complex  of  statistical  vari- 
ables into  principal  components.  J.  Ed.  Psychol.  24:  417-441  and 
498-520,  1933. 

15.  Householder,  A.  S.,  & Young,  G.:  Matrix  approximation  and 

latent  roots.  Amer  Math.  Monthly  45:  165-171,  1938. 

16.  Jennings,  J.  R.,  Averin,  J.  R.,  Opton,  E.  M.,  & Lazarus, 

R.  S . : Some  parameters  of  heart  rate  change:  perceptual  versus  motor 

task  requirements,  noxiousness,  and  uncertainty.  Psychophysiol.  7: 
194-212,  1971. 

17.  Jewett,  D.  L:  Activity  of  single  efferent  fibres  in  the 
cervical  vagus  nerve  of  the  dog ,v  with  special  reference  to  possible 
cardioinhibitory  fibres.  J.  Physiol.  (London)  175:  31-357,  1964. 

18.  Kaiser,  H.  F.:  The  varimax  criterion  for  rotation  in 

factor  analysis.  Psychometrika  23:  187-200,  1958. 

19.  Katona,  P.  G.,  Poitras,  J.  S.,  Barnett,  G.  0.,  & Terry,  B.  S.: 
Cardiac  vagal  efferent  activity  and  heart  period  in  the  carotid  sinus 
reflex.  Amer.  J.  Physiol.  218:  1030-1037,  1970. 

20.  Kerr,  B.:  Processing  demands  during  mental  operations. 

Mem.  & Cog.  1:  401-413,  1973. 

21.  Lacey,  J.  I.:  Some  cardiovascular  correlates  of  sensori- 
motor behavior:  Example  of  visceral  afferent  feedback?  In  C.  H. 

Hockman  (Ed.),  Limbic  System  Mechanisms  and  Autonomic  Function. 

Thomas:  Springfield,  Illinois,  175-201,  1972.  ™ 

22.  Lacey,  B.  C.t  & Lacey,  J.  I.:  Studies  of  heart  rate  and 
other  bodily  processes  in  sensorimotor  behavior.  In  P.  A.  Obrist,  A. 
Black,  J.  Brener,  & L.  DiCara  (Eds.),  Cardiovascular  psychophysiology  — 
Current  issues  in  response  mechanisms,  biofeedback,  and  methodology. 
Chicago,  111:  Aldlne-Atherton,  1974. 

23.  Lappin,  J.  S.,  &.  Disch,  K. : The  latency  operating 

characteristic:  I.  Effects  of  stimulus  probability  on  choice 

reaction  time.  J.  Exp.  Psychol.  92;  419-427,  1972. 

24.  Levy,  M.  N.,  Martin,  P.  J.,  Iano,  T.,  & Zieske,  H.:  Effects 

of  single  vagal  stimuli  on  heart  rate  and  atrioventricular  conduction. 
Amer.  J.  Physiol.  218:  1256-1261,  1970. 


955 


25.  Liberman,  A.  M.,  Cooper,  F.  S.,  Shankweiler,  D.,  & 

Studdert-Kennedy,  M.:  Perception  of  the  speech  code.  Psychol.  Rev. 

74:  431-461,  1967. 

26.  Link,  S.  W. : The  relative  judgment  theory  of  two-choice 

response  time.  J.  Math.  Psychol.  12j  114-135,  1975. 

27.  Link,  S.  W.,  & Heath,  R.  A.:  A sequential  theory  of 

psychological  discrimination.  Psychometrika  40:  77-105,  1975. 

28.  Luce,  R.  D.:  A threshold  theory  for  simple  detection 

experiments.  Psychol.  Rev.  _70:  61-79,  1963. 

29.  Obrist,  P.  A.,  Webb,  R.  A.,  Sutterer,  J.  R.,  & Howard,  J.  L.: 

Cardiac  deceleration  and  reaction  time:  An  evaluation  of  two  hypotheses. 
Psychophysiol.  15:  695-706,  1970. 

30.  Obrist,  P.  A.,  Howard,  J.  L.,  Lawler,  J.  E.,  Galosy,  R.  A., 

Meyers,  K.  A.,  & Gaebelein,  C.  J.:  The  cardiac-somatic  interaction. 

In  P.  A.  Obrist,  A.  H.  Black,  J.  Brener,  and  L.  V.  DiCara,  Cardio- 
vascular Psychophysiology:  Current  Issues  in  response  mechanismsT 
biofeedback  and  methodology"  Chicago:  Aldine,  1974. 

31.  Pachella,  R.  G. : The  interpretation  of  reaction  time  in 

information  processing  research.  In  B.  Kantowitz  (Ed.),  Human 
information  processing:  Tutorials  in  performance  and  cognition. 

New  York:  Lawrence  Erlbaum,  1974. 

32.  Pearson,  K. : On  lines  and  planes  of  closest  fit  to  systems 

of  points  in  space.  Phil.  Mag.  6;  559-572,  1901. 

33.  Schouten,  J.  R.,  & Bekker,  J.  A.  M.:  Reaction  time  and 

accuracy.  In  A.  F.  Saunders  (Ed.),  Attention  and  performance. 

Amsterdam:  North  Holland,  1967. 

34.  Sternberg,  S.:  The  discovery  of  processing  stages: 

Extensions  of  Donders'  method.  Acta.  Psychol.  30:  276-315,  1969. 

35.  Swensson,  R.  G.:  The  elusive  tradeoff:  Speed  vs.  accuracy 

in  visual  discrimination  tasks.  Percept.  & Psychophys.  .12:  16-32,  1972. 

36.  Swets,  J.  A.:  The  relative  operating  characteristic  in 

psychology.  Science  182:  990-1000,  1973. 

37.  Taylor,  D.  A.:  Stage  analysis  in  reaction  time.  Psychol. 

Bull.  83:  161-191,  1976. 

38.  Tucker,  L.  R.:  Learning  theory  and  multivariate  experiment: 

Illustration  by  determination  of  generalized  learning  curves.  In  R. 

B.  Catell  (Ed.)  Handbook  of  Multivariate  Experimental  Psychology, 

Chicago:  Rand  McNally,  1966. 


956 


i.,«w  >iii.i|i  .u>)  m wrv- 


39.  Wood,  C.  C.:  Parallel  processing  of  auditory  and  phonetic 

information  in  speech  discrimination.  Percept.  Psychophys.  15; 

501-508,  1974. 

40.  Wood,  C.  C.:  Discriminability,  response  bias,  and  phoneme 
categories  in  discrimination  of  voice  onset  time.  J.  Acous.  Soc.  Amer., 
in  press. 

Publ ications: 


1.  Jennings,  J.  R.:  Information  processing  and  concomitant 

heart  rate  changes  in  the  obese  and  underweight.  Physiol.  Psychol. 

3:  290-296,  1975. 

2.  Jennings,  J.  R.,  Wood,  C.  C.,  & Lawrence,  B.:  Effects  of 

graded  doses  of  alcohol  upon  speed-accuracy  tradeoff  in  choice 
reaction  time.  Percept.  Psychophys.  JJ;  85-91,  1976. 

3.  Jennings,  J.  R.,  and  Wood,  C.  C.:  The  e-adjustment  procedure 

for  repeated-measures  analyses  of  variance.  (Letter).  Psychophysiol. 
13:  277-278,  1976. 

4.  Wood,  C.  C.:  Average  evoked  potentials  and  phonetic  pro- 
cessing in  speech  perception.  In  J.  E.  Desmedt  (Ed.),  Recent 
Developments  jn_  the  Psychobiology  of  Language.  Oxford  University 
Press,  1976. 

5.  Wood,  C.  C.:  A normative  model  for  redundancy  gains  in 

speech  discrimination:  In  F.  Restle,  R.  M.  Shlffrin,  N.  J.  Castellan, 

H.  Lindman,  and  D.  Pisoni  (Eds.),  Cognitive  Theory:  Volume  I.  Potomac, 
Maryland:  Erlbaum  Associates,  1975. 

6.  Wood,  C.  C.:  Discriminabil ity,  response  bias,  and  phoneme 

categories  in  voice  onset  time  discrimination.  (Abstract).  J.  Acoust. 
Soc.  Amer.  58:  S58,  1975. 

7.  Wood,  C.  C.:  Discrf  nabllity,  response  bias,  and  phoneme 

categories  in  speech  discrimination:  II.  Place  of  articulation. 

(Abstract).  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Amer.  59:  S26,  1976. 

8.  Wood,  C.  C.,  & Jennings,  J.  R.:  Speed-accuracy  tradeoff 

functions  in  choice  reaction  time:  Experimental  designs  and  compu- 
tational procedure^.  Percept.  Psychophys.  19;  92-101,  1976. 


to  NO  CODES  • PROCMM  (LIMCNT 


[Pll  Redacted] 


»'  GENERAL  lill 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


■ 04 T 1 PNC  V SUM*  NY 

75  07  01 


k RIND  OF  SUMMARY 

H.  Termin. 


b.  coK'Niutmc 


CONTRIBUTING 


62758A 


TMDT  TW 


I SUMMARY  SC 


7 T 


• RORR  AECURt 


7T 


PROJECT  NURSE M 


3A52758A823. 


I RMMCV  ACftl 


DA  OA  6438 


kS  DNS’S  MITR’N 


NA 


76  06  30 


NL 


TAM  ARE  A NUMBER 


_QQ_ 


REPORT  CORTM1  IFSSOl 

Dl)l>RkE(AH)6J6 


COM1 

C 1 


□m 


LlYll  OP  SUM 
A.  BORN  UMT 


STORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


TIT 


Ll  P'Y'pR*  -»<R  S*e».»llr  Cfttilltulm  C«M»J*  " 

(U)  Anatomical  and  Physiological  Correlates  of  Brain  Function  in  Stress  and  Disease 

..... « 


SC’ENTIFIC  ANO  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREA** 


002400  Bioengineering 

TTTstart  oat* 

63  08 


CONTRACT  GRANT 
* DATE  S/I  TIE  C Tl  V* 


. KINO  OF  ARARO 


016200  Stress  Physiology 

I*  ElTIMATfO  COMPLETION  OAT*  


TERMINATED  76  06 


NA 


CRPIRATION 


A AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT 


RESPONSIBLE  DOD  ORGANISATION 


M PCRPORMING  ORAANIIA  TKM 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
-"••“•Washington,  0.  C.  20012 


RCSPONSINlC  INDIVIDUAL 


«*«■  JOY,  COL  R.J.T. 

2fl2=5Zfi=355I  ... 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 


lb  FUNDING  AGENCY 

DA 


M RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 
ESIMSTnI 


FISCAL 

TEAR 


75 

'f  VIWMHT 

76 


IS  PER  FORM  ARC!  ME  V MOO 

C.  In-House 


% P NO  F E ASTON  A L HAN  YRS 


T 


178 


587 


X 


•“■*Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Neuropsychiatry 
"■>•■“•  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  TP-nMaA  MAN  II  V S Ami 

»*•••  Spector,  N.H.,  Ph.D. 
"l”1"1 202-576-3457 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  HUMBER  | 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

■“*  Petras,  J.M.,  Ph.D.. 
*“•  b m , Ph  n 


UX 


*■  Neurophysiology;  ^Neuropsychiatry;  (U)  Neuroanatomy 

Combat  Shock;  (U)  Autonomic  Nervous  System;  (U)  Biomedical  Engineering;  (U)  Stress 


II  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE  * IS  APPROACH,  IS  PROGRAM  fP*P»U«A  InRvfRMl  pP»»AF«pP»  IMrIIRpA  bp  " 


1 P**(*A>  ml  Mi«  Ml*  Hull)  ClMHEullM  C«R  j 


23.  (U)  The  principal  research  objectives  are  to  identify  the  anatomical  and  physio- 
logical mechanisms  by  which  the  central  nervous  system  maintains  vital  functions  during 
or  following  physiological  stress,  disease,  or  trauma  in  the  military  environment. 

24.  (U)  The  disciplines  and  techniques  of  neuroanatomy,  neurophysiology,  physiological 
psychology,  and  neurochemistry  areused. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Research  continued  on  brain  mechanisms  mediating  control  of 
skeletal  muscle  and  on  those  mediating  equilibrium  of  internal  organs.  Experiments 
directed  toward  the  neural  control  of  posture  and  movement  included  study  of  the  ac- 
tivity of  vestibular  neurons  during  purposeful  movement,  morphology  of  vestibular 
nerve  synapses,  anatomic  identification  of  spinal  cord  systems  providing  input  to  the 
cerebellum,  purposeful  movement  and  fatijue  in  primates  deprived  of  sensory  input 
from  the  limbs,  and  organization  of  neuron  populations  in  sensory-motor  cortex.  Ex- 
periments directed  toward  neural  control  of  homeostasis  included  identification  of 
spinal  cord  centers  controlling  blood  pressure,  hypothalamic  regulation  of  body  tem- 
perature, anatomic  identification  of  spinal  cells  of  origin  of  specific  visceral 
nerves,  and  central  pathways  for  analysis  of  visceral  sensory  information.  Work  unit 
terminated  due  to  Division  re-organization;  elements  of  this  work  to  be  continued 
under  work  units  071  and  072  of  task  area  01,  project  3A161102B71P.  For  technical 
report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  01  July  75  - 
30  June  76. 


•a  yaiIaMy  m « u 


DD,r‘  1498 


l)5H 


BH— 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 


Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  033  Anatomical  and  physiological  correlates  of  brain 
function  in  stress  and  disease 


Investigators. 

Principal:  N.  H.  Spector,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  J.F.  Cummings,  Ph.D.  DVM:  George  F.  Knob,  CPT,  MSC; 

Gregory  E.  Martin,  Ph.D;  Epp  A.  Miller,  Ph.D.; 

J.M.  Petras,  Ph.D.;  Andrew  T.  Pryzbylik;  Maurice 
E.T.  Swinnen;  C.F.  Tyner,  MAJ,  MC;  R.  M.  Wylie,  Ph.D. 

DESCRIPTION 

Experiments  in  this  work  unit  are  designed  to  bring  the  techniques 
of  physiology  and  anatomy  to  bear  on  those  aspects  of  brain  function 
which  are  essential  to  sustained  performance  in  the  military  environ- 
ment or  to  the  body’s  response  to  stress  and  injury  in  that  environment. 
Current  experiments  include  study  of:  a)  hypothalamic  neurons  critical 

to  body  temperature  control;  b)  spinal  cor!  nuclei  on  control  of  the 
cardiovascular  system;  c)  neural  regions  which  control  posture  and  move- 
ment and  the  recovery  of  useful  movement  after  brain  injury. 

PROGRESS 

Hypothalamic  Neurons  Concerned  with  Temperature  Regulation 

A population  of  neurons  in  the  medial  preoptic  and  anterior 
areas  of  the  hypothalamus  have  been  found  to  have  unusual  QlOs  when 
defined  in  terms  of  spontaneous  firing  rates  in  vivo.  These  cells 
have  been  called  internal  temperature  sensors  and  are  believed  to 
play  a major  role  in  temperature  regulation  of  endotherms  and  per- 
haps exotherms.  No  data  are  available,  however,  on  which  to  postu- 
late the  basis  of  this  temperature  sensitivity;  in  particular,  it  is 
unclear  whether  the  property  is  intrinsic  to  the  neurons  or  is  a 
function  of  the  circuits  to  which  the  cells  belong  This  issue  can 
be  resolved  if  these  neurons  are  available  for  individual  study  in 
tissue  culture.  Techniques  have  been  developed  here  for  growing  these 
cells  in  culture  and  for  recording  their  spontaneous  and  evoked  elec- 
trical activity  under  a wide  variety  of  controlled  temperature  condi- 
tions. During  the  past  year,  the  media  composition  and  culture 
methods  have  been  standardized,  pre-optic  neurons  have  been  grown  for 
up  to  five  months  and  have  shown  development  of  substantial  morpho- 
logical diversity  during  that  time,  an  accurate  means  of  controlling 


959 


MacwawBrsp  racwr..  ~ 


media  temperature  has  beer-  developed,  and  preparations  have  been  made 
to  record  the  nauronal  electrical  activity. 

Spinal  Autonomic  Nuclei;  Pressor  Centers 

Investigations  have  been  underway  on  the  influence  of  spinal 
autonomic  nuclei  on  cardiovascular  function.  Initial  experiments 
in  spinal  cats  involved  exploring  the  cord  with  stimulating  micro- 
electrodes to  locate  cell  groups  able  to  cause  increases  in  blood  pres- 
sure. Results  indicate  that  these  cells  are  well  localized  in  the 
intermediolateral  nucleus  (ILN)  of  the  thoracic  spinal  cord.  Contrary 
to  earlier  reports,  these  pressor  neurons  are  distributed  over  the  en- 
tire longitudinal  extent  of  tue  thoracic  region.  Furthermore,  there  is 
a substantial  lateralization  of  pressor  invluence:  ILN  activation  on 

the  right  side  of  the  cord  produces  substantially  greater  increases  in 
systemic  blood  pressure  than  does  comparable  activation  on  the  cord's 
left  side.  This  lateralization  parallels  that  described  by  others  for 
the  neurons  controlling  heart  rate  although  the  longitudinal  distribu- 
tion of  the  two  neuron  sets  appears  different.  Future  work  will  concern 
spinal  effects  on  the  specific  components  of  a pressor  response:  heart 

rate,  cardiac  contractility,  and  peripheral  vasoconstriction. 

Spinal  Autonomic  Nuclei:  Input  Systems 

The  preganglionic  neurons  are  the  final  common  pathway  for  the 
autonomic  nervous  system's  output  from  the  spinal  cord:  all  neural  con- 

trol of  the  viscera  by  the  spinal  cord  involves  participation  of  these 
neurons.  The  pathways  by  which  other  parts  of  the  nervous  system  control 
these  final  output  elements  are  poorly  known,  however.  Recently  begun 
experiments  in  the  Department  are  designed  to:  a)  describe  the  distribu- 

tion and  cellular  appearance  of  spinal  visceral  motor  neurons;  b)  describe 
the  input  to  these  motor  neurons  from  elsewhere  in  the  spinal  cord;  c)  des- 
cribe the  inputs  which  descend  to  these  motor  neurons  from  sites  above  the 
spinal  cord,  with  particular  emphasis  on  nuclei  in  the  brainstem.  The 
principal  techniques  in  use  are  anatomic:  retrograde  degeneration,  trans- 

port of  horseradish  peroxidase,  and  transport  of  radioactive  amino  acids. 
Initial  results  indicate  that  retrograde  transport  of  horseradish  peroxi- 
dase from  peripheral  sympathetic  ganglia  to  the  spinal  cord  is  an  effec- 
tive means  of  locating  visceral  motor  neurons  in  the  cord  with  much 
accuracy. 

Spinal  Autonomic  Nuclei:  Routes  for  Visceral  Sensory  Information 

Three  major  ascending  pathways  in  the  spinal  cord  transmit  somatic 
sensory  information  to  higher  centers;  dorsal  columns,  spinothalamic 
tract,  and  spinocervical  tract.  The  first  two  have  been  previously  shown 
to  transmit  sensory  information  from  the  viscera  as  well.  Recent  experi- 
ments in  this  Department,  using  the  single-unit  recording  method,  have 
demonstrated  that  the  lateral  cervical  nucleus  — the  principal  relay  in 


960 


the  spino-cervical  system,  located  in  the  upper  cervical  spinal  cord  — 
also  transmits  information  from  the  viscera.  This  input  is  carried 
over  the  greater  splanchnic  nerve,  and  possibly  other  visceral  nerves 
as  well,  and  may  signal  information  about  the  heart  and  abdominal  blood 
vessels.  Current  work  is  directed  toward  precise  delineation  of  the 
interactions  between  visceral  and  somatic  sensory  inputs  in  the  lateral 
cervical  nucleus.  An  abstract  on  the  work  has  been  accepted  for  presen- 
tation at  a forthcoming  symposium  on  the  abdominal  nervous  system 
(Visceral  Afferent  Projections  to  the  Lateral  Cervical  Nucleus,  D.D. 
Rigamonti  and  D.  DeMichelle,  1976). 

Posture  and  Movement:  Neuron  Populations  in  Sensory-Motor  Cortex 

Experiments  designed  to  describe  the  input-output  relations  and 
interactions  among  neuron  populations  in  the  sensory-motor  cerebral  cor- 
tex have  been  continued,  using  single-unit  recording  methods.  The  most 
recent  experiments  have  been  directed  at  the  wide-field  population  in 
this  tissue  as  these  neurons  may  be  exemplary  of  motor  cells  throughout 
mammalian  nervous  systems.  Work  during  the  past  year  has  extended  the 
earlier  ideas  that  these  cells  are  receptive  to  a great  variety  of  in- 
puts by  showing  them  to  be  activated  from  two  separate  spinal  cord  path- 
ways, the  dorsal  columns  and  the  spino-cervical  tract,  and  by  showing 
them  to  respond  to  activation  of  the  splanchnic  nerve  in  the  abdomen. 

In  addition,  analysis  of  the  increasing  data  base  for  these  cells  indi- 
cates that  the  wide-field  population  may  have  an  internal  organization 
in  the  form  of  a serial  ordering  of  its  members  and  that  this  ordering 
may  be  a central  factor  in  the  population's  behavior. 

Posture  and  Movement:  The  Cervical  Spino-cerebellar  System 

Although • anatomists  have  traditionally  recognized  two  pathways 
providing  input  to  the  cerebellum  from  the  spinal  cord,  the  spinal  nuclei 
of  origin  of  only  one  of  these  — the  dorsal  spino-cerebellar  tract  — 

Is  known.  Both  anatomists  and  physiologists  have  disputed  the  origin  of 
the  ventral  tract  and  the  situation  has  been  complicated  by  the  claim  th3t 
the  tract  arises  partly  in  the  lumbar  and  partly  in  the  cervical  spinal 
regions.  Recent  experiments  in  the  Department  have  established  conclu- 
sively that  cells  in  the  cervical  spinal  cord  do  project  to  the  cerebel- 
lum, and  have  allowed  identification  of  the  nuclear  groups  involved. 
Identical  results  from  work  with  horseradish  peroxidase  and  retrograde 
degeneration  techniques  indicate  that  the  nucleus  cervicalis  centralis 
and  the  nucleus  centrobasalis  in  the  cervical  cord  project  to  the  cere- 
bellum, the  former  contralaterally  and  the  latter  ipsilaterally . In  ad- 
dition, an  electron  microscope  examination  of  these  nuclei  has  made  pos- 
sible a description  of  the  fine  structure  of  the  cells  involved  and  of 
the  several  synaptic  types  responsible  for  input  to  these  cells.  Two 
manuscripts  have  been  prepared  for  submission  to  the  Journal  of  Compara- 
tive Neurology. 


961 


Posture  and  Movement:  Activity  of  Vestibular  and  Fastigial 

Neurons  in  Waking  Cats 

Prior  work  by  others  has  implicated  the  vestibular  nuclei  of  the 
brainstem  and  the  fastigial  nuclei  of  the  cerebellum  in  control  of 
posture  and  movement  although  the  details  of  their  participation  are 
unclear.  In  an  effort  to  detect  the  predicted  changes  in  neuron  fir- 
ing which  should  accompany  movement , experiments  in  the  Department 
have  been  directed  at  recording  neuron  activity  in  these  nuclei  in 
awake  cats  trained  to  perform  limb  movements  on  command.  Although 
the  animals  are  still  under  study  so  that  conclusive  information  on 
the  location  of  all  cells  is  not  yet  available,  results  to  date  indi- 
cate fewer  than  ten  percent  of  neurons  studied  show  changes  in  firing 
pattern  clearly  related  to  limb  movement;  this  result  is  in  striking 
contrast  with  those  of  similar  studies  conducted  on  a wide  variety  of 
other  central  nervous  system  motor  nuclei.  Study  of  these  cells  is 
continuing,  as  are  efforts  to  suggest  alternate  theories  concerning 
the  roles  of  these  nuclei  in  the  control  of  skeletal  muscle. 

Posture  and  Movement:  Recovery  of  Limb  Use  After  Dorsal  Rhizotomy 

Severance  of  dorsal  roots  innervating  a monkey's  limb  produces 
profound  sensory  and  motor  deficits,  although  limited  recovery  of  the 
motor  loss  is  possible.  Experiments  in  the  Department  have  been 
directed  at  producing  quantitative  descriptions  of  the  recovery  pro- 
cess and  the  nature  of  recovered  functions  after  such  surgery.  Normal 
monkeys  have  readily  learned  to  lift  weights  to  a given  height  when 
suitably  rewarded  and  to  perform  the  task  with  great  accuracy  over  a 
wide  range  of  imposed  weights.  As  the  weight  is  increased,  the  total 
work  performed  in  a session  changes  as  does  the  muscle  fatigue  and  the 
monkey's  behavioral  compansation  for  it.  In  contrast,  a de-af f erented 
monkey  trained  to  perform  the  same  task,  initially  with  no  imposed 
load  and  later  with  a moderate  load,  showed  no  ability  at  first  to 
compensate  for  these  factors,  and  the  animal's  present  performance 
remains  substantially  poorer  than  that  of  normals. 

Biomedical  Instrumentation 

Instrumentation  development  included  design  and  fabrication  of  a 
fast-tracking  digital  voltmeter  able  to  capture  and  hold  peaks,  a 
digital  ECG  calibrator,  a photocell  amplifier  to  pinpoint  an  animal's 
exact  position  in  a test  apparatus,  and  several  signal  simulation 
systems  for  testing  data  processing  equipment.  In  addition,  instru- 
mentation personnel  offered  a course  in  digital  logic  circuitry  to 
Department  investigators  and  technicians. 


962 


Work  in  this  unit  was  terminated  on  30  June  1976;  elements  of  the 
program  will  be  continued  in  work  units  072,  Biological  Modulation  of 
Military  Performance,  aud  work  unit  040,  Behavioral  Variables  in  Auto- 
nomic Function  and  Disease  in  Military  Personnel. 


v^T55Ks  vr«ii6CWi»"  'an 


^*7— »■-.»!?  r," 


PPP* 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Taat  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  033  Anatomical  and  physiological  correlates  of  brain 
function  in  stress  and  disease 


Literature  Cited. 

Publications : 

1.  Aminoff,  M.  J.,  Layzer,  R.  L. , Satymurti,  S.  and  Faden,  A. I.: 
The  declininc  muscle  response  to  repetitive  nerve  stimulation  in  myo- 
tonia. Neurology  2j5:  337,  1976. 

2.  Faden,  A.  I.  and  Townsend,  J.  J.:  Myoclonus  in  Alzheimer 

Disease.  Arch.  Neurol.  _3_3 : 278,  1976. 

3.  Faden,  A.  I,:  Encephalopathy  following  treatment  of  chronic 
pulmonary  failure.  Neurology  26:  337,  1976. 

4.  Faden,  A.  I.,  Collins,  M. , and  Spire,  J.  P.:  Electroencepha- 

lographic  changes  following  intra-amniotic  prostoglandin  F2  adminis- 
tration for  therapeutic  abortion.  Obstetrics  and  Gynecology  42:  607, 
1976. 

5.  Neeley,  W.  E. , Wardlaw,  S.  S. , and  Swinnen,  M.E.T.:  Design 

of  a novel  electronics  debubbler  for  continuous  flow  analyzers.  9th 
International  Congress  on  Clinical  Chemistry  1975. 

6.  Neeley,  W.  E. , Wardlaw,  S.  S.,  Yates,  T.,  Hollingsworth,  W.  G., 

and  Swinnen,  M.E.T. : A high  performance  colorimeter  with  an  electronic 

bubble  gate  for  use  in  miniaturized  continuous  flow  analyzers.  Clin. 
Chem.  22:  227,  1976. 

7.  Pryzbylik,  A,  T.  and  Howe,  R.  C.:  A low-noise  cable  and  slip- 

ring assembly  for  recording  of  small  amplitude  physiological  signals  in 
chronic  animals.  Med.  Biol.  Eng.  in  press,  1976. 

8.  Tyner,  C.  F.:  The  naming  of  neurons:  applications  of  taxonomic 

theory  to  the  study  of  cellular  populations.  Brain,  Behav.,  Evol.  12: 
75-96,  1975. 

9.  Towe,  A.  L.,  Tyner,  C.  F.,  and  Nyquist,  J.  K.:  Facilitatory 
and  inhibitory  modulation  of  wide-field  neuron  activity  in  the  post- 
cruciate  cortex  of  the  cat.  Exper.  Neurol.  50:  734-756,  1976. 


964 


l DATE  RRCV  SUM* NT 

75  07  01 

4 KINO  OW  SUMMARY 

H.Terminatioi 

t SUMMARY  ICTY* 

u 

A NOR*  SECURITY^ 

u 

r reoramno* 

NA 

IN  Of 

NL 

IB*N  MfSTN’N 

•4  SPECIFIC  OATA  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

(JTII  D MO 

■ LEVEL  OF  SUM 
A worn  UNIT 

IO  NO  COOES*  PROGRAM  CLEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

■OAK  UNIT  NUMBER 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


Mi  PRIMARY 


fc.  CONTRIBUTING 


C.  COMTRIIUYIMO 


672758A 


CARDS  1 14F 


lUFmmTT 


I AOENCf  ACCESS^ 

DA  OA  6439 


76  06  30 


report  com r»vL  irmmc 

DD  DRtEfARjbJb 


UU~ 


uw 


■ rfwNi  ciMOiiMii*  c*p»;  * ( U ) Influence  of  Stress  on  Hormone  Response,  rerrormance 

Emotional  Breakdown  In  Military  Personnel 


wr 


I SCIENTIFIC  AMD  TECH  NOL  OOI  C A L AREAS* 


013400  Psychology  016200  Stress  Physiology  005900  Environmental  Bio 

'•* 'it  UtMITID  COwiilTMM  AtTl  * J“  ' 


II  |T  ART  G*tt 

63  08 


IT  CONTRACT  GRANT 
•ATKt/IFRICTIVf; 


76  06 


NA 


c.  TYRI. 

«.  KINO  OR  AWARD 


4 AMOUNT, 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


If  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OMOANltATlON 


* RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

S Funds  (N*  fwwmN) 

FISCAL 

TEAR 

75 

4 

159 

76 

4 

302 

M PERFORMING  OR0ANI  I A 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
‘Washington,  DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

JOY,  COL  RJT 
TIlIRNOMC  (202)  576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


tft  FUNDING  AOINCV 

DA 


IS  RIRRORMArCI  METHOD 

C.  In-House 


‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
‘Washington,  DC  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VtlTIMA  TOR  fPw^lfA  MAM  II  (I  S.  A*4 

>,m<  Meyerhof f,  JL,  MD 
tblcpnoni  (202)  576-3559_ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMMR 
ASSOCIATE  IN VtITIO ATORI 

Mason,  JW,  MD 


...»  Mougey,  EH 


ft .a m.i  ^uj  stress;  (U)  Emotions;  (U)  Homeostasis;  (U)  rsycno- 
physiology;  (U)  Neuroendocrinology;  (U)  Psychoendocrinology;  (U)  Human  Volunteer 


H TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  |4  APPROACH,  It  PROORE  U { Pn*"»wR  Ii»M*IAh/  IAmnIIHmM  M (**NMtor  PPM**  •#  «P«A  Nl»  SpcntI*  ClMWlAcallai  C«P«  ) 

23.  (U)  Principal  objective  is  to  study  the  integrating  influences  of  the  central 
nervous  system  in  controlling  and  coordinating  the  organs  of  the  body  and  their  meta- 
bolic functions  under  environmental  and  emotional  stresses  which  are  likely  to  produce 
casualties  due  to  psychiatric  or  psychosomatic  disease  in  military  personnel. 

24.  (U)  This  involves  measurement  of  plasma  and  urinary  hormone  levels  in  humans  and 
monkeys  in  a variety  of  acute  and  chronic  stress  situations.  One  important  conceptual 
approach  is  that  the  organization  of  endocrine  regulation  can  only  be  understood  by 
viewing  "overall"  hormonal  balance,  or  multihormonal  patterns. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Collaborative  studies  of  physical  stress  with  ARIEM  have  con- 

tinued. Studies  of  acute  heat  exposure  (49  degrees  C for  90  min)  with  and  without 
superimposed  muscular  exertion  in  normal  young  men  have  shown  that  heat,  even  in  the 
presence  of  some  discomfort  and  psychological  disturbance,  produces  no  increase  or  a 
mild  decrease  in  plasma  cortisol  levels  and  that  the  further  superimposition  of  muscular 
exertion  does  not  result  in  increased  pituitary-adrenal  cortical  activity.  A recent 
pilot  experiment  indicated  a striking  12  fold  increase  in  plasma  renin  levels  in  respons 
to  capture  and  restraint  in  the  rhesus  monkey.  This  is  the  largest  renin  response  to  an 
type  of  stress  yet  recorded  and  indicates  that  renin  secretion  is  sensitively  responsive 
to  psychological  stress  and  should  be  considered  more  fully  in  future  psychoendocrine 
studies.  Elements  of  this  work  will  be  continued  under  Work  Unit  073  Neuroendocrine 
Response  to  Military  Stress,  Program  Element  6.27.71A.  For  technical  report  see  Walter 
Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


DD,:”“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  O F THIS  FO«M  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I 4 M A 
AND  < 491  I I MAR  «■  FOR  ARMY  USE  ARC  OBSOLETE 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 


Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  034  Influence  of  stress  on  hormone  response,  performance 
and  emotional  breakdown  in  military  personnel 

Investigators . 

Principal:  James  L.  Meyerhoff,  M.D. 

Associate:  John  W.  Mason,  M.D. ; Robert  H.  Lenox,  M.D. , MAJ,  MC; 

Gregory  L.  Belenky,  M.D. , MAJ,  MC;  G.  J.  Kant,  Ph.D.  ; 

E.  H.  Mougey,  M.S.;  F.  E.  Wherry,  A.B.;  J.  W.  Holaday, 

M.S.;  D.  R.  Collins,  B.S.;  L.  L.  Pennington,  B.S. 

I . Endocrine  Profile  as  Indicator  of  Stress  Response 
Description. 

This  program  is  concerned  primarily  with  the  role  of  the  central 
nervous  system  in  the  control  and  especially  the  coordination  of 
endocrine  regulation.  As  this  program  has  gradually  developed, 
some  general  concepts  have  emerged  which  appear  to  have  major  and 
far-reaching  implications  for  the  field  of  stress  research.  In- 
cluded among  such  concepts  which  have  been  particularly  important 
in  opening  up  productive  new  avenues  of  stress  research  are: 

1.)  The  neuroendocrine  apparatus  represents  a third  effector 
system  of  the  brain  (along  with  the  autonomic  and  skeletal-muscular 
systems)  providing  sensitive  and  objective  reflections  of  central 
integrative  processes,  such  as  emotions  a id  psychological  defenses, 
which  are  of  key  importance  in  human  performance  under  stress,  but 
which  have  so  far  been  extraordinarily  difficult  to  bring  under 
rigorous  experimental  investigation.  2.)  There  is  now  serious 
doubt  concerning  the  validity  of  Selye's  "non-specificity"  concept 
in  stress  theory,  because  of  considerable  recent  research  indicating 
that  psychoendocrine  reactions  are  frequently  and  inadvertently 
elicited  during  experiments  designed  for  the  study  of  physical 
stim'-li.  There  is  a pressing  need,  therefore,  for  a thoroughgoing 
reevaluation  of  past  research  on  neuroendocrine  responses  to  the 
physical  stresses,  with  closer  scrutiny  of  independent  variables 
and  special  attention  to  the  possible  contamination  of  physical 
stress  experiments  by  psychoendocrine  reactions  reflecting  attendant 
discomfort,  pain,  or  emotional  reactions.  Our  recent  studies  of 
muscular  exertion,  fasting,  and  heat,  for  example,  indicate  that 
erroneous  conclusions  concerning  the  effects  of  these  stimuli  upon 
neuroendocrine  systems  are  likely  to  be  drawn  unless  rigorous  and 
systematic  efforts  are  made  to  evaluate  and  to  minimize  interfering 
psychoendocrine  reactions.  3.)  While  it  has  long  been  the  pre- 
vailing practice  in  stress  research  to  study  isolated  endocrine 
systems,  usually  one  at  a time,  It  is  increasingly  clear  that  the 


966 


i .iii.i 


many  neuroendocrine  systems  are  closely  interdependent  in  their 
functions  and  that  a key  to  the  understanding  of  the  principles 
underlying  the  integration  of  these  systems  lies  in  the  study  of 
relative  changes  between  interacting  endocrine  systems,  as  mani- 
fested in  the  organization  of  patterns  or  pi  ofiles  of  multiple 
hormonal  responses  to  various  stressful  stimuli.  In  recent  years, 
we  have  learned  that  relatively  distinctive,  broadly  organized 
patterns  of  hormonal  changes,  involving  many  hormones  in  addition 
to  those  of  the  adrenal  systems,  occur  in  response  to  various 
types  of  psychological  and  physical  stress.  A major  immediate 
goal,  therefore,  is  to  define  an  conclusively  as  possible  the 
characteristic  hormone  response  profiles  for  various  stressful 
stimuli,  with  principal  eraphas.s  on  psychological  stimuli,  but 
also  including  exercise,  heat,  cold,  fasting,  hypoxia,  infection, 
and  other  physical  stimuli  encountered  in  military  stress 
situations.  Such  basic  knowledge  of  the  organization  of  integrative 
machinery  is  an  essential  foundation  for  more  complex  neuroendocrine 
approaches  to  the  study  of  stress-related  clinical  and  field  prob- 
lems concerned  with  such  pavameters  as  endurance,  fatigue,  host 
resistance,  performance,  and  the  pathogenesis  of  some  psychosomatic 
disorders.  It  is  clear  that  this  approach  logically  must  move 
eventually  through  a series  of  successive  stages,  beginning  with 
1.)  basic  definition  of  response  profiles  for  the  various  stressful 
stimuli,  2.)  determination  of  the  degree  of  response  profile 
specificity  for  diverse,  discrete  stimuli,  3.)  evaluation  of 
factors  which  determine  response  profile  priorities  when  there  are 
various  natural  admixtures  of  multiple,  concurrent  stimuli,  4.) 
evaluation  of  the  physiological  significance  of  differing  neuro- 
endocrine response  profiles  by  extending  the  approach  to  the  con- 
current study  of  their  metabolic  or  physiological  concomitants  or 
consequences,  and  5.)  evaluation  of  the  degree  to  which  both  acute 
and  chronic  hormone  response  profiles  may  be  adaptive  or  mal- 
adaptive. It  is  evident  that  each  of  the  above  projected  stages 
in  the  development  of  this  conceptual  approach  is  in  large  measure 
dependent  upon  establishment  of  prerequisite  knowledge  in  the  pre- 
ceding stage,  so  that  the  stages  must  generally  best  be  pursued  in 
logical  sequence.  Our  efforts  at  present,  therefore,  are  still 
largely  limited  to  the  sizeable  task  involved  in  just  the  first 
two  stages  of  this  approach.  The  amount  of  stress  response  profile 
data  accumulating,  however,  is  already  quite  substantial  and  is 
providing  an  increasingly  useful  basis  for  the  clarification  and 
revision  of  stress  concepts,  as  discussed  in  some  detail  in  a recent 
overview  of  our  approach  (Toronto  Neuroscience  Symposium).  During 
the  past  year,  a major  portion  of  our  effort  has  been  devoted  to 
continued  collaboration  in  physical  stress  with  the  Army  Research 
Institute  for  Environmental  Medicine  (ARIEM)  at  Natick,  MA. 


967 


Developmental  work  has  also  continued  on  new  or  refined  hormone 
assay  procedures  in  order  to  provide  the  necessary,  up-dated 
methodological  foundation  for  this  stress  research  program. 

Progress 


A.  Organization  of  Neuroendocrine  Responses  to  Psychological 


Stress.  Profile  of  Acute  Hormonal  Responses  to  Capture  and  Chair 


Restraint  in  Monkeys:  The  development  of  highly  sensitive  and 

reliable  new  methods  for  the  measurement  of  plasma  levels  of 
certain  hormones  has  now  made  possible,  for  the  first  time,  in  our 
laboratory,  the  study  of  a relatively  detailed  profile  of  neuro- 
endocrine responses  during  acute  emotional  reactions.  The  selection 
of  hormonal  indices  in  our  research  program  is  based  primarily  on 
the  rationale  that  it  is  logical  in  the  study  of  neuroendocrine 
organization  to  begin  with  endocrine  systems  that  have  well-estab- 
lished neuroendocrine  linkages,  that  is,  systems  in  which  endocrine 
cells  articulate  with  nerve  cells,  either  via  neural  or  neurohumoral 
connections.  The  battery  of  methods  used  in  this  study  includes 
those  for  the  measurement  of  plasma  cortisol,  epinephrine,  norepi- 
nephrine, total  thyroxine,  thyrotropin,  testosterone,  growth  hormone, 
insulin,  prolactin,  and  glucagon.  Chair  restraint  and  capture  was 
selected  as  a particularly  suitable  situation  for  response  profile 
study,  since  previous  research  with  the  adrenal  systems  had  shown  it 
to  be  an  especially  potent,  reliable,  and  convenient  psychoendocrine 
stimulus.  Following  a period  of  at  least  one  week  of  cage  housing 
in  a quiet,  stable  environment,  monkeys  were  captured  as  rapidly  as 
possible  and  blood  samples  obtained  by  saphenous  venipuncture  at 
intervals  of  1,  3 and  5 minutes.  The  monkey  was  then  installed  in 
the  restraining  chair  and  additional  samples  obtained  at  20,  40  and 
60  minutes,  2,  4,  6,  24  and  48  hours.  A primary  series  of  8 capture 
and  restraint  experiments  and  12  catheter  control  experiments  have 
now  been  completed  and  all  hormonal  analyses  are  now  completed.  A 
family  of  hormonal  response  curves  has  been  defined,  with  different 
hormones  having  remarkably  different  dynamic  characteristics. 
Prolactin  levels  show  about  a four-fold  increase,  peaking  at  20 
minutes  after  onset  of  restraint.  Growth  hormone  shows  greater  than 
a fifteen-fold  elevation  peaking  at  40  minutes.  Cortisol  shows  about 
a three-fold  elevation  peaking  at  4 hours.  Thyrotropin  levels  show 
nearly  a two-fold  increase  during  the  first  hour,  but  total  thyroxine 
rises  only  very  slowly  to  about  a two-fold  elevation  at  48  hours. 
Testosterone  levels,  after  a mild  and  transient  rise,  show  a slow  but 
marked  decline  over  a 24  hour  period  and  remain  very  low  for  at  least 
a week.  Plasma  insulin  levels  generally  tend  to  be  suppressed  after 
4 to  6 hours.  Preliminary  evidence  indicates  that  a four-fold  in- 
crease in  plasma  glucagon  levels  may  occur  within  5 minutes  after 
capture. 


r 


During  the  past  year  a new  series  of  these  capture-restraint 
experiments  has  been  completed  which  will  permit  the  addition  of 
plasma  epinephrine,  norepinephrine  and  renin  measurements  to  enlarge 
the  profile.  In  the  first  experiment  with  plasma  renin  measurement, 
a marked,  approximately  eight-fold  elevation  was  observed,  peaking  at 
2 hours  and  remaining  high  for  at  least  6 o.rs  after  restraint  onset. 
This  is  the  most  striking  evidence  yet  a~  ...able  for  the  responsive- 
ness of  renin  levels  to  psychological  str,  s. 

In  general  the  overall  pattern  of  acute  neuroendocrine  responses 
observed  following  capture  and  chair  restraint  is  closely  similar  to 
that  observed  earlier  in  conditioned  avoidance  experiments  and  chair 
restraint  experiments  which  were  of  longer  duration  and  dependent 
largely  upon  24-hour  urinary  hormonal  excretion  measurements.  In 
these  earlier  studies  it  was  difficult  to  evaluate  in  some  instances 
the  extent  to  which  such  factors  as  altered  food  intake,  altered 
sleep  patterns,  prolonged  postural  changes,  or  altered  muscular 
activity  might  have  been  determinants  of  the  neuroendocrine  response 
pattern  along  with  psychological  factors.  The  present  study,  how- 
ever, using  plasma  hormone  measurements  during  the  initial  minutes 
and  hours  of  restraint,  before  the  above  non-psychological  variables 
become  significant  factors,  provides  a much  stronger  basis  for  in- 
terpreting these  data  as  representing  primarily  a psychoendocrine 
response  pattern.  The  data  on  prolactin,  glucagon,  and  renin  provide 
some  of  the  most  striking  data  available  so  far,  particularly  with 
regard  to  control  of  non-psychological  variables,  which  indicate  that 
these  three  hormones  should  be  included  among  the  growing  assemblage 
of  hormones  which  are  sensitively  responsive  to  psychological  stimuli. 

Finally,  control  experiments  incorporated  in  this  study  include 
experiments  in  which  blood  samples  were  taken  by  saphenous  venipuncture 
on  exactly  the  same  schedule  after  one  month  of  restraint  and  three 
subsequent  control  experiments  performed  in  each  monkey  at  weekly 
intervals  in  which  blood  samples  on  the  same  schedule  were  withdrawn 
remotely  through  chronic  indwelling  venous  catheters  in  order  to 
minimize  psychological  disturbance  of  the  monkeys.  Only  very  minor 
hormonal  fluctuations  have  been  observed  in  the  catheter  control  ex- 
periments. In  the  control  saphenous  venipuncture  experiments,  a 
pattern  of  response  very  similar  to  that  seen  with  acute  capture  and 
restraint  has  been  observed,  but  generally  hormonal  changes  are  of 
substantially  smaller  magnitude. 


969 


B . Organization  of  Neuroendocrine  Responses  to  Physical  Stress. 
1.  Neuroendocrine  Studies  of  Heat  Acclimatization. 


In  continuation  of  our  studies  of  heat  exposure  in 
collaboration  with  Dr.  John  Maher  of  the  ARIEM  laboratories  at 
Natick,  we  have  studied  hormonal  profiles  in  two  groups,  each  com- 
posed of  four  normal  young  men;  one  group  during  a "control"  first 
week  with  no  treatment  and  a second  week  with  daily  90  minute 
exposure  to  43°C  (30%  R.H.);  the  second  group  had  mild  daily  90 
minute  physical  training  sessions  at  25  C the  first  week  and  43  C 
(30%  R.H.)  the  second  week. 

Cortisol.  Plasma  cortisol  levels  declined  rather  sharply 
during  heat  exposure  alone,  but  showed  less  of  a decline  when  mus- 
cular exertion  was  superimposed.  It  is  especially  noteworthy  that 
cortisol  levels  showed  no  significant  increase  in  any  of  the  heat 
exposure  experiments  although  exercise  .sad  presumably  emotional 
reaction  from  the  discomfort  was  present  d.-  ^lng  exposure  to  such 
intense  heat. 

Growth  Hormone.  Plasma  growth  hormone  levels  did  not 
change  significantly  during  heat  exposure  alone,  but  did  show 
moderate  elevations  when  muscular  work  was  superimposed.  However, 
levels  were  also  elevated  in  the  exercise  ?,roup  o-;  the  control  day 
with  catheterization  alone. 

Testosterone.  Plasma  testosterone  levels  showed  a slight 
trend  upwards  with  both  heat  and  exercise-heat  conditions  but  the 
changes  are  not  significant. 

Insulin.  Plasma  insulin  levels  did  not  change  significant- 
ly with  heat  alone  but  decreased  sharply  when  exercise  was  super- 
imposed. 


Total  Thyroxine.  Plasma  thyroxine  levels  did  not  change 
significantly  during  the  brief  heat  exposure  periods  nor  with 
exercise  although  there  was  a mild  upward  trend  in  levels. 

In  general,  these  findings  confirm  those  of  a previous 
study  of  acute  heat  exposure,  particularly  with  regard  to  the  failure 
of  heat  "stress"  to  stimulate  the  pituitary-adrenal  cortical  system, 
thus  providing  still  further  data  militating  against  the  "non- 
specificity" concept  of  Selye  in  stress  theory.  In  addition,  this 
study  indicates  that  heat  may  exert  a suppressive  influence  which 
overrides  the  concurrent  excitatory  influence  of  psychological  stress 
and  exercise.  Growth  hormone  and  insulin  responses  to  exercise  do 
apparently  occur,  however,  during  heat  exposure. 


970 


It  is  questionable  whether  any  conclusions  concerning  heat 
acclimatization  effects  can  be  drawn  from  these  experime  rs,  since 
physiological  measures  such  as  rectal  temperature  and  heart  rate 
indicated  only  a mild  degree  of  heat  acclimatization  a,",  the  end  of 
the  second  week  in  the  exercise-heat  exposure  group.  Lt  appears 
likely  that  there  was  appreciable  residual  summer  acclimatization 
in  this  group  of  young  men  from  Ft.  Jackson,  S.C.,  studied  in  Boston 
in  October.  It  appears  advisable  to  view  these  present  data,  tnen, 
largely  in  terms  of  acute  and  repeated  short  term  heat  exposure 
with  and  without  concurrent  muscular  exertion,  as  discussed  above. 
Further  studies  would  be  needed  of  subjects  showing  more  marked 
physiological  evidence  of  heat  acclimatization  before  firmer  conclu- 
sions could  be  drawn  legarding  possible  hormonal  correlates  of  such 
acclimatization. 

II.  Mechanism  of  Neuroendocrine  Response  to  Stress 

In  order  to  study  neurochemical  mechanisms  concomitantly  with 
hormonal  response  to  environmental  stress,  it  has  become  necessary 
to  develop  new  models.  It  is  well  established  that  stress  causes 
elevations  in  plasma  corticosterone  (1-5)  and  prolactin  (is  while 
lowering  plasma  growth  hormone  (3,4).  Corticosterone  levels  follow- 
ing stress  vary  with  time  of  day,  reflecting  the  circadian  rhythm  in 
testing  levels  (2)  . It  has  been  demonstrated  that  habituation  occurs 
to  the  corticosterone  response  induced  by  handling  (3,4).  Stress  is 
reported  to  activate  central  noradrenergic  (NE)  dopaminergic  (DA) 
and  serotonergic  (5HT)  neurons  (6-12).  It  has  been  recently  reported 
that  cold  stress  elevates  cerebellar  cyclic  GMP  in  rats  (13)  and  mice 
(14).  Cyclic  nucleotides  are  known  to  active  protein  kinases. 
Rodknight  (15)  notes  a possible  stress  component  in  brain  protein 
kinase  activity.  Increases  in  cAMP  levels  in  brain  tissues  have  been 
demonstrated  following  exposure  to  NE,  DA  or  5HT  in  vitro  (16,17)  and 
to  NE  (but  only  minimally  to  DA)  in  vivo  (18), 

The  foregoing  has  led  us  to  predict  that  psychological  stressors 
will  elevate  cGMP  and/or  cAMP.  An  ACTH  fragment  reportedly  lowers 
brain  GABA  (19).  As  ACTH  is  released  in  stress  and  GABA  administra- 
tion lowers  cGMP  (20) , it  would  seem  highly  desirable  to  study  the 
effects  of  stress  (as  well  as  ACTH  and  other  peptides)  on  brain  cGMP 
and  GABA,  as  well  as  norepinephrine  and  cAMP,  A method  has  been 
established  in  our  laboratory  which  permits  assay  of  gamma-amino- 
butyric acid  (GABA),  glutamic  acid  (GLU) , cyclic  adenosine  3' 5', 
monophosphate  (cAMP),  cyclic  guanosine  3' 5'  monophosphate  (cGMP) 
and  norepinephrine  in  the  same  sample  of  brain  tissue  after  microwave 
inactivation  of  enzymes,  thereby  increasing  the  amount  of  information 
obtainable  from  a single  experiment.  The  assays  employed  are  the 
radioimmunoassay  of  Steiner  for  cyclic  nucleotides  and  the  enzymatic 
method  of  Graham  and  Aprison  for  GABA  and  GLU.  It  is  thought  that 
cGMP  is  responsive  to  cholinergic  transmission  and  under  various 


9/1 


i 


conditions,  brain  tissue  cAMP  is  stimulated  by  norepinephrine, 
dopamine,  serotonin  and  histamine.  Emphasis  in  the  field  is  shifting 
to  cAMP/cGMP  ratios,  and  the  capacity  to  study  both  is  essential. 
Further  studies  in  our  laboratory  have  demonstrated  that  the  tech- 
nique of  using  high-intensity  microwave  irradiation  for  enzyme 
inactivation  as  indispensable  for  determining  levels  of  cAMP,  cGMP 
and  GABA  in  brain  regions.  The  elimination  of  artifact  has  per- 
mitted the  establishment  of  new  levels  of  these  substances  in  the 
regions  studied  previously.  In  addition,  for  many  of  the  regions, 
the  work  is  unique  in  that  levels  have  never  previously  been  reported. 

We  have  recently  completed  a preliminary  study  of  the  effect  of 
footshock  on  levels  of  cyclic  nucleotides  in  brain.  A significant 
increase  in  cGMP  in  cerebral  cortex,  as  well  as  cerebellum  was  found 
in  animals  exposed  to  that  stressor.  No  significant  changes  in  cAMP 
were  found.  Several  additional  studies  are  planned  which  will  eval- 
uate the  effects  of  a range  of  stressors  on  brain  GABA  and  cGMP  as 
well  as  NE  and  cAMP.  Future  work  will  include  examination  of  sex 
differences  in  neurochemical  and  hormonal  responses  to  stress,  as 
well  as  neurochemical  mechanisms  involved  in  habituation  to  chronic 
exposure  to  stress. 

A new  area  of  critical  importance  to  understanding  the  effects 
of  stress  on  emotional  breakdown  is  being  opened  up  by  studies  in- 
dicating direct  effects  of  steroid  and  peptide  hormones  on  brain. 
Corticosteroids  bind  preferentially  to  specific  regions  in  brain, 
notably  brainstem  and  hippocampus  (21,22).  The  binding  is  both  to 
cytosol  and  to  nuclei  and  is  influenced  by  level  of  circulating 
corticoids  (21).  Corticosterone  administration  causes  a marked 
increase  in  the  activity  of  tryptophan  hydroxylase  (the  enzyme  that 
synthesizes  serotonin)  in  midbrain  (24).  These  observations  have  led 
to  speculation  that  the  serotonin  neurons  which  project  from  the 
raphe  cells  to  the  hippocampus  (16,25)  might  mediate  the  feedback 
inhibitory  effect  of  glucocorticoids  on  the  pituitary-adrenal  axis. 
There  is  controversy  over  whether  or  not  glucocorticoids  depress  the 
single  unit  firing  from  raphe  cells  (26,27).  An  increase  in  hippo- 
campal theta  is  reported  to  occur  1 hr  following  glucocorticoid 
administration  (29).  Raphe  stimulation,  which  releases  5HT  (34), 
blocks  habituation  to  auditory  startle  response  (35).  In  one  study 
of  glial  tumor  cells  in  culture,  glucocorticoids  doubled  the  cAMP 
response  to  NE  but  at  least  a 20  hr  exposure  to  the  glucocorticoids 
was  required  for  minimal  effect  (23).  From  the  above  description,  it 
appears  likely  that  the  direct  effect  of  glucocorticoids  on  brain  is 
more  related  to  chronic,  rather  than  acute  effects  of  stress. 

As  an  initial  approach  to  study  of  effects  of  hormones  on  brain, 
in  collaboration  with  Dr.  Barry  Hoffer  at  St.  Elizabeth's  Hospital, 
Washington,  D.C.,  we  have  carried  out  several  experiments  involving 
the  measurement  of  cyclic  nucleotides  in  a chronic  preparation  of 


9 12 


hippocampal  explant.  Dr.  Hoffer  and  his  colleagues  have  carried  out 
electrophysiological  studies  demonstrating  cholinergic  innervation  oi 
the  explant  via  the  supetior  cervical  ganglion.  Our  efforts  are 
directed  toward  understanding  the  receptor  response  in  this  system  as 
manifested  by  possible  cyclic  nucleotide  level  changes  in  the  explant. 
Effects  of  uuperfused  steroids  and  peptide  hormones  will  be  evaluated 
in  this  system. 

In  another  approach  to  study  the  effects  of  hormones  on  the  brain, 
we  will  study  the  effects  of  administered  hormones  on  the  cyclic  nucleo- 
tide response  to  stimulation  of  specific  monoamine  tracts,  particularly 
those  innervating  the  hippocampus.  In  preparation  for  these  studies, 
we  have  studied  the  effect  of  urethane  on  cyclic  nucleotide  levels.  A 
marked  reduction  of  cGMP  levels  was  found  in  the  cerebellum. 

To  ensure  optimal  support  of  the  stress  studies,  we  have  modified 
assay  procedures  to  reflect  * most  current  technological  advances. 

To  increase  the  sensitivity  f our  assay  system  we  are  present’v  work- 
ing with  modifications  of  techniques  for  acetylating  our  sampx  s as 
described  by  Harper  and  Brooker  (J.  of  Cyclic  Nucleotide  Research 
1:207-218,  1975).  This  appears  to  be  a promising  method  to  increase 
our  sensitivity  into  the  femtomole  range.  In  collaboration  with 
Dr.  David  Rodbard  at  NIH,  we  have  completed  a study  evaluating  the 
4 parameter  logistic  model  for  statistical  analysis  of  cyclic  AMP  and 
cyclic  GMP  radioimmunoassays.  In  an  effort  to  maintain  the  quality 
and  stability  of  the  assay  procedure,  efforts  this  past  year  have 
been  directed  toward  producing  and  characterizing  our  own  antibodies 
for  cyclic  AMP  and  cyclic  GMP.  The  protein-conjugates  of  the  ScAMP 
and  ScGMP  derivatives  were  prepared  in  our  laboratory  and  used  for 
immunization  in  our  rabbit  colony.  At  this  time  we  have  several 
potentially  good  cyclic  GMP  antibodies  which  are  being  titrated  and 
evaluated  for  cross-reactivity. 

Because  many  of  our  neurochemical  studies  require  the  use  of  high- 
intensity  microwave  irradiation  to  accomplish  enzyme  inactivation,  we 
have  continued  to  initiate  improvements  in,  and  document  limitations 
of,  the  microwave  technology.  Modifications  of  our  present  microwave 
power  source,  Varian  PPS-2.5,  introducing  electronic  circuitry  to  pre- 
cisely control  power  delivered  to  the  animal  as  well  as  exposure 
duration,  have  been  completed  by  Peter  Brown  in  the  Department  of 
Microwave  Research  and  are  presently  in  operation.  Studies  have  con- 
tinued in  conjunction  with  Dr.  0m  Gandhi  and  Department  of  Microwave 
Research  to  develop  an  appropriate  waveguide  applicator  to  achieve 
more  uniform  enzyme  inactivation  in  the  brain.  As  noted  in  last  years 
report,  we  have  a waveguide  applicator  suitable  for  high  energy  expo- 
sures at  985  MHZ.  We  have  proceeded  with  testing  of  this  applicator 
for  uniformity  of  inactivation  using  histochemical  techniques  in 
collaboration  with  AFIP.  By  evaluating  the  pattern  of  presence  or 
absence  of  succinic  dehydrogenase  activity,  we  hope  to  demonstrate  the 
degree  of  uniformity  of  inactivation  not  only  at  985  MHZ  but  also 
at  2450. 


973 


High  power  microwave  irradiation  at  2450  MHZ  has  been  used  in 
the  measurement  of  a number  of  metabolites  (Cyclic  AMP,  Cyclic  GMP, 
ATP,  Creatine-P,  etc.)  and  putative  neurotransmitters  (GABA,  Gluta- 
mate, and  Acetylcholine)  in  the  brains  of  both  rats  and  mice.  Whole 
brain  levels  of  these  compounds  have  compared  favorably  to  rapid 
freezing  techniques.  Although  determination  of  many  of  these  sub- 
stances in  brain  regions  has  been  performed  after  microwave  inactiva- 
tion, the  possibility  of  cell  membrane  disruption  secondary  to  rapid 
heating  with  subsequent  diffusion  has  been  considered  but  never 
demonstrated.  Studies  in  our  laboratory  and  one  other  have  demonstra- 
ted the  use  of  microwave  irradiation  at  2450  MHZ  in  the  measurement 
of  norepinephrine  (NE)  and  dopamine  (DA)  in  whole  brain.  Regional 
brain  studies  in  our  laboratory,  however,  indicate  highly  significant 
increases  in  DA  concentration  in  specific  areas  including  regions  of 
the  cortex,  amygdala  and  septal  area  following  irradiation  at  2450 
MHZ.  Concentrations  of  NE  in  all  17  regions  studies  were  comparable 
to  the  decapitated  control  values.  Since  the  precise  pattern  of 
microwave  energy  deposition  into  the  brain  is  not  homogeneous  and 
is  affected  by  frequency  as  well  as  applicator  characteristics, 
studies  of  regional  levels  of  NE  and  DA  in  rat  brain  were  carried 
out  at  985  MHZ.  Once  again  levels  of  DA  were  significantly  elevated 
over  decapitated  controls  in  the  same  regions,  while  NE  values 
remained  unaffected.  These  data  suggest  that  a problem  of  diffusion 
with  microwave  inactivation  may  occur  independent  of  the  frequency 
used,  and  may  be  significant  in  the  case  of  compounds  with  high 
regional  concentration  gradients  in  brain. 

Histological  examination  accomplished  in  the  Department  of 
Neurophysiology  and  in  the  AFIP  using  Woelke's  or  Luxol-Fast  Blue 
staining  indicated  a marked  breakdown  of  myelinated  bundles  in 
corpus  callosum  and  corona  radiata  which  might  have  facilitated 
diffusion  from  the  corpus  striatum  to  the  adjacent  frontal  and 
parietal  cortex  an  well  as  to  the  septal  nuclei  and  amygdala. 

Elements  of  this  work  will  be  continued  under  Project  No. 
3A762758A823,  Work  Unit  037  and  Project  No.  3A161102371P,  Work 
Unit  070. 


974 


1 


Project  3A762758A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 


Work  Unit  034  Influence  of  stress  on  hormone  response,  performance 
and  emotional  breakdown  in  military  personnel. 

Literature  Cited. 


References : 

1.  Henkin,  R.I.,  and  Knigge,  K. : Effects  of  sound  on  the 

hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  204 : 710,  1963. 

2.  Dunn,  J. , Scheving,  L. , and  Millet,  P. : Circadian  variation 

in  stress-evoked  increases  in  plasma  corticosterone.  Am.  J.  Physiol. 
222(2) :402-406,  1972. 

3.  Kokka,  G.J.F.,  George,  R.,  and  Elliott,  H.W. : Growth 

hormone  and  ACTH  secretion:  evidence  for  an  inverse  relationship 
in  rats.  Endocrinology  90(3) : 735-743,  1972. 

4.  Takahashi,  K. , Daughaday,  W.M.,  and  Kipnis,  D.M. : Regulation 

of  immuno reactive  growth  hormone  secretion  in  male  rats.  Endocrinology 
88:909-917,  1971. 

5.  Brown,  G.M. , Martin,  J.B.:  Corticosterone,  prolactin,  and 

growth  hormone  responses  to  handling  and  new  environment  in  the  rat. 
Psychosom.  Med.  36(3) :241-247,  1974. 

6.  Corrodi,  M. , Fuxe,  K. , and  Hokfelt,  T. : The  effect  of  im- 

mobilization stress  on  the  activity  of  central  monoamine  neurons. 

Life  Sci  2:107-112,  1968. 

7.  Korf,  J.,  Aghajanian,  G.J.,  and  Roth,  R.M. : Increased 

turnover  of  norepinephrine  in  the  rat  cerebral  cortex  during  stress: 
role  of  the  locus  coeruleus.  Neuropharmacology  12:933-938,  1973. 

8.  Thierry,  A.M. , Blanc,  G. , and  Glowinski,  J. : Effect  of 
stress  on  intraneuronal  storage  forms  in  the  brain  stem  of  the  rat. 

J.  Neurochem.  18.:449-461,  1971. 

9.  Thierry,  A.M. , Javoy,  F.,  Glowinski,  J.,  and  Kety,  S.S.: 
Effects  of  stress  on  the  metabolism  of  norepinephrine,  dopamine  and 
serotonin  in  the  central  nervous  system  of  the  rat.  I.  Modifications 
of  norepinephrine  turnover.  J.  Pharm.  Exp.  Ther.  163:163-171,  1968. 

10.  Bliss,  E. : Relationship  of  stress  to  brain  serotonin  and 

5-hydroxyindoleacetic  acid.  J.  Psychiat.  Res.  9:71-80,  1972. 


sr  pi'  ~ ' 


11.  Morgan,  W. : Effect  of  immobilization  stress  on  serotonin 

content  and  turnover  in  regions  of  the  rat  brain.  Life  Sci.  17 : 

143-150,  1975. 

12.  Bliss,  E.  : Relationship  of  stress  and  activity  to  brain 

dopamine  and  homovanillic  acid.  Life  Sci.  10:1161-1169,  1971. 

13.  Mao,  C.C.,  Guidotti,  A.,  and  Costa,  E.  : Interactions  be- 

tween Y-2minobutyric  acid  and  guanosine  3', 5'  cyclic  monophosphate 
in  rat  cerebellum.  Mol.  Pharmacol.  10:736-745,  1974. 

14.  Dinnendahl,  V.:  Effects  of  stress  on  mouse  brain  cyclic 

nucleotide  levels  in  vivo.  Brain  Res.  100 : 716-719,  1975. 

15.  Rodknight.  Personal  communication. 

16.  Huang,  M.J. : Documentation  of  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate 

in  incubated  slices  of  brain  tissue.  I.  Structure  activity  relation- 
ships of  agonists  and  antagonists  of  biogenic  amines  and  of  tricyclic 
tranquilizers  and  antidepressants.  Medicinal  Chem.  L5:458,  1972. 

17.  Forn,  J.:  Adenosine  3’ ,5* -monophosphate  content  in  rat 

caudate  nucleus:  demonstration  of  dopaminergic  and  adrenergic  receptors. 
Science  186:1118-1120,  1974. 

18.  Burkard,  W.P. : Catecholamine  induced  increase  of  cyclic 

adenosine  3' 5' -monophosphate  in  rat  brain  in  vivo.  J.  Neurochem. 
19:2615-2619,  1972. 

19.  Leonard,  B.E.:  The  effect  of  two  synthetic  ACTH  analogues 

on  the  metabolism  of  biogenic  amines  in  the  rat  brain.  Arch.  Int. 
de  Pharmacodynamie  207^:242-253,  1974. 

20.  Mao,  C.C.,  Guidotti,  A.,  and  Costa,  E. : The  regulation  of 

cyclic  guanosine  monophosphate  in  rat  cerebellum:  possible  involvement 
of  putative  amino  acid  neurotransmitters.  Brain  Res.  79^:510-514,  1974. 

21.  Steiner,  A.L.,  Kipnis,  D.M.,  Utiger,  R.,  and  Parker,  C.W. : 
Radioimmunoassay  for  the  measurement  of  adenosine  3',5'-cyclic  phos- 
phate. Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  64:367,  1969. 


22.  Steiner,  A.L.,  Wehmann,  R.E.,  Parker,  C.W.,  and  Kipnis,  D.M. : 
In  Advances  in  Cyclic  Nucleotide  Research,  Vol.  12,  Ed.  by  P.  Greengard, 
G.  Alan  Robison,  and  R.  Paoletti.  Raven  Press,  New  York,  1972. 

23.  Graham,  L.T.,  and  Aprison,  M.H.:  Fluorometric  determination 

of  aspartate,  glutamate,  gamma-aminobutyrate  in  nerve  tissue  using 
enzymic  methods.  Analytical  Biochem.  15^:487-497,  1966. 


24.  Ferrendelli,  J.A.,  Steiner,  A.L.,  and  McDougal,  D.B.:  The 

effect  of  oxotremorine  and  atropine  on  cGMP  and  cAMP  levels  in  mouse 
cerebral  cortex  and  cerebellum.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  Rsch.  Comm. 
41:1061-1067,  1970. 

25.  Brown,  J.H.,  and  Makman,  M.H. : Stimulation  by  dopamine  of 

adenylate  cyclase  in  retinal  homogenates  and  of  adenosine  3'5'-cyclic 
monophosphate  formation  in  intact  retina.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci. 

69^(3)  :539-543,  1971. 

26.  Kebabian,  J.W.,  Petzold,  G.L.,  and  Greengard,  P.:  Dopamine- 

sensitive  adenylate  cyclase  in  caudate  nucleus  of  rat  brain,  and  its 
similarity  to  the  "dopamine  receptor".  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  69 : 
2145-2149,  1972. 

27.  Lenox,  R.H.,  Meyerhof f,  J.L.,  and  Wray,  H.L.:  Regional 

distribution  of  cyclic  nucleotides  in  rat  brain  as  determined  after 
microwave  fixation  technique.  Proc.  Soc.  for  Neurosciences  Fourth 
Annual  Meeting,  1974. 

28.  Balcom,  G.J.,  Lenox,  R.H.,  and  Meyerhof f,  J.L.:  Regional 

gamma-aminobutyric  acid  levels  in  rat  brain  determined  after  microwave 
fixation.  J.  Neurochem.  24^(4) : 609-613,  1975. 

29.  McEwen,  B.S.,  Wallach,  G.,  and  Magnus,  C.:  Corticosterone 

binding  to  hippocampus:  immediate  and  delayed  influences  of  the 
absence  of  adrenal  secretion.  Brain  Res.  _70(2)  :321-334 , 1974. 

30.  Kraulis,  I.,  Foldes,  G.,  Traikov,  H.,  Dubrovsky,  B.:  Distri- 

bution, metabolism  and  biological  activity  of  deoxycorticosterone  in 
tne  central  nervous  system.  Brain  Res.  88(1):1-14,  1975. 

31.  Azmitia,  E.C.:  Corticosterone  regulation  of  tryptophan 

hydroxylase  in  midbrain  of  the  rat.  Brain  Res.  166:1274-1276,  1969. 

32.  Lorens,  S.A.,  and  Guldberg,  H.C.:  Regional  5-hydroxy- 

tryptamine  following  selective  midbrain  raphe  lesions  in  the  rat. 

Brain  Res.  78(l):45-56,  1974. 

33.  Dahlstrom,  A.:  A method  for  the  demonstration  of  monoamine- 

containing  nerve  fibers  in  the  central  nervous  system.  Acta  Physiol. 
Scand.  62,  Suppl.  232:1-55,  1964. 

34.  Mosko,  S.S.,  and  Jacobs,  B.L.:  Midbrain  raphe  neurons: 
sensitivity  to  glucocorticoids  and  ACTH  in  the  rat.  Brain  Res.  89 
(2) : 368-375,  1975. 

35.  Foote,  W.E.:  Effect  of  hydrocortisone  in  single  unit 

activity  in  midbrain  raphe.  Brain  Res.  4_l:242-244,  1972. 


36.  Martin,  S.M.,  Moberg,  G.P.,  and  Horowitz,  J.M. : Glucocorti- 
coids and  the  hippocampal  theta  rhythm  in  loosely  restrained,  un- 
anesthetized rabbits.  Brain  Res.  9^3(3)  :535— 542,  1975. 

37.  Aghajanian,  G.K.:  Serotonin:  release  in  the  forebrain  by 

stimulation  of  midbrain  raphe.  Science  156 :402 , 1967. 

38.  Sheard,  M.H.:  Stimulation  of  midbrain  raphe  neurons: 

behavioral  effects  of  serotonin  release.  Life  Sci.  7^:19-25,  1968. 

Publications : 

1.  Mason,  J.W.  Emotion  as  Reflected  in  Patterns  of  Endocrine 
Integration.  Karolinska  Symposium  on  Parameters  of  Emotion.  Emotions — 
Their  Parameters  and  Measurement,  Ed.  by  L.  Levi,  pp.  143-181,  Raven 
Press,  New  York,  1975. 

2.  Mason,  J.W. : A historical  view  of  the  stress  field,  Part 

I.  J.  Human  Stress  _1(1):6-12,  1975. 

3.  Mason,  J.W. : A historical  view  of  the  stress  field,  Part 

II.  J.  Human  Stress  ,2(2):22-36,  1975. 

4.  Mason,  J.W.:  Psychological  Stress  and  Endocrine  Function. 

Topics  in  Endocrinology,  Ed.  by  E.  Sachar,  Grune  & Stratton,  New 
York,  pp.  1-18,  1975. 

5.  Mason,  J.W. : Clinical  Psychophysiology:  Psychoendocrine 

Mechanisms.  Amer.  Handbook  of  Psychiatry,  Vol.  IV,  Ed.  by  M.  Reiser, 
Basic  Books,  New  York,  pp.  553-582,  1975. 

6.  Natelson,  B.H.,  Holaday,  J.,  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  and  Stokes, 

P.E.:  Temporal  changes  in  growth  hormone,  cortisol,  and  glucose: 

relation  to  light  onset  and  behavior.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  229(2) : 

409-415,  1975. 

7.  Lenox,  R.H.,  Gandhi,  O.P.,  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  and  Grove,  H.M. : 

A microwave  applicator  for  in-vivo  rapid  inactivation  of  enzymes  in 
the  central  nervous  system.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Microwave  Theory 
and  Techniques,  January  1976,  pp.  58-61. 

8.  Rodbard,  D. , Lenox,  R.H.,  Wray,  H.L.,  and  Ramseth,  D.: 
Statistical  characterization  of  the  random  errors  in  the  radioimmuno- 
assay dose-response  variable.  Clin.  Chem.  22^3) : 350-358,  1976. 


978 


Project  3A762758A824 
RADIATION  INJURY  AND  PROTECTION 


Task  00 

Microwave  Radiation 


10  NO  COOE»  * 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I DATE  RRI  V tUM*NY 

75  07  01 


4 NINO  or  SUNHART 


D Change 


PROGRAM  ELEMENT 


b CONTRIBUTING 


CONTRIBUTING 


62758A 


nTaTTTT"^" 

u 


• NORM  JICUI 


IIM^^ 


NNOJECT  NUMBER 


3A762758A824 


I AGIRCY  ACCEI 

DA  OB  6484 


•*  ?RA(MNG* 

NA 


76  07  01 


»»  OMB*N  IN® TR 

NL 


TASK  AREA  NUMBER 


“07" 


i t itl*  »ma  lafJiir  c(N<inM'i7cNNr 

(U)  Biological  Effects  and  Hazards  of  Microwave  Radiation 


ttUPQUT  CONTROL  SYMBOL 

OI)  DRlF.rAK  .t,ib 


B*  IRECIPIC  OATA 
CONTRACTOR  ACCISI 

B TIS  D MO 


utvEL  Or  sun 

A.  MOB®  UNIT 


morn  unit  number 


W 


1 SCifNTiriC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  ANBAS* 

013400  Psychology  016208  Stress  Physiology  005700  Electronic  & Electrical  Engineering 


II  START  OAT* 


71  07 


• 4 ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  DATE 

C0NT 


CONTRACT  GRANT 

OATES/trSECTlvE 

NUMRE  R * 


I ARlRATIOR 


NA 


v PE 


•.  KINO  OE  ARARO 


4 AMOUNT 

f.  CUM.  AMT. 


• RESPONSIBLE  OOD  ORO  AMI  | A TION 


rami*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


• lA  INDIVIDUAL 

Joy,  COE  R.  J.  T. 
(202)  576-3551 


|l  GCNCAAL  VII 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


I®  rUNOING  AGENCY 


DA 


I®  Nt  SOURCES  ESTIMATE 


viveiuui 

76 


N PEN  rOMMN  G ORGANIIA  »OM 


14  PCRrONMANC  E ME  VmOO 

C.  In-House 


A PROrtlSIOM  At  MAN  YRS  4 E UN  CM  (In  WwuiaiNj 


T 


609 


t.'jli 


nani  * Wa  Iter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Neuropsychiatry 
*»D**“ "Washington,  DC  20012 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  fPwHNAA  MAR  If  1/  | Am 

. Hunt , E.  L. 


TELEPHONE 

SOCIAL  SECU 


(202)  427-5262 


ASSOCIATE  INVtBTIGATOBS 

I.arsen,  MA.I.  L.E. 
Jacobi,  J.H. 


II  .I.NGut*'/-— '.A«  I.  (■«-!*  I«  —ID  . (...  1 1 1 .ii— . CaA.)  (0)  MlllUWrlVf  Hdidi  J.hj  (U)  ^Unionizing  R.'ld  1 U L ! CJ1 

Dosimetry;  (U)  Behavioral  Effects;  (U)  Physiological  Effects;  (U)  Military  Medicine 


trrr 


It  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE*  14  APPROACH.  IS  PROONtU  (1—1*  MX  AnI  MNPM*' 


PNI*4|  •(  Mrt  MS  S»r<Mi*r  CImiIIkHm  Cap*  ) 


23.  (0)  To  establish  meaningful  criteria  for  delimiting  human  occupancy  in  an 
electr  imagnet  ic  (EM)  environment  in  support  of  maximum  operational  effectiveness  of 
Army  and  other  military  personnel  with  minimum  medical  and  health  risk.  Delineate  t lie 
interaction  of  radio  frequency  and  microwave  radiation  (10  MHz  to  100  GHz)  with 
biological  systems.  Survey  and  evaluate  known  methods  and  techniques  of  EM  dosimetry 
and  develop  same  for  control  and  measurement  of  incident  and  absorbed  energy  where 
appropriate  and  necessary. 

24.  (U)  Investigate  each  major  organ  system  and  biological  process  where  EM  effects 
might  occur  at  reasonably  low  power  intensities.  Where  indicated,  determine  the 
military  significance  of  the  effects  and  the  measures  necessary  to  obviate  them. 
Scientific  methods  of  engineering,  biophysics,  physiology,  neurophysiology  and 
experimental  psychology  will  he  used.  Exposure  parameters  will  be  chosen  to  provide 
information  relevant  to  Army  radiating  equipment  and  operational  requirements. 

25.  (II)  75  07  - 76  06.  Research  is  conducted  on:  energy  absorption  and  distribution 

in  experimental  animals  and  figurine  models  of  humans  using  temperature  rise 
measurements  and  absolute  calorimetry;  modeling  of  resonant  and  non-resonant 
absorption  conditions  as  determined  hv  frequency,  field  orientation  and  presence 

of  reflecting  surfaces;  development  of  Implantable,  radio  transparent  temperature 
probe  system;  character i zat ion  of  blood-brain  barrier  permeability  changes  with 
brief  exposure  to  low-level  pulsed  fields;  modeling  of  microwave  transmission  in 
anistropic  tissues;  investigation  of  microwave  field  escape  and  behavioral  activation 
with  low-level  exposures,  (For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report  1 Jul  75  - 30  Inn  76).  Support  in  the  amount  of  ■;  JO, 
from  FY  7t  funds  is  program  for  the  period  1 July  76  through  30  Sc 


*4rAllibl*  In  lontrAcfoi*  w 


Sept  76. 


DD,r.‘J498 


E I A^OBIOI  E TE 


DO  FORMS  I ABBA 


PROJECT  3A762758A824  RADIATION  INJURY  AND  PROTECTION 


Task  02  Microwave  Radiation 


Work  Unit  057  Biological  effects  and  harzards  of  microwave  radiation 


Investigators. 
Principal : 
Associate : 


Edward  L.  Hunt,  B.A. 

MAJ  Lawrence  E.  Larsen,  M.D.,  MC;  John  H.  Jacobi, 
M.Sc.;  T.  Daryl  Hawkins,  M.A.;  Peter  V.K.  Brown, 
B.S.;  John  F.  Schrot,  Ph.D.;  Sandra  H.  Githens,  B.S. 


Descript  ion 

This  research  task  is  to  develop  information  on  the  potential 
biological  hazards  of  electromagnetic  radiations  (EMR) , primarily 
microwaves,  to  Army  and  other  military  personnel.  Of  particular 
interest  are  the  biological  effects  of  acute  and  chronic  exposure 
to  radiation  fields  produced  by  military  sources,  such  as  the 
high  peak  power,  pulsed  fields  produced  by  radars.  A wide  variety 
of  biological  effects  data  needed  for  hazards  analysis  are  being 
developed  in  experimental  animal  investigations  to  characterize 
(1)  microwave  energy  absorption  and  distribution  in  biological 
systems,  (2)  effects  on  nervous  and  sensory  systems,  (3)  effects 
on  behavior  and  performance,  (4)  stress  reactions  to  microwave 
irradiation  and  (5)  physiological  and  biophysical  effects  at  the 
cellular  and  tissue  level  of  function.  This  research  depends  on 
an  extensive  in-house  engineering  capability  to  establish,  operate 
and  maintain  specialized  exposure  systems  (anechoic  chambers), 
high  power  generators  and  other  specialized  sources,  and  complex 
control,  instrumentation,  data  acquisition  and  analysis  systems. 

This  engineering  resource  is  utilized  also  in  (6)  a collaborative, 
programmatic  development  of  tissue  enzyme  inactivation  systems 
with  the  Department  of  Medical  Neurosciences  (see  FY77  Work  Unit 
070)  and  in  (7)  providing  direct  research  support  to  extramural 
research  investigators  using  the  WRAIR's  Microwave  Research 
facilities . 

Progress 

1 . Energy  Absorption  and  Distribution 

Investigations  have  continued  on  the  development  of  measurement 
devices  and  techniques,  on  the  physical  modeling  of  field  energy 
coupling  to  biological  objects  and  on  biodosimetry  studies  of 
absorption  in  experimental  animals. 


rt3* > «5E, 


>ti-  " -<W3»w' 


A.  Measurement  developments  include  work,  on  improving  the  RF- 
transparent,  implantable  temperature  electrode,  construction  and 
testing  of  an  absolute  calorimetric  device  for  whole-animal  (and 
physical  model)  dosimetry  and,  recently  started,  development  of 
methods  for  microwave  interrogation  of  biological  targets  in  situ. 

Temperature  measurements  made  locally  in  tissues  of  interest 
during  microwave  exposure  of  the  animal  are  often  required  to  make 
interpretable  the  results  of  bioeffects  experiments.  The  microwave 
integrated  circuit  electrode,  initially  developed  by  Larsen,  Moore 
and  Acevedo  (Larsen  et  al,  1974),  has  been  further  developed  to 
improve  its  performance.  The  resistance  of  the  chip  thermistor 
transducer  at  the  tip  end  of  the  sapphire  needle  is  now  measured  by 
the  four  terminal  method,  eliminating  RF  sensitive  bridge  circuitry; 
a hyperthin  film  transmission  line  now  is  used  to  reduce  RF  coupling; 
the  transducer  is  now  glass  encapsulated  to  improve  long  term 
stability  and  physiological  inertness;  materials  and  structural 
design  have  been  selected  to  enhance  the  electrode's  electro- 
thermal matching  with  tissues.  The  electrode  is  fabricated  using 
standard  quantity  production  methods.  Thermography  was  used  to 
verify  RF  properties  of  the  electrode  and  transmission  line  in 
simulated  tissue  and  in  air.  RF  transparency  has  been  improved 
significantly,  the  electrode  operating  successfully  in  a 25C)  mW/cm 
field  (CW,  2.45  GHz)  as  compared  with  the  previous  50  mW/cm 
f ield . 

Whole-animal  calorimetry  (Hunt  and  Phillips,  1972)  provides  an 
integrated  dose  measurement  of  absorbed  energy  that  is  of  primary 
interest  biologically  and  is  of  particular  value  for  microwave 
bioeffects  research  since  the  measurement  is  independent  of  incident 
field  measurements  and  can  be  used  to  characterize  various  exposure 
systems  (Phillips  et  al,  1975).  Twin-well  calorimeters  were  designed 
and  constructed  in  two  sizes,  suitable  for  small  rodents  (<  100  g 
weight)  and  for  larger  animals  and  physical  models  (<  30  cm  length), 
respectively.  When  tested,  both  models  exhibited  excessive  sensitivity 
to  ambient  temperature  variations  and  excessive  balance  voltage 
drift.  Some  improvements  have  been  made  that  have  increased  ’ ermal 
and  electronic  stabilities.  The  larger  unit  has  been  used  in  a 
limited  manner  in  measuring  absorption  of  microwave  energy  in 
physical  modeling  investigations  (see  below).  Further  improvements 
in  performance  of  these  units  will  be  made  before  standardization 
of  the  design  is  attempted. 

Investigations  have  been  started  on  the  potential  use  of 
microwaves  to  interrogate  complex  dielectric  objects  to  obtain 
information  on  the  physical  shape  and  structure  and  the  RF  electrical 
characteristics  of  discontinuities  therein,  a first  approximation 
to  characterizing  organs  and  tissues  in  situ.  In  one  series  of 
studies,  mechanical  scanning  methods  were  used  to  investigate  spatial 
resolutions  of  single  and  multiple  dielectric  discontinuities  for 


I “ ■ > * 


objects  immersed  in  deionized  water  by  measuring  scattering  parameters. 
Amplitude  and  phase  of  S.. ..  and  S.  for  a phase-locked  3243  MHz 
interrogation  source  were  obtained  using  dielectrically  loaded, 
matched  antennas  incorporated  in  a digitally  controlled  scanner 
which  was  interfaced  to  an  automatic  network  analyzer  (HP  8542A) . 

The  complex  functions  of  space  obtained  in  this  manner  were  processed 
further  to  create  a real  valued  function  of  space  for  intensity 
representation  of  the  data.  Detection  of  single  and  multiple 
discontinuities  with  dimensions  much  less  than  one  wavelength  in 
water  were  obtained.  This  method  can  be  further  generalized  to 
collect  multiple  projections  of  and  from  such  data  the  three 
dimensional  pattern  of  microwave  energy  absorption  can  be  obtained. 

In  a second,  parallel  series  of  studies  with  the  same  scanning 
system,  the  velocity  of  propagation,  which  is  a function  of  the 
dielectric  constant  of  the  transmission  medium,  was  used  to  determine 
time  delays  in  transmission  for  mapping  dielectric  inhomogeneities 
represented  by  the  immersed  object.  Time  and  frequency  of  the 
transmitted  interrogation  signal  are  related  with  a linear  chirp. 

The  received  signal  is  mixed  with  a reference  signal  that  does  not 
pass  through  the  target  object  and  time  delays  appear  as  frequency 
shifts  in  the  mixer  output  is  processed  by  generalized  harmonic 
analysis.  Path  lengths  equivalent  to  40  picoseconds  of  propagation 
time  were  resolved  using  this  method  and  it  was  possible  to  detect 
targets  with  dimensions  of  less  than  one  wavelength  in  water  for 
the  highest  frequency  transmitted. 

To  resolve  phase  ambiguities  and  multipath  effects  in  the 
measured  projections  of  $2^,  it  will  be  necessary  to  use  path 
length  information.  The  results  of  both  studies  demonstrate  the 
feasibility  of  obtaining  three  dimensional  dosimetric  plots  of 
dielectrically  heterogeneous  objects  in  a non- invasive  manner. 

B.  Physical  modeling  of  EMR  energy  absorption  in  an  isotropic, 
sizescaled  model  of  man  provides  a means  for  testing  general  concepts 
that  relate  absorption  to  frequency  and  field  geometry  or  structure 
and  to  the  size  of  man  and  his  location  and  orientation  in  the 
field.  Once  tested,  these  concepts  can  serve  to  determine  maximally 
hazardous  exposure  conditions  suitable  for  regulation  of  occupancy. 

This  same  information  can  be  used  also  to  establish  reliable  exposure 
parameters  for  experimental  animal  investigations  of  bioeffects. 


In  this  report  period,  Prof.  Om  P.  Gandhi,  University  of  Utah, 
has  continued  collaborative  work  at  the  WRAIR,  employing  the  free- 
space  exposure  facilities  to  test  and  extend  his  "dipole"  theory  of 
absorption.  According  to  this  theory,  man  exposed  to  a free  space, 
plane  wave  field  absorbs  field  energy  similarly  to  a dipole  antenna, 
with  maximum  absorption  occuring  at  a resonant  frequency  at  which 
the  model  length  is  about  0.36-0.4A  and  the  long  axis  of  the  body  is 
parallel  to  the  E-field  vector.  For  1.75  m tall  man,  this  frequency 


'v’r>««56  iw 


982 


is  about  65  MHz.  This  work  (Gandhi,  1975)  has  been  extended  to 
investigate  a wider  range  of  model  lengths  to  wavelength  ratios  (L/A 
= 0. 5-2.5)  using  models  ranging  from  3 to  16  in  length,  rendered  by 
a professional  sculpter  to  preserve  exact  proportionalities.  At 
resonance,  the  absorption  cross  section  is  approximately  4 times  the 
shadow  cross  section  and  as  the  frequency  increases  the  absorption 
cross  section  approaches  0.5  of  the  shadow  cross  section.  Fig.  1 
shows  the  absorption  characteristics  for  these  and  other  models  for 
a broad  region  of  the  EM  spectrum.  '/Then  electrically  grounded,  the 
model  acts  electrically  as  a monopole;  the  resonant  frequency  be- 
comes approximately  half  the  frequency  when  ungrounded  and  absorption 
is  nearly  quadrupled. 


To  test  the  dipole  theory  of  absorption  further,  studies  w re 
conducted  with  far-field,  plane-wave  exposures  with  reflectors 
located  immediately  behind  the  model.  Dipoles  located  at  appropriate 
distances  from  such  reflectors  would  form  receiving  antennas  with  an 
enhancement  of  absorption  corresponding  to  the  antenna  gain.  When 
placed  at  certain  distances,  such  as  0.25A  in  front  of  a flat 
(180°)  reflector,  absorption  by  the  model  was  enhanced  by  a factor 
of  4,  an  amount  that  would  be  expected  also  by  standing  wave  theory. 
At  a still  closer  distance,  still  greater  enhancement  would  occur 
with  a "receiving  antenna"  and  would  be  reduced  according  to  standing 
wave  theory.  The  model  exhibited  an  enhancement  factor  of  5.5  at 
the  distance  of  0.125A  consistent  with  the  antenna  theory.  With  90° 
corner  reflectors,  appreciably  greater  antenna  gains  can  be  achieved, 
and  enhancements  in  rates  of  energy  absorbed  in  models  exposed  at 
their  resonant  frequency  were  increased  in  a manner  consistent  with 
the  antenna  theory.  At  a distance  of  0.4A,  for  example,  a 100  g rat 
that  without  the  reflector  would  be  absorbing  energy  at  the  rate  of 
0.8  W from  a 10  mW/cm  field  at  its  resonance  frequency  of  985  MHz 
would  be  absorbing  energy  at  the  rate  of  8.8  W,  an  enhancement 
factor  of  11.  The  comparable  gain  in  rate  of  absorption  for  ^he 
1.75  m tall  "standard"  man  similarly  oriented  in  the  10  mW/cm  , 65 
MHz  field  would  be  from  151  W to  1,660  W.  In  parallel  with  these 
investigations  with  size-scaled  models  of  "antenna"  enhancements 
with  reflectors,  rats  of  appropriate  size  were  employed  in  iricrowave- 
induced  seizure  experiments  to  further  test  the  theory  (see  below) . 

More  complex  physical  modeling  investigations  requires  deter- 
mination of  dielectric  properties  of  tissues  to  enable  construction 
of  precise  anisotropic  models  of  particular  biological  systems,  such 
as  the  eye,  that  need  to  be  investigated.  The  development  of  a new 
sample  holder,  started  in  the  previous  report  period,  has  progressed 
to  the  fabrication  of  one  su.i  table  for  testing.  The  holder  was 
designed  to  permit  analysis  of  smaller  samples  of  tissues  and 
tissue-equivalent  materials  than  previous  was  possible  and  will 
permit  testing  over  a broader  range  of  frequencies.  This  line  of 
test  development  will  continue  as  time  permits. 


983 


rr 


C.  Biodosimetry  consists  of  scaling  prompt  responses  to  measure 
intensity  of  insult.  For  microwave  bioeffects  investigations, 
extensive  use  of  the  time  to  onset  of  a thermal  seizure  (seizure 
latency)  during  continuous  high  level  exposure  has  provided  a means 
of  investigating  energy  absorption  in  rodents.  Such  as  investigation 
was  used  to  relate  animal  size  to  energy  coupling  from  the  field 
according  to  microwave  frequency  and  the  general  orientation  of  the 
animal  relative  to  the  E-field  plane  of  polarization  (Schrot  and 
Hawkins,  1975).  The  results  of  such  investigations  have  consistently 
paralleled  those  derived  from  carefully  controlled  physical  modeling 
studies  (Gandhi,  1975)  and  are  similarly  related  to  whole-animal 
calorimetric  dosimetry  when  these  measurements  have  been  available 
(Phillips  et  al,  1975) . 

In  the  present  report  period,  seizure  latency  measurements  were 
employed  as  a rapid  validating  procedure  for  antenna  theory  predic- 
tions of  absorption  enhancement  with  nearby  reflectors  (see  above). 

In  these  experiments,  100  g rats  were  exposed  while  held  without 
restraint  in  a nearly  RF-transparent  cage  with  the  long  axis  of  the 
cage  (and  almost  always  the  long  axis  of  the  rat's  body)  parallel  to 
the  E-field  plane.  The  frequency  of  985  MHz  is  resonant  for  animals 
of  their  size.  When  flat  or  corner  (90°)  reflectors  were  placed 
behind  the  animal,  it  served  as  the  dipole  of  the  antenna  so  formed. 
With  a 20  mW/cm  field  density,  which  even  at  this  resonance  frequency 
is  alone  ineffective,  the  seizure  latency  was  reliably  shorter  with 
the  flat  reflector  placed  0.125X  behind  the  cage  than  when  placed 
0.25X  behind  the  cage,  a result  consistent  witlj  antenna  theory  and 
contrary  to  standing-wave  theory.  At  12  mW/cm  , an  average  seizure 
latency  of  995  sec  (SD  = +190  sec)  was  obtained  at  the  shorter 
distance  and  none  of  the  3 rats  tested  at  the  0.25X  distance  convulsed 
during  the  30  min  test.  (Postirradiation,  the  average  colonic 
temperature  was  41.3  °C) . Antenna  theory  applied  to  the  90°  corner 
reflector  predicts  a maximum  gain  near  the  corner  at  a distance  of 
0.4X,  and  the  results  of  the  seizure  tests  were  consistent  with 
this.  Seizures  were  induced  at  this  distance  within  the  30-min  test 
period  with  a field  power  level  of  6 mW/cm  . 


In  addition  to  providing  confirmation  of  the  physical  modeling 
studies  of  absorption,  the  results  of  the  biodosimetry  investigations 
provide  information  useful  for  designing  exposure  arrangements  for 
bioeffects  investigations.  When  positioned  at  an  enhancement  position 
in  front  of  a ref lei  tor,  the  animal  is  exposed  to  coherent  microwaves 
but  multilaterally . High  rates  of  absorption  can  be  achieved  with 
lower  levels  power  levels  radiated  from  the  source,  and  with  mcl.i- 
lateral  exposures,  the  biological  effects  might  be  comparable  tc 
those  obtained  with  multimodal  cavity  exposures. 


2.  Effects  on  Nervous  and  Sensory  Systems 


Investigations  of  microwave  irradiation  effects  were  continued 
on  audiogenic  seizure  sensitivity  and  on  blood-brain  barrier 
permeability. 


>LJj 


(jC3/n“  “F  PP!J  JU.ipi3i!j'^:3K./fl  uf 


V)  "J 
C C *-> 

n d c 

a ^ 
a w 
X u cn 
C *H 
^ -H 
O ^ - 

^ D C 
tc  * 

cr,  *H  o 
jr. 

u (/) 
C TJ 
<y  <D  « 

•H  rH 

U »H 
•H  *H  •> 
»w  <w  ^ 
^ i a> 

QJ  Qi  U 

o c o 

O -H  E 

F — 1 Cj 

C <0  u 
o Crt  to 
*H  (X 

a *j  w 

^ *H 
O 5 Uh 
W O 
X>  V) 

(0  4J  to 
C D 

G>  <D  r-i 

> i±  a 

*H  -H  > 

t0  O G) 
rH  a jr. 
0>  X H 
U to  ^ 


M # o-  - 
M V 


<1-  ^ . 


Xooq  oi{4  jo  t )ji’  nopriis 

BTfjMMois  u»pJj6sni^DA6>ioj3Ti  1 S >u®I>FJja«:‘  uoniiosq«  >A,lc[oa 


S^ijza. 


T->^  -*VT>'«9>  JW" 


985 


A.  Audiogenic  seizure  sensitivity  following  acute  exposures  to 
continuous  wave  (CW) , 2450  MHz  microwave  was  not  altered  in  seizure 
sensitive  rat  xcept  at  exposure  levels  that  were  thermalizing, 
and  the  effec.  found  was  a transient  reduction  in  sensitivity 
(Hawkins  and  Hunt,  1975).  During  this  report  period,  an  experiment 
was  conducted  to  evaluate  effects  of  a 10  mW/cm  level  of  exposure 
to  CW  2450  MHz  radiation  of  four  hours  duration,  repeated  5 days  a 
week  over  a course  of  10  weeks.  Forty  rats  preselected  from  audiogenic 
seizure  sensitive  stock  for  being  seizure  prone,  half  of  them 
irradiated  and  half  sham-irradiated,  were  retested  biweekly  for 
seizure  sensitivity.  The  seizure  tests  were  designed  to  reveal 
either  increases  or  decreases  in  seizure  proneness.  No  changes  in 
either  direction  were  detected.  These  negative  results  are  in 
contrast  to  the  decreased  sensitivity  that  was  found  following  the 
single  30-min  exposure  at  75  mW/cm  . Future  investigations  will 
evaluate  the  effects  of  low  level  exposures  (<_  10  mW/cm  ) to  high 
peak  power,  pulsed  fields  when  this  capability  is  established.  For 
these  future  investigations  the  genetic  stock  established  for  this 
type  of  study  will  be  retained. 

B.  Blood-brain  barrier  permeability  changes  produced  by  low- 
ievel  microwave  irradiation  in  rats  continued  to  be  investigated  in 
collaboration  with  Dr.  K.  Oscar,  American  University.  The  finding 
of  an  increased  permeability  following  a single,  20  min  exposure  to 
1.3  CHz  was  expanded  by  determining  the  relative  effectiveness  of 
CW  anu  pulsed  radiation,  by  attempting  to  determining  unique  pulse 
parameters  responsible  for  producing  the  effect,  by  testing  for 
permeability  changes  with  larger  molecules,  and  by  testing  for 
duration  of  the  permeability  change.  Notably,  it  was  found  that 
following  CW  exposure  increased  permeability  of  the  blood  brain  ^ 
barrier  increased  with  field  power  density  up  to  about  1.0  mW/cnT  and 
then  decreased  with  further  increases  in  field  density.  The  effect 
was  evident  through  this  "power  window,"  represented  by  an  inverted 
"U"  shaped  function.  increases  in  blood  brain  barrier  permeability 
were  observed  at  average  power  densities  as  low  as  0.03  mW/cm". 

Several  characteristics  of  the  effect  will  be  investigated  further, 
particularly  the  "power  window"  phenomenon,  and  frequency  dependence 
for  the  permeability  change  will  also  be  investigated. 

3 . Effects  on  Behavior  and  Performance 

Escape  behavior  from  pulsed  microwave  fields  at  1.2  (Frey  et_  al , 
1975)  and  2.88  CHz  (Hunt  et  al,  1975)  have  been  reported  to  occur  in 
rats  with  average  field  power  densities  below  10  mW/cm“.  Investigations 
of  this  phenonmenon  with  mice  has  been  undertaken  during  this  report 
period.  The  procedure  employs  a two-compartment  shuttle  box  and  a 
forced-trial  design  of  conditioning  the  animal  to  discriminate  the 
compartment  in  which  exposure  occurs  using  differential  cues.  The 
choice  apparatus  has  been  tested  and  environmental  conditions  established 
that  reduce  strong  side  preferences  in  mice  given  hour-long  free 
choice  tests.  The  investigation  was  delayed  while  procurement  of  a 


980 


pulsed  source  was  completed.  Suitably  high  peak  power  pulses  can  be 
obtained  with  this  unit  by  using  an  ellipsoidal  focusing  dish  to 
concentrate  the  radiator  output  in  a 4-6  inch  wide  field. 

Performance  of  a multiple  schedule  task  has  been  reported  to  be 
altered  in  rats  following  long  duration  exposures  to  pulse  microwaves 
(Thomas,  1975),  and  the  results  might  be  attributable  to  a disruption 
in  the  animal's  discrimination  of  schedule  components.  A procedure 
has  been  developed  that  requires  the  animal  to  relearn  a different 
sequence  of  responses  in  each  session  which  provides  a means  for 
measuring  development  of  discrimination  learning  within  each  session 
with  repeated  testing  daily,  if  needed  (Shrot  et^  al^,  1976).  During 
this  report  period  further  testing  of  the  procedure  was  undertaken  to 
determine  its  sensitivity  for  detecting  manipulations  in  schedule 
conditions,  such  as  changing  "time  out"  durations.  It  is  anticipated 
that  the  constantly  changing  discriminative  control  of  behavior  generated 
by  this  procedure  will  be  especially  sensitive  to  effects  of  exposure 
to  microwave  radiation. 

4.  Stress  Reactions  to  Microwave  Irradiations 


Ambient  temperature  and  relative  humidity  variations  alter  the 
animal's  capacity  to  dissipate  heat  and  can  be  related  to  the  animal's 
capacity  to  withstand  heat  loading  during  an  acute,  high  level  exposure 
to  microwaves.  Elapsed  time  to  the  onset  of  a thermal  seizure  was 
used  to  measure  vulnerability  under  various  combinations  of  ambient 
temperature  (AT)  and  relative  humidity  (RH)  to  exposure^with  2450  MHz, 
CW  microwave  at  a high  field  power  density  of  150  mW/cm  . Rats  100- 
125  g in  weight  were  individually  exposed  while  held  in  a holder 
constructed  of  styrofoam  and  plexiglas  rods,  designed  by  open  structure 
to  maximally  expose  the  animal  to  ambient  conditions.  AT's  of  from 
62-94°F  in  combination  with  high  medium  and  low  RH  conditions.  A 
monotonic  function  of  seizure  latency  with  the  temperature-humidity 
index  (THI=  1.44(°C)  + 0.1  (RH)  + 30.6).  A decrease  in  mean  latency 
of  70%  occurred  with  an  increase  in  THI  from  the  lowest  value  (58.6) 
to  the  highest  (85.5).  The  microwave  heating  hazard  is  strongly 
influenced  by  the  THI  value  of  ambient  conditions.  These  results 
provide  useful  information  for  determining  ambient  conditions  suitable 
for  some  bioeffects  studies. 

5 . Physiological  and  Biophysical  Investigations 

During  this  report  period,  effort  was  limited  to  program  design 
and  outfitting  of  suitable  laboratory  facilities  to  optically  investi- 
gate changes  during  microwave  irradiation  in  the  structure  of  a nerve 
cell  membrane.  This  work  will  utilize  a giant  nerve  cell  preparation 
from  an  marine  animal  for  determing  membrane  events  by  flouroscopic 
and  birefringent  microscopy. 

6 . Development  of  Tissue  Enzyme  Inactivation  Systems 


987 


I 


In  collaboration  with  the  Department  of  Medical  Neurosciences, 
research  engineering  support  is  provided  for  design,  fabrication  and 
testing  of  microwave  enzyme  inactivation  applicators,  high  power 
microwave  sources  (primarily  by  modifications)  and  associated  instru — 
mentation.  In  the  refitting  of  the  Varian  source,  the  circuit 
modifications  begun  in  FY  75  were  completed.  The  unit  was  successfully 
tested  on  brain  biochemical  studies  placed  in  operation  during  this 
report  period. 


In  the  use  of  inactivation  systems  for  biochemical-anatonic 
investigations,  the  operational  criteria  equipment  must  meet  to  pro- 
vide reliable  results  are  very  demanding  such  as  that  for  uniform 
tissue  heating,  but  they  are  essential  for  obtaining  this  type  of 
information  (Lenox  et^  a_l,  1976).  Planning  and  preliminary  work  on 
applicators  for  brain  biochemical  investigations  in  rats  was  undertaken. 
Tests  have  been  made  of  two  types  of  applicators  that  were  designed 
by  Professor  Om  P.  Gandhi,  University  of  Utah,  for  this  WRAIR  program. 
Presently,  the  design  and  procurement  of  more  advanced  sources  and 
applicators  has  been  undertaken. 

7 . Extramural  Research  Support 

The  WRAIR  makes  available  the  use  of  its  microwave  exposure 
facilities  to  extramural  researchers.  This  type  of  support  re- 
presents a cost  in  personnel  equipment  and  facilities  that  directly 
augments  the  support  with  funds  provided  the  extramural  researcher 
by  another  sponsor,  making  WRAIR  a co-sponsor  of  the  research  in 
fact.  The  need  for  this  expanded  use  of  the  facilities  by  the 
microwave  bioeffects  research  community  will  continue  to  increase, 
necessitating  the  need  for  an  increased  level  of  oversight  and 
management  of  this  support  function. 


A broader  more  public  base  than  can  be  provided  by  in-house 
staff  alone  for  furnishing  protocol  review  and  facilities  scheduling 
for  extramural  researches  has  been  designed  in  the  form  of  a tri- 
partite agreement  sponsored  by  WRAIR  with  the  Naval  Medical  R and  D 
Commands'  EMR  Project  Office  and  with  AFRRI.  The  scheduling  functions 
by  the  tri-partite  committee  for  facilities  use,  operating  now  on  a 
trial  basis  pending  completion  of  engineering  staffing  at  the  WRAIR, 
informs  extramural  user  of  facilities  use  and  provides  them  maximum 
flexibility  in  their  own  programming.  The  protocol  review  function 
of  the  tri-partite  committee  has  not  been  used  since  only  currently 
approved  protocols  are  being  honored  pending  completion  of  staffing. 


During  this  report  period,  ten  extramural  research  projects 
were  provided  this  direct  support,  nine  sponsored  by  the  DoD  of 
which  two  were  Army  funded  projects.  All  of  the  DoD  funded  projects 
constitute  identifiable  research  elements  in  the  Tri-Service  EMR 
Bioeffects  Research  Plan  that  is  being  instituted  jointly  by  the 
medical  R & D commands  of  the  three  services  at  the  request  of  ODDR 
and  E. 


^ i W 


r 


! 


l 


i 


The  protocol  review  function  provided  by  WRAIR  staff  to-date 
has  on  3 occasions  failed  to  approve  extramural  proposals  as  not 
providing  the  promise  of  interpretable  results.  The  staff  has  also 
provided  active  oversight  as  to  the  research  operations  that  the 
WRAIR  is  supporting  in  this  extramural  program.  It  is  anticipated 
that  through  tri-partite  committee  will  actively  function  to  provide 
such  oversight. 


If 


i 


i 

■ 

i 

i 


Project  3A762758A824  RADIATION  INJURY  AND  PROTECTION 
Task  02  Microwave  Radiation 

Work  Unit  057  Biological  effects  and  hazards  of  microwave  radiation 
Literature  Cited. 

References : 

1.  Frey,  A.H.,  Field,  S.R.,  Frey,  B.  : Neural  function  and  behavior 

defining  the  relationship.  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences 
247:  433-439,  1975. 

2.  Gandhi,  O.P.:  Conditions  of  strongest  electromagnetic  power 

deposition  in  man  and  animals.  IEEE  Trans.  MTT,  MTT-23 , NO  12,  1021- 
1029,  1975. 

3.  Hawkins,  T.D. , Hunt,  E.L.:  Reduction  in  sensitivity  to 

audiogenic  seizure  following  a single,  2450  MHz,  CW  irradiation  of 
rats.  USRI  1975  Annual  Meeting,  223,  Oct  20-23. 

4.  Hunt,  E.L.,  Phillips,  R.D.:  Absolute  physical  dosimetry  for 

whole  animal  experiments.  Digest  of  Papers,  Joint  U.S.  Army/Georgia 
Institute  of  Technology  Microwave  Dosimetry  Workshop,  74-77,  June  1972. 

5.  Hunt,  E.L.,  King,  N.W.,  Loveley,  R.H. , Phillips,  R.D. : 
"Avoidance"  by  rats  of  2.88  GHz  pulse  microwave  field.  USRI  1975 
Annual  Meeting,  192,  OCt  20-23. 

6.  Larsen,  L.E.,  Moore,  R.A. , Acevedo,  J. : A microwave  decoupled 

brain  temperature  transduce*.  IEEE  Trans.  MTT,  MTT- 2 2 , 438-444,  1974. 

7.  Lenox,  R.H. , Gandhi,  O.P.,  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  Grove,  H.M. : A 

microwave  applicator  for  in-vivo  rapid  inactivation  of  enzymes  in  the 
central  nervous  system.  IEEE  Trans  MTT,  January  1976. 

8.  Oscar,  K. J. , Hawkins,  T.D.:  Electromagnetic  radiation  effects 

on  the  blood  brain  barrier  system  of  rats.  USRI  1975  Annual 
Meeting,  222,  Oct  20-23. 

9.  Phillips,  R.D.,  Hunt,  E.L.,  King,  N.W.:  Field  measurements, 

absorbed  dose,  and  biological  dosimetry  of  microwaves.  Annals  of 
the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences,  247 : 499-509,  1975. 


10.  Anonymous:  A summary  of  the  ERMAC  work  session  on  nervous 

system  and  behavioral  effects  of  nonionizing  electromagnetic  radiations. 
Journal  of  Microwave  Power,  10(2) , 1975. 


990 


11.  Schrot,  J.,  Baren,  J.J.,  Moerschbaecher , J.M.:  Sequential 

reacquisition  as  a function  of  timeout  from  avoidance.  Journal  of  the 
Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  1976,  25,  303-310. 

12.  Schrot,  J.,  Hawkins,  T.D.:  Microwave  frequency  and  E-field 

orientation  interaction  with  animal  size.  US RT  1975  Annual  Meeting 
233,  Oct  20-23. 

Publications: 

1.  Gandhi,  O.P.:  Conditions  of  strongest  electromagnetic  power 

deposition  in  man  and  animals.  IEEE  Trans.  MTT,  2^3,  1021-1029,  1975. 

2.  Larsen,  L.E.:  Sequential  methods  for  parametric  discriminant 

analysis.  N.I . Burch  (Editor)  Behavior  and  Brain  Electrical  Activity, 
Plenum  Press,  New  York,  1975,  pp.  165-192. 

3.  Larsen,  L.E.,  Bonney,  C.W.,  Jacobi,  J.H.:  Memorandum  Report  to 

Tri-Service  EMR  Bioeffects  Advisory  Panel.  Investigation  of  microwave 
frequency  effects  on  lens  and  eye  absorption  in  anesthetized  rhesus  and 
stump-tail  monkeys,  1975. 

4.  Larsen,  L.E.,  Evans,  R.A. : An  off-line  image  processing 

system  for  digital  tomography.  Neuroradiology,  9,  No. 5,  284-285,  Sept. 
1975. 

5.  Lenox,  R.H.,  Gandhi,  O.P.,  Meyerhoff,  J.L. , Grove,  H.M.:  A 
microwave  applicator  for  in-vivo  rapid  inactivation  of  enzymes  in  the 
central  nervous  system.  IEEE  Trans.  MTT,  24^  58-61,  Jan  1976. 

6.  Schrot,  J. , Boren,  J.J.,  Moerschbaecher,  J.M. : Sequential 

reacquisition  as  a function  of  timeout  from  avoidance.  Journal  of  the 
Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  15,  303-310,  1976. 


991 


Project  3A762759A829 
MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 


Task  00 

Malaria  Investigations 


t .ZZZTTZZSZr 

DA  OH  65  5 ^ 


7b  07  01 


RESEARCH  AMD  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 
^TummTr^^^m^ 


7* 


umpoht  com  mot  irvac 

DD  DR*E(AR)6J6 


1.  DAT*  RNEV  SUM*RT 


7b  07  01 


A KIND  OF  tOMMART 


1).  Change 


A NONK  IICUW 


» REORACNHO* 

NA 


IA  DttB'N  INETN*N 

NL 


Bfc  IFECIFIC  0ATA- 
CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

S Ml  O W 


• LEVEL  OF  IUM 
A.  Nil  UMtT 


10  NO  coots*  PAOGNAM ELCUtNT 


PROJECT  NUM8EN 


TASK  AREA  NUMBER 


•OAK  UNIT  NUMHR 


62759 A 


3A762 7 5yA829 


00 


308 


b COHTniauTINO 


1 


(.ARDS  1 14F 


I TITLC  >ib  r r.  c IbbbillcbMbb  C-bbj* 


(Ul  Biological  Evaluation  of  Anti-malarial  Drugs 


11  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 


012800  Pharmacology  U02b00  Hi  'logy 


IS  START  DATE 

M 07 


IS  PERFORMANCE  MttHOO 

C.  In-House 


CD  COMPLETION  0 A T i 


-Com. . 


IS  F UN  CM  N 0 AGtNCV 


DA 


IT  CONTRACT  CHANT 
A OAT CS/t  F FCC Tl  VC: 
bb  NUHBCH  * 

C.  TTPR- 

«.  KINO  OF  ABANO 


NA 


»•  HCSOUHCiA  CSTIMA  Tf 


A HNOFCftSlONAL  MAN  V NS  b FUNDS  (t*  SmnN) 


A AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT 


FISCAL 
r t ah 


MIc*o1n* 

7b 

2.  y5 

CURRENT 

—Li 

2-U 

JJLl. 


L C DOO  OHO  AN  I Z A T ION 


10  HtHFOHNINC  OHO  AN  I Z A T ION 


*“•’*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
.oo.i..«  Washington,  DC  20012 


"■«  * Wai  ter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 


Washington , DC  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VtSTIGATOH  (PuF 


» MAR  II  V I 4C«* 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAME. 

TELEPHONE 


. OENEHAL  USE 


Joy,  COL  R. 
2,02-5,76-  .15.11. 


N*“B  Davidson,  D.  F . LTC 

telephone  202-376-2292 

SOCIAL  SKCURIT v ACCOUNT  NUMBER 


ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 


name  Ket  ter  ling,  L.  L.  CFT 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

. kCvbohos  f’p*»c*A*  Mach  -ip  c*a»; 

(IU  Malaria:  (U)  Drug  Development;  (U)  Ant imaiar ia 1 s : 

.in  Bioiogv : (hi  Chemistry:  (Uf  Pharmacodynamics;  (l)  Drug  Metabolism;  Ml)  Toxicology 

TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  IA  APHROACH,  IS  PHOOHESS  fP-mlMi  IrMlwAUAl  pmtmft* *«  IMwKIHaV  Ay  hmNi  pracaM*  (•(!  ml  aarfl  » I*  S*ci*lfy  ClaaalWtaUan  C*K*  J 

23.  (U)  To  conduct  ln-house  and  contract  studies  in  biology  specifically  related 
to  the  design,  development  and  exploitation  of  new  ant imalarials  for  military  use. 

24.  ( U J Close  supervision  will  be  maintained  by  providing  guidance  and  an 
integrated  evaluation  of  productivity,  and  by  the  redirection  and  coordination  of 
objectives  as  dictated  by  feedback  from  clinical  studies  as  candidate  ant imalarials . 

25.  (U)  /5  07  - 7b  06  Compounds  are  tested  tor  prophylactic  or  suppressive  anti- 

malarial  activity  in  approximately  25  test  systems  at  six  different  laboratories. 

Of  10,900  compounds  screened  In  the  primary  P.  berghei  suppressive  test,  302  were 
active.  Of  these,  125  have  undergone  advanced  studies  including  23  compounds  which 
have  been  tested  against  P.  eynomolgi,  P.  vivax  and/or  P.  falciparum  in  subhuman 
primates.  Causal  prophylactic  and/or  radical  curative  tests  against  sporozoite 
induced  malarias  in  rodents  and/or  rhesus  monkeys  have  been  conducted  for  approxi- 
mately 250  compounds.  Five  compounds  with  curative  activity  markedly  superior 

to  primaquine  are  undergoing  special  toxicologic  studies.  In  vitro  methods  to 
study  structure-act ivltv  relationships  responsible  for  induction  of  hemolysis  and 
methemoglobinemia  by  primaquine  analogues  are  being  developed.  Fur  technical 
report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 dui  / 5- 
30  Jun  7b. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $15,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period 
1 Jul-30  Sep  76. 


0D,:°”J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OK  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  I48AA 
AND  I 401*  I 1 MAR  EE  iFOR  ARMY  USE',AJIF  OBSOLETE 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 


Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  308  Biological  evaluation  of  antimalarial  drugs 
Investigators . 

Principal:  LTC  David  E.  Davidson,  Jr.,  VC 

Associate:  LTC  Peter  S.  Loizeaux,  VC,  CPT  Lyle  L.  Ketterling,  MSC 

1 . Description 

Candidate  chemical  compounds  are  tested  for  prophylactic  or 
suppressive  antimalarial  activity  employing  some  25  animal  and  in- 
vitro  test  systems  at  seven  different  laboratories.  Of  230,000 
compounds  tested  during  the  12  years  of  the  program,  about  3%  (4500 
compounds)  were  active.  Approximately  200  of  the  most  active  were 
selected  for  advanced  evaluation  in  simian  test  systems,  and  of  these 
40  have  been  selected  for  preclinical  pharmacological  and  toxico- 
logical studies. 

2.  Progress 

a.  Suppressive  Testing 

The  basic  primary  screening  test  for  suppressive  antimalarials 
utilizes  trophozoite-induced  Plasmodium  berghei  KBG  173  in  ICR/HA 
Swiss  mice.  Active  compounds  lengthen  survival  time  of  mice  when 
administered  subcutaneously  in  peanut  oil  72  hours  after  a standard 
supra-lethal  inoculum  of  parasitized  blood.  Untreated  controls  sur- 
vive only  6.2±0.3  days.  During  this  reporting  period,  10,900  compounds 
were  screened  in  the  primary  mouse  test.  Of  these,  302  compounds  had 
antimalarial  activity,  and  125  have  been  selected  for  secondary  test- 
ing. Twenty-three  compounds  have  undergone  advanced  suppressive 
testing  against  P.  cynomolgi,  P.  vivax,  or  P.  falciparum  in  sub- 
human primates. 

b.  Prophylactic  Testing 

Considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  establishing  a sporozoite- 
induced  P^.  berghei  prophylactic  test  system  capable  of  screening  com- 
pounds in  large  numbers.  Reference  antimalarial  compounds  are 
being  evaluated  in  this  test  system  at  the  present  time.  Secondary 
rodent  prophylactic  test  systems  have  been  used  to  test  approximately 
200  compounds  for  causal  prophylactic  activity.  Approximately  75 
compounds  have  been  tested  for  radical  curative  activity  against 
Plasmodium  cynomolgi  in  rhesus  monkeys.  Five  compounds  of  the  8- 


993 


aminoquinoline  class  have  been  found  which  are  at  least  4 times  as 
potent  as  primaquine  and  these  are  undergoing  special  toxicologic 
testing. 

c . Antifolic  Acid  Assay 

One-hundred  compounds  were  tested  for  their  ability  to  inhibit 
growth  of  three  species  of  folate  dependent  bacteria.  Tnis  informa- 
tion is  utilized  in  the  design  and  selection  of  antimalarials  which 
act  by  interfering  with  the  metabolism  of  folates. 

d.  Primaquine-Induced  Hemolysis 

Primaquine  and  certain  other  antimalariai  drugs  may  induce 
hemolysis  in  glucose-6-phosphate-dehydrogenase  (G-6PD)  deficient 
individuals.  G-6PD  deficiency  is  a defect  intrinsic  to  the  erythro- 
cytes of  the  affected  person,  and,  although  this  hereditary  condi- 
tion is  more  common  in  Mediterranean  and  Oriental  populations, 
approximately  10%  of  American  Negro  males  are  affected. 

Welt,  et  al,  studied  the  effect  of  primaquine  on  normal  subjects 
by  measuring  the  amount  of  1^C02  evolved  during  incubation  of  the 
subject's  own  erythrocytes  and  serum  in  the  presence  of  glucose-1  . 
The  stimulation  of  CO2  production  through  the  pentose  pathway  by 
primaquine  is  believed  to  be  related  to  its  hemolytic  potential. 

Welt's  method  has  been  modified  and  is  being  used  to  screen 
antimalariai  compounds.  Whole  blood  is  collected  from  normal 
human  volunteers  and  def ibrinated . Qne  ml  of  defibrinated  blood 
and  one  ml  of  test  compound  (2.5xlU~"M)  are  mixed  in  a 25  ml 
Ehrlenmyer  Flask.  To  this  mixture,  0.5  ml  of  glucose-1--^' C is  added. 
The  flask  is  then  sealed  with  a rubber  stopper  holding  a disposable 
center  well  and  incubated  at  J7°C  for  90  minutes  while  shaking  at  120 
oscillations  per  minute.  At  the  end  of  the  first  incubation  period, 
0.2  ml  of  2N  sodium  hydroxide  is  injected  into  the  center  well  and 
0.5  ml  of  3.7N  Perchloric  acid  is  injected  directly  into  the  incuba- 
tion mixture.  The  vial  is  re-incubated  at  the  same  speed  and  tempera- 
ture for  an  additional  30  minutes.  At  the  end  of  the  second  incuba- 
tion period  the  center  well  is  removed, and  its  contents  placed  into 
a scintillation  vial  containing  10  ml  of  Aquasol  and  0.8  ml  of  water. 
After  scintillation  counting,  the  results  for  each  test  compound  are 
compared  with  those  of  a primaquine  standard. 

To  date,  61  compounds  have  been  tested  in  this  ija  vitro  system. 

Of  these,  J3  v^re  less  potent  in  stimulating  glucose-l^C^- incorpora- 
tion hit*  v,  ’ than  primaquine.  Structure-activity  relationships 
of  these  compounds  are  being  evaluated. 


994 


3.  Summary : 


More  than  11,000  compounds  have  been  tested  for  antimalarial 
activity  in  vitro  or  in  animal  models.  More  than  30U  were  active. 
Twenty-three  highly  promising  suppressant  antimalarials  were  tested 
against  simian  or  human  Plasmodia  in  subhuman  primates.  Five 
radical  curative  drugs  were  identified  which  were  at  least  four 
times  as  active  as  primaquine  in  the  simian  model.  Structure- 
activity  relationships  leading  to  primaquine-induced  hemolysis  are 
being  studied  in  vitro . 


995 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1 ABE RC V ACCESSION* 

DA  OB  6536 

I.  DATE  OF  summary* 

76  07  01 

HMronT  comrmoL  inraoi 

DD  DR*E(AR)*J* 

4 DA Y C Mlv  SUFRY 

75  07  01 

A M1NO  OR  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

S SUMMARY  SCTY*  4 BORA  SECURITY* 

u u 

> RBSRACMMO*  14  OSSrM  tNSTR'N  Ik  SPECIFIC 

CORTRAC  TO 

NA  NL  Brl, 

DATA  - S LEVEL  OF  SUM 

ACCESS 

□ m ‘.vomimi 

10  MO  COOES:*  PROGRAM  CLEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

RORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

M PRIMARY 

62759A 

3A762759A829 

00 

J59 

b.  CONTRIBUTIN' 

CARDS  1 14F 

I TITLE  | MMrtfp  citHlNMMa  C**T 


(LI ) Determination  of  Pharmacological  Effects  of  Antimalarial  Lungs 


«1  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 

012600  Pharmacology  002600  Biology 

it  START  DATE  M ESTIMATED  COMPLETIOR  OATS 

72  07  CONT 

14  FUNOlNO  AGENCY 

DA  | 

IS  PERFORMANCE  MEtNOO 

C.  In-House 

11  CONTRACT  BRANT 

4 DATES/E  FFICTIVE.  EXPIRATION 

C TYPE  4 AMOUNT 

St  KINO  OF  AVARD:  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

IS  RE  SOU  RC  as  ESTIMATE 

k FUNDS  PmmnR) 

' sc al 

YEAR 

76 

4.5 

252 

77 

9.0 

390 

IS  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORE  AMI  I AT  ION  j J 

SS.  PERFORMIMO  ORSARIIA 

“ ! 1 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
.odnih*  Washington,  DC  20012 

RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

»*«-.10Y,  R.  J.  T. , COL 

,Ht>  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  ot  Kesearc 
Div  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 
»ooMu:*Washington , DC  20012 

MMMCiMAL  IM  VI ITIAATOA  irMM  MAM  II  ||  J.  ...Ami.  y.lil^llwj 

HEIFFF.R,  Dr.  M.  H. 

TitiMMoai  202-576-3387 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

•*■«■  EINHEBER,  Dr.  A.  j 

•».  R0ZMAN,  Dr.  R.  S. 

Pharmacodynamics;  (U)  Pharmacokinetics;  (U)  Toxicity; 
fill  Biotransformation:  (U)  Antimalarial  Drugs;  (U)  Preclinical  Pharmacology 

l»  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  14  APPROACH.  14  M09DIU  (P-niInA  pA»  Mwll t-r  nnpAm  )••••!  c«M«  ; 


23.  (U)  The  technical  objectives  are  to  develop  and  exploit  animal  models  for  the  study 
of  the  pharmacodynamic  and  toxic  effects  of  drugs  intended  for  use  as  antimalarial  in 
man.  The  intended  purposes  of  these  studies  are  to  provide  a basis  for  predicting 
human  response  and  to  fulfill  requirements  for  submission  of  IND  for  clinical  trials  of 
new  antimalarials  for  military  personnel  in  malarious  areas. 

24.  (U)  The  approach  is  to  study  both  the  effects  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  healthy  ani- 
mals and  the  fate  of  these  drugs  in  healthy  animals  in  order  to  predict  the  human  tol- 
erance to  new  drugs  (Phase  I).  The  effects  of  antimalarial  drugs  are  being  studied  in 
infected  animals.  The  handling  of  antimalarial  drugs  by  diseased  animals  is  being 
studied  to  determine  the  effects  of  malaria  upon  pharmacokinetics.  This  is  in  order  to 
predict  the  tolerance  of  new  antimalarial  drugs  in  human  efficacy  studies  (Phase  II). 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Technical  management  continued  for  14  contracts  in  pharmacology. 
Two  new  IND  applications  and  13  supplements  were  written.  Methods  for  determining 
human  blood  levels  of  4 antimalarials  utilizing  extraction  and  high  pressure  liquid 
chromatography  were  developed.  WR  142,490  was  shown  to  maintain  persistent  levels  for 
weeks  in  human  plasma  after  oral  dosing.  WR  122,455  and  WR  171,669  were  both  shown  to 
be  curative  against  P.  falciparum  malaria  in  humans.  Absorption,  distribution  and  ex- 
cretion studies  using  radioactively  labeled  WR  180,409  were  carried  out  in  healthy  mice 
Cardiorespiratory  evaluations  in  anesthetized  dogs  were  made  on  WR  180,409.  The  mouse 
oral  efficacy  and  toxicity  and  effects  of  microsomal  modifiers  on  these  continued  to  be 
intensively  studied  in  primaquine  analogs,  both  racemic  mixtures  and  resolved  optical 
forms.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress 
Report,  1 July  75  - 30  Jun  76.  Support  in  the  amount  of  $92,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is 
programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul  - 30  Sep  76. 

nn  FORM  1 iQQ  PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OSIOLITE  DD  FORMS  I ASS  A I NOV  SS 

UU,  AND  'ASS  t I MAR  SS  (FOR  ARMY  US  El  ARE  OBSOLETE 

996 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investiaations 


Work  Unit  309  Determination  of  pharmacological  effects  of  anti- 
malarial  drugs 


Investigators. 
Principal : 
Associate: 


Description. 


Melvin  H.  Heiffer,  Ph.D. 

Dr.  R.  Rozman,  Dr.  A.  Einhe  er,  1LT  J.  Grindel,  Dr. 
H.  Chung,  CPT  D.  Korte,  Jr.,  MAJ  R.  Desjardins,  1LT 
V.  Jimmerson,  MAJ  J.  Rinehart,  SP4  H.  Gillum,  P. 
Tilton,  SP4  R.  Keller,  SP4  M.  lieidig 


The  thrust  of  the  pharmacological  studies  carried  out  by  the 
department  continue  in  two  broad  areas.  First  is  the  effect  of  the 
body  or  system  on  the  drug,  i.e.  absorption,  distribution,  biotrans- 
formation and  excretion.  Second  is  the  effect  of  the  drug  on  the 
body  or  system.  A considerable  overlap  exists  between  the  two  areas. 
This  year  a greater  emphasis  was  placed  on  developing  sensitive  assay 
methods  for  several  of  the  new  antimalarial  drugs  in  biological  fluids 
than  in  the  past. 

2 . Development  and  evaluation  of  a high  pressure  liquid  chromato- 
graphic assay  for  WR  142,490  in  blood,  plasma  and  urine. 

a.  Background: 

WR  142,490-HCl  (Mefloquine-HCl ) , dl-erythro-«- (2-pi peri dyl )- 
2,8-bis  (trifluoromethyl )-4-quinolinemethanol  hydrochloride,  is  a 
radical  curative  agent  for  the  treatment  of  drug-resistant  falciparum 
malaria  (Canfield  and  Rozman,  1974;  Trenholme  et  aj_. , 1975)  and  has 
been  shown  to  provide  suppressive  prophylaxis  against  mosquito- 
induced  infections  with  £_,  vivax  and  P_.  falciparum  in  human  volunteers 
(Rieckmann  et  al_. , 1974;  Clyde  1976).  Due  to  the  lack  of 

information  concerning  the  fate  of  mefloquine  in  man,  a sensitive  and 
specific  high  pressure  liquid  chromatographic  assay  for  the  parent 
drug  in  blood,  plasma  and  urine  was  developed  and  evaluated. 

b.  Methods : 

A high  pressure  liquid  chromatograph  equipped  with  a 280  nm 
absorbance  monitor  was  utilized.  Whole  blood  and  plasma  extracts  were 
chromatographed  on  a column  of  10  y,  fully  porous  silica  bonded  with 
a monomolecular  layer  of  cyanopropylsi lane  (4  mm  ID  x 30  cm)  using  a 
mobile  phase  of  isopropyl  ether/p-dioxane/glacial  acetic  acid 


--A  jwT-rT  • T*  J J.  / ' W 


(118:80:1  v/v/v)  at  2 mi/mir..  Urine  extracts  were  chromatographed  on 
a column  of  10  y,  fully  porous  silica  bonded  with  a monomolecular 
layer  of  octadecylsilane  (4  mm  ID  x 30  cm)  using  a mobile  phase  of 
methanol/0.1  .1  NaH2P04  (3:2  v/v)  at  2 ml/min. 

A calibration  curve  was  constructed  using  an  internal  standard. 

A solution  of  WR  184,806  was  prepared  in  p-dioxane/methanol  (7:3  v/v) 
(196  pg/ml ) . This  solution  was  the  solvent  for  the  preparation  of  a 
stock  solution  of  WR  142,490  (1028  yg/ml)  from  which  dilutions  were 
made  to  give  solutions  with  concentrations  of  10.2  to  205.6  ug/ml  of 
mefloquine  and  1.96  yg/ml  of  WR  184,806  (all  concentrations  expressed 
as  the  free  base).  Duplicate  injections  with  each  solution  were  made 
to  yield  data  for  the  construction  of  a linear  calibration  curve 
relating  the  peak  area  ratio  of  WR  142,490/WR  184,806  vs  amount  of 
mefloquine  injected. 

For  the  general  assay  procedure,  the  internal  standard  solution 
(50  yl)  containing  9.8  yg  of  WR  184,806,  5 ml  of  whole  blood,  plasma 
or  urine  and  5 ml  of  pH  7.4  phosphate  buffer  (0.065  M)  were  placed 
in  a 45  ml  glass  conical  tube  with  a teflon-lined  screw  cap  and 
thoroughly  mixed.  10  ml  of  ethyl  acetate  was  added  to  each  tube, 
the  samples  agitated  at  100  strokes/min  for  30  min  on  a reciprocat- 
ing shaker  bath,  centrifuged  at  2000  rpm  for  10  min  and  the  ethyl 
acetate  layer  carefully  pipetted  into  45  ml  glass  conical  tubes  with 
teflon  stoppers.  The  extraction  procedure  was  repeated  twice,  the 
combined  ethyl  acetate  layers  from  each  sample  evaporated  to  dryness 
under  a gentle  stream  of  nitrogen  at  40°C,  and  the  residue  stored 
overnight  in  a vaccum  desiccator.  The  sample  residues  were  recon- 
stituted with  500  yl  of  the  appropriate  mobile  phase,  and  50  yl 
aliquots  injected  into  the  HPLC.  Quantitation  of  WR  142,490  levels 
was  achieved  by  measurement  of  peak  area  ratios  for  WR  142,490/ 

WR  184,806  and  relating  the  ratio  to  the  linear  calibration  curve. 

To  quantitate  recovery  of  WR  142,490  and  WR  184,806,  ai iquots 
(25  ml)  of  human  whole  blood  were  spiked  with  a methanol ic  solution 
of  mefloquine  (250  yg/ml ) to  give  drug  concentrations  of  1.00,  0.50 
and  0.10  yg/ml.  The  samples  were  thoroughly  mixed  for  30  min  and 
treated  as  described  above  except  that  the  internal  standard  was  not 
added  until  the  extraction  was  completed.  Aliquots  of  human  blood 
were  spiked  with  a methanolic  solution  of  WR  184,806  (250  pg/ml)  to 
give  drug  concentrations  of  1.00,  0.50  and  0.10  pg/ml . The  samples 
were  thoroughly  mixed  for  30  min  and  treated  as  described  above 
except  that  the  internal  standard  was  not  added  until  the  extraction 
was  completed.  Aliquots  of  human  whole  blood  were  spiked  with  a 
methanolic  solution  of  WR  184,806  (250  yg/ml)  to  give  drug  concentra- 
tions of  1.00,  0.50  and  0.10  yg/ml.  The  samples  were  thoroughly 
mixed  for  30  min  and  treated  as  described  above  except  that  the 
internal  standard  was  not  added. 


998 


To  determine  precision  of  the  mefloquine  assay,  al iquots  (25  ml) 
of  human  whole  blood  and  plasma  were  spiked  with  a methanolic  solu- 
tion of  mefloquine  (250  pg/ml ) to  give  drug  concentrations  of  5.00, 

1.00,  0.50  and  0.05  pg/ml  while  urine  aliquots  (25  ml)  were  spiked  at 

5.00,  1.00,  0.50  and  0.25  pg/ml . The  samples  were  thoroughly  mixed 
for  30  min  and  treated  as  described. 

c.  Results  and  discussion: 

The  choice  of  extraction  solvent  for  the  assay  was  based  on 
solvating  strength,  transfer  characteristics  and  ease  of  evaporation. 
Ethyl  acetate  fulfilled  these  criteria  due  to  the  excellent  parti- 
tioning of  mefloquine  into  it  from  pH  7.4  buffer  (Mu  et  aK , 1975), 
due  to  its  good  pipetting  characteristics  and  due  to  its  low 
boiling  point  which  allowed  quick  evaporation  under  mild  conditions. 

The  establishment  of  liquid  chromatographic  conditions  was 
accomplished  by  examining  the  retention  characteristics  of  mefloquine 
on  normal  phase  and  reverse  phase  partitioning  columns.  Comparative 
retention  volumes  for  mefloquine  and  WR  184,806  are  presented  in 
Table  1.  Optimal  resolution  of  mefloquine  and  WR  184,806  from 
ethyl  acetate  extracts  of  blood  and  plasma  was  accomplished  using  a 
normal  phase  partitioning  column  with  a mobile  phase  of  isopropyl 
ether/p-dioxane/glacial  acetic  acid  (3:2  v/v  + 0.5%).  These  condi- 
tions, however,  did  not  resolve  mefloquine  and  WR  184,806  from  urine 
extract  peaks.  Adequate  resolution  of  the  two  compounds  from  urine 
extracts  was  achieved  on  a reverse  phase  partitioning  column  utilizing 
a mobile  phase  of  methanol/0.1  M NaH2P04  (3:2  v/v).  Representative 
chromatograms  are  presented  in  Figures  1 and  2. 

The  selection  of  an  internal  standard  for  the  assay  was  made  on 
the  basis  of  chromatographic  resolvability  and  the  possession  of 
physico-chemical  properties  similar  to  that  of  mefloquine.  WR  184, 

806  had  the  following  properties:  1)  a molar  absorptivity  at  280  nm 

nearly  identical  to  that  of  mefloquine;  2)  pKa,  solvent  partition 
coefficients  and  aqueous  solubility  similar  to  those  of  mefloquine; 
and  3)  chromatographic  resolution  from  mefloquine  and  from  extracts 
of  blood  and  urine  under  appropriate  chromatographic  conditions. 

Recovery  percentages  from  whole  blood  for  both  mefloquine  and 
WR  184,806  using  ethyl  acetate  as  extraction  solvent  are  presented 
in  Table  2.  The  recoveries  were  greater  than  95%  for  both  compounds 
with  standard  deviations  less  than  10%  at  concentrations  of  0.10- 
1.00  pg/ml . Precision  data  for  the  assay  of  blood,  plasma  and  urine 
specimens  spiked  with  known  concentrations  of  mefloquine  are 
presented  in  Table  3.  The  relative  percent  accuracy  was  + 3%  of  the 
amount  added  with  relative  standard  deviations  less  than  T0%  over  the 
range  of  0.05  - 5.00  yg/ml  for  blood  and  plasma  and  over  the  range  of 
0.25  - 5.00  ug/ml  for  urine  samples. 


999 


Daily  calibration  curves  had  a mean  slope  of  1.013  (r^  = 

0.9995)  with  a relative  standard  deviation  of  3.9%  for  ten  experi- 
ments over  a three  month  period.  The  lower  limit  of  sensitivity 
was  0.05  pg/ml  for  blood  and  plasma  samples  and  0.25  pg/ml  for 
urine  samples. 

Based  on  the  results  of  the  foregoing  experiments,  an  adult 
male  was  given  500  mg  of  mefloquine  hydrochloride,  and  serial  blood 
and  plasma  specimens  were  assayed  for  two  months  for  mefloquine  con- 
centrations (Figures  3 and  4).  Blood  and  plasma  levels  of  meflo- 
quine were  readily  detected  57  days  after  dosing.  Random  urine 
specimens  were  obtained  on  days  1 and  2 and  assayed  for  free  meflo- 
quine content  (Table  4).  The  levels,  although  low,  were  readily 
quantitated  using  the  assay.  These  results  established  the  applic- 
ability of  the  methodology  for  the  study  of  mefloquine  pharmaco- 
kinetics in  man. 

3.  Development  of  a high  pressure  liquid  chromatographic  assay  for 
WR  184,806  in  whole  blood. 

a.  Background: 

WR  184,806- H3PO4 , dl-2,8-bis(trifluoromethyl ) -4- [1 -hydroxy - 
3-(N-.t-butylamino)propyl jquinoline  phosphate,  is  a promising  new 
antimalarial  agent  currently  undergoing  Phase  I clinical  evaluation. 
Due  to  the  need  for  information  concerning  its  fate  in  man,  a 
sensitive  and  specific  high  pressure  liquid  chromatographic  assay 
was  developed  to  determine  WR  184,806  levels  in  human  whole  blood 
specimens. 

b.  Methods: 

A high  pressure  liquid  chromatograph  with  a 280  nm  absorbance 
monitor  was  utilized.  Whole  blood  extracts  were  chromatographed  on  a 
column  of  10  p,  fully  porous  silica  bonded  with  a monomolecular  layer 
of  cyanopropylsilane  (4  mm  ID  x 30  cm)  using  a mobile  phase  of 
p-dioxane/isopropyl  ether/methanol/glacial  acetic  acid  (117:80:2:1 
v/v/v/v)  at  2 ml/min. 

A calibration  curve  was  constructed  using  an  internal  stan- 
dard. A solution  of  WR  142,490  was  prepared  in  isopropyl  ether/ 
methanol  (7:3  v/v)  (100  pg/ml).  This  solution  was  the  solvent  for 
the  preparation  of  a stock  solution  of  WR  184,806  ( 1 . 00  mg/ml ) from 
which  dilutions  were  made  to  give  additional  concentrations  of 
WR  184,806  (10  - 200  pg/ml)  containing  100  ug/ml  of  WR  142,490  (all 
concentrations  are  express?d  as  the  free  base).  Duplicate  injections 
with  each  solution  were  made  to  yield  data  for  a linear  calibration 
curve  relating  peak  area  ratio  of  WR  1 84 ,806/WR  142,490  vs  amount  of 


1000 


WR  134,806  injected  in  the  range  of  25  ng  - 5000  ng. 

The  general  assay  procedure  used  was  as  described  for  WR  142,490 
except  that  only  human  whole  blood  was  assayed  and  that  50  micro- 
liters (5.0  yg)  of  WR  142,490  internal  standard  was  added  to  each 
tube. 

To  determine  precision  for  the  WR  184,806  assay,  aliquots 
(25  ml)  of  human  whole  blood  were  spiked  with  a methanol ic  solu- 
tion of  WR  184,806  (250  ul/ml)  to  give  drug  concentrations  of  5.00, 
1.00,  0.50,  0.25  and  0.10  pg/ml  of  blood.  The  samples  were 
thoroughly  mixed  for  30  min  and  treated  as  described  for  the  general 
assay  procedure. 

c.  Results  and  discussion: 

Based  on  the  results  of  chromatographic  (Table  1)  and 
extraction  (Table  2)  experiments  with  both  WR  184,806  and  WR  142,490, 
it  was  determined  that  WR  142,490  would  serve  well  as  the  internal 
standard  for  the  WR  184,806  assay.  Subsequently,  experiments  were 
performed  to  determine  the  accuracy  and  precision  of  the  proposed 
internal  standard  method.  The  results  of  this  experiment  are  pre- 
sented in  Table  5.  The  mean  percent  recovery  was  100.1%  with  a 
standard  deviation  of  4.6%.  The  lower  limit  of  quantitation  for 
WR  184,806  is  felt  to  be  100  ng/ml  of  whole  blood.  Based  on  blood 
level  data  for  the  mouse  this  level  of  quantitation  should  be 
adequate  for  the  performance  of  pharmacokinetic  studies  in  human 
subjects.  The  calibration  curve  was  described  by  the  following 
equation:  y = 1.9505  {+  0.1573)  x + 0.0419  (+  0.0322),  r = 0.9949. 

4.  Development  of  a high  pressure  liquid  chromatographic  assay  for 
WR  177,602  in  whole  blood. 

a.  Background:  WR  177,602-HCl,  dl -threo-a- (2-piperidyl  )-2 ,8- 
bis(trifluoromethyl)-4-quinolinemethanol  hydrochloride,  is  the 
diastereoisomer  of  WR  142,490.  WR  177,602  has  been  shown  to  be  as 
effective  as  WR  142,490  in  curing  Aotus  trivirgatus  monkeys  infected 
with  multi-drug  resistant  strains  of  malaria.  Preliminary  toxico- 
logical data  suggest  that  WR  177,602  may  be  less  toxic  than  WR  142, 
490.  Due  to  the  great  similarity  in  physical  properties  expected  of 
these  two  isomers,  the  information  stained  from  the  WR  142,490  HPLC 
assay  development  was  applied  with  ">  modification  to  the  WR  177,602 
project. 


1001 


b.  Methods: 


Partition  coefficients  of  WR  177,602  were  determined.  A 
stock  solution  of  WR  1 77 ,602-1 4c - HC1  (Lot  469a,  32.3427  yCi/mg) 
labeled  in  the  methanol  carbon,  was  prepared  in  methanol  (1  mg/ml). 
This  solution  was  utilized  to  make  a 500  ng  (base)/ml  solution  in 
0.065  M pH  7.4  Sorenson  phosphate  buffer.  Two  ml  aliquots  of  the 
buffered  drug  solution  were  separately  equilibrated  for  2 hr  against 
2 ml  of  one  of  each  of  the  following  solvents:  n-heptane,  benzene, 

diethyl  ether,  ethyl  acetate,  chloroform  and  n-butanol.  Samples  were 
withdrawn  from  both  the  organic  and  aqueous  layers  and  assayed  for 
total  14C.  The  ratio  of  the  dpm  (organic  phase)/dpm  (aqueous  phase) 
was  calculated  for  each  solvent  set  (n  = 4). 

A high  pressure  liquid  chromatograph  with  a 280  nm  absorbance 
monitor  was  utilized.  Whole  blood  extracts  were  chromatographed  on 
a column  of  10  y,  fully  porous  silica  bonded  with  a monomolecular 
layer  of  cyanopropylsilane  (4  mm  ID  x 30  cm)  using  a mobile  phase  of 
p-dioxane/isopropyl  ether/methanol/glacial  acetic  acid  (117:80:2:1 
v/v/v/v)  at  2 ml/min. 

A calibration  curve  was  constructed  for  WR  177,602.  A solution 
of  WR  184,806  was  prepared  in  p-dioxane/methanol  (7:3  v.v)  (196  yg/ 
ml).  A stock  solution  of  WR  177,602  was  prepared  in  methanol  at 
0.98  (base)  mg/kg.  Appropriate  amounts  of  this  solution  were  added 
to  10  ml  volumetric  flasks,  evaporated  to  dryness  under  N2  and 
reconstituted  in  the  internal  standard  solution  to  give  concentra- 
tions of  WR  177,602  of  200,  100,  50  and  20  yg/ml  containing  196  pg/ml 
of  WR  184,806.  All  concentrations  are  expressed  as  the  free  base. 

A calibration  curve  was  constructed  relating  peak  area  ratio  of 
WR  1 77 ,602/WR  184,806  vs  amount  of  WR  177,602. 

The  general  assay  procedures  were  identical  to  that  described 
for  WR  142,490  except  that  only  whole  blood  was  analyzed.  Precision 
determinations  for  the  WR  177,602  assay  were  made.  Aliquots  (25  ml) 
of  human  whole  blood  were  spiked  with  a methanol ic  solution  of 
WR  177,602  (0.98  mg/ml)  to  give  drug  concentrations  of  5.00,  1.00, 
0.50  and  0.10  yg/ml.  The  samples  were  thoroughly  mixed  for  30  min 
and  treated  as  described  under  the  general  assay  procedure. 

c.  Results  and  discussion: 

Since  WR  177,602  is  the  diastereoisomer  of  WR  142,490, 
similarities  in  physical  and  chromatographic  properties  would  be 
expected.  A comparison  of  the  spectroscopic  properties  of  the  four 
antimalarial  drugs  studied  is  presented  in  Table  6.  The  three  quino- 
1 inemethanols  all  have  very  similar  molar  absorptivity  constants  at 


1002 


283  nm.  Further,  a comparison  of  the  partition  coefficients  for 
WR  177,602  (Table  7),  WR  142,490  (Mu  et  al.,  1975),  and  WR  184,806 
(Grindel  et_  aL , 1976)  showed  that  ethyl  acetate  would  be  an 
excellent  extraction  solvent  for  all  three  drugs. 

An  evaluation  of  the  retention  volumes  (Rv)  for  these  three 
compounds  using  the  chromatographic  conditions  detailed  above 
showed  that  WR  177,602  (Rv  = 8.2  ml)  could  be  readily  resolved  from 
WR  184,806  (Rv  = 12.3  ml)  but  not  from  WR  142,490  (Rv  = 7.8  ml). 

Thus  WR  184,806  was  used  as  the  internal  standard  for  this  assay. 

Utilizing  the  above  information  an  assay  procedure  for  WR  177, 
602  was  evaluated  over  the  range  100  ng  - 5000  ng/ml  of  blood.  The 
results  are  presented  in  Table  8.  The  mean  percent  recovery  was 
102.8+6.2%.  The  linear  calibration  curve  was  described  by  the 
equation: 

y = 1.1854X  + (-0.0011),  r = 0.9988. 

5.  Development  of  a high  pressure  liquid  chromatographic  assay  for 
WR  180,409  in  whole  blood. 

a.  Background: 

WR  180.409-H3P04,  dl -threo-a-(2-piperidyl )-2-trifluoromethyl - 
6- (4-tri f 1 uoromethyl phenyl ) -4-pyri di nemethanol  phosphate,  has  been 
shown  to  be  effective  in  curing  Aotus  trivirgatus  monkeys  infected 
with  multi-drug  resistant  strains  of  malaria.  Its  physicochemical 
characteristics  are  not  unlike  those  observed  for  the  quinoline- 
methanols;  thus,  the  developmental  work  already  cited  was  directly 
applied  to  this  project. 

b.  Methods : 

The  chromatography  procedures  are  as  described  for 
WR  177,602. 

Calibration  curves  were  constructed.  An  internal  standard 
solution  of  WR  184,806  was  prepared  in  p-dioxane/methanol  (7:3  v/v) 
(196  ug/ml).  A stock  solution  of  WR  180,409  (0.96  (base)  mg/ml)  was 
prepared  in  methanol.  Appropriate  aliquots  of  the  stock  solution 
were  added  to  separate  10  ml  volumetric  flasks,  evaporated  to  dryness 
under  N£  and  reconstituted  in  the  internal  standard  solution  to  give 
concentrations  of  WR  180,409  of  192,  96,  48  and  19  ug/ml  containing 
196  yg/ml  of  WR  184,806.  Calibration  curves  were  constructed  as 
previously  described  using  the  ratio  WR  180,409/WR  184,806. 


1003 


The  general  assay  procedure  was  identical  to  that  described  for 
WR  142,490  except  that  only  whole  blood  was  analyzed.  Precision 
determinations  for  the  WR  180,409  assay  were  carried  out.  Aliquots 
(25  ml)  of  human  whole  blood  were  spiked  with  a methanolic  solution 
of  WR  180,409  (0.96  mg/ml)  to  give  drug  concentrations  of  4.800, 
0.960,  0.480  and  0.096  ^g/ml . The  samples  were  thoroughly  mixed  for 
30  min  and  treated  as  described  under  the  general  assay  procedure. 

c.  Results  and  discussion: 

The  physicochemical  properties  of  WR  180,409  are  reasonably 
similar  to  those  of  the  quinolinemethanols  studied.  Thus,  the  molar 
absorptivity  is  approximately  twice  that  seen  for  the  quinoline- 
methanols (Table  6),  its  partition  coefficients  are  very  similar  and 
its  retention  volume  (8.00  ml)  is  nearly  identical  to  those  cited 
for  WR  142,490  (7.8  ml)  and  WR  177,602  (8.2  ml). 

Based  on  the  foregoing  data  an  assay  procedure  was  evaluated 
for  WR  180,409  over  the  range  of  96  - 4800  ng/ml  of  whole  blood 
(Table  9).  The  mean  percent  recovery  was  97.9  + 4.6%.  The  linear 
calibration  curve  was  described  by  the  equation. 

y = 1.8865  x + 0.0002,  r = 0.9985. 

6.  Analysis  of  serum  and  whole  blood  specimens  from  human  subjects. 

a.  Background: 

An  extension  of  the  phase  I clinical  trials  on  mefloquine 
hydrochloride  (WR  142,490-HCl)  was  performed  at  the  Washington 
Hospital  Center  by  Bio-Med,  Inc.  In  a rising-dose,  double-blind 
study  design  male  subjects  were  administered  mefloquine  hydrochloride 
orally  as  250  mg  film-coated  tablets  or  identical  looking  placebos. 
Serum  or  whole  blood  specimens  were  obtained  as  specified  for 
analysis  of  drug  content. 

b.  Methods: 

The  serum  and  whole  blood  specimens  which  were  received  from 
the  Washington  Hospital  Center  were  stored  at  -20°C  until  analyzed. 
The  method  of  analysis  was  as  described  above  for  WR  142,490. 

Twelve  adult  male  subjects,  age  21-45  yrs  and  weighing 
50-100  Kg,  were  dosed  orally  with  mefloquine  hydrochloride  as  250  mg 
film-coated  tablets  (B-512)  or  identical-looking  placebo  tablets 
(B-513)  on  Days  1 and  8 of  the  study.  Specimens  for  analysis  were 
obtained  on  days  0,  2,  3,  7,  9,  10  and  14.  Serum  specimens  were 


submitted  for  groups  20  (1.00  g)  and  21  (1.25  g)  and  whole  blood 
specimens  were  submitted  for  group  22  (1.50  g). 


\ 


c.  Results  and  discussion: 

The  results  of  the  analyses  are  presented  in  Table  10. 

Day  0 and  placebo  subject  specimens  exhibited  no  detectable  levels 
of  mefloquine.  All  specimens  obtained  after  administration  of  drug 
demonstrated  readily  measurable  levels  of  drug.  The  submission  of 
whole  blood  specimens  for  group  22  instead  of  serum  specimens  as 
for  groups  20  and  21  obscures  detection  of  a dose/drug  level  rela- 
tionship among  these  three  groups. 

7.  The  absorption,  distribution  and  excretion  of  WR  18Q,4Q9-^C-HiP04 
in  mice. 


a.  Background: 

DL-threo-a -(2-pi  peri dyl )-2-trifluoromethyl-6-(4-triflipro- 
methyl phenyl )-4-pyridinemethanol  phosphate  (WR  1 80 ,409 • H3PO4 ) is  a 
promising  candidate  antimalarial  drug.  The  objective  of  this  study 
was  to  determine  the  absorption,  distribution  and  excretion  of  this 
compound  in  mice.  In  addition  a number  of  physical  properties  of 
the  drug  was  investigated  as  an  aid  to  these  studies. 

b.  Materials  and  methods: 

Radioactive  WR  180,409-H3P04  (21.1179  yCi/mg;  Lot  No.  436a- 
3a)  was  synthesized  by  Dr.  W.  H.  Yanko  of  Monsanto  Research  Corp* 
(Dayton  Laboratory,  Dayton,  OH)  with  the  14C-label  on  the  methanol 
carbon.  The  nonradioactive  compound(Lot  AC;  bottle  number 
BE  56685)  was  prepared  by  Ash  Stevens,  Inc.  (Detroit,  MI).  A solu- 
tion of  WR  180,409-14c- H3PO4  with  a specific  activity  of  2 yCi/mg 
was  prepared  by  dissolving  the  appropriate  amount  of  radioactive  and 
nonradioactive  compound  in  deionized  water.  Chemical  and  radio- 
chemical purity  of  the  solution  were  assayed  by  thin-layer  chromato- 
graphy. A premixed  liquid  scintillation  solution,  Hydromix  (York- 
town  Research  Co.  Hackensack,  NJ)  was  used  for  radioassay.  All 
other  chemicals  and  solvents  used  were  reagent  grade  quality. 

Albino,  ICR  male  mice  from  the  Walter  Reed  Colony  weighing 
about  25  g were  used.  The  mice  were  fed  D and  6 Laboratory  diet 
(G.  L.  Baking  Co.,  Frederick,  MD)  and  were  maintained  in  a tempera- 
ture controlled  room  with  a 12-hr  light-dark  cycle.  The  mice  were 
fasted  for  about  18  hr  prior  to  dosing  but  were  permitted  water  ad 
libitum.  A dosage  of  20  mg/kg  was  administered  to  each  mouse  by  oral 
intubation.  The  mice  were  then  housed  four  to  a modified  Roth 


1005 


metabolism  cage  and  were  allowed  water  ad  libitum.  Food  was  not 
allowed  until  four  hours  after  dosing.  Standard  doses  were  taken 
for  radioassay  before,  during  and  after  dosing  the  animals. 

Excreta  was  collected  for  analysis.  Expired  air  was  drawn 
through  both  base  and  acid  scrubbers  and  analysis  performed  on  con- 
secutive 12  hr  samples. 

Urine  samples  were  collected  at  24  hr  intervals  for  10  days; 
aliquots  of  each  sample  were  taken  for  total  radioactivity  deter- 
mination. The  samples  were  lyophi  1 i zed  to  dryness  and  reconstitu- 
ted in  5 ml  phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4).  The  samples  were  then 
extracted  3 times  with  10  ml  of  diethyl  ether.  The  pooled  extract 
was  evaporated  to  dryness  and  reconstituted  with  small  amounts  of 
absolute  methanol  for  TLC  study. 

Fecal  samples  were  collected  at  24  hr  intervals  for  10  days, 
homogenized  in  absolute  methanol  in  a Waring  blender  and  extracted 
in  glass  columns  with  methanol.  The  eluates  were  measured  and 
aliquots  taken  for  gross  radioassay.  The  methanol  extracts  were 
evaporated  to  dryness  in  a flash  evaporator  and  reconstituted  in  5 
ml  phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4).  The  samples  were  then  extracted  with 
diethylether  as  described  above. 

Plasma  and  red  blood  cell  levels  were  examined.  At  appropriate 
intervals  after  dosing  the  four  mice  in  a group  were  anesthetized 
with  ether  and  exsanguinated  via  a surgically  exposed  femoral 
artery.  Aliquots  of  the  heparinized  pooled  blood  were  used  for  radio- 
assay along  with  aliquots  for  the  hematocrit  (Hct)  determination 
(13,000  x g for  3 min).  The  remainder  of  each  sample  was  centri- 
fuged at  7,000  x g for  5 min  to  separate  the  plasma  from  the  red 
blood  cells.  Aliquots  of  plasma  were  taken  from  each  sample  for 
radioassay.  Red  blood  cell  levels  were  calculated.  The  plasma 
and  red  blood  cells  were  lyophi li zed  and  extracted  by  diethyl  ether 
as  described  above. 

Tissue  levels  of  radioactivity  were  determined  at  appropriate 
intervals  after  dosing.  All  four  mice  in  a group  were  anesthetized 
with  ether,  exsanguinated  and  the  following  tissues  removed  by 
dissection:  submaxillary  salivary  glands,  heart,  lungs,  liver, 

kidneys,  spleen,  gall  bladder  and  bile,  stomach  and  its  contents, 
small  intestine  and  its  contents,  cecum  and  its  contents,  and  large 
intestine  and  its  contents.  Samples  of  abdominal  fat  and  skeletal 
muscle  were  also  taken.  Each  tissue  type  from  each  time  interval 
group  was  pooled,  placed  in  a preweighed  container,  weighed  and 
sufficient  methanol  was  added  to  cover  the  tissues. 


r 


For  radioassay,  fifteen  ml  of  premixed  scintillation  fluid, 
Hydromix,  was  added  to  each  sample.  The  samples  were  counted  for  10 
minutes  in  a Searle  Mark  II  liquid  scintillation  counter.  Quenching 
and  counting  efficiency  were  corrected  by  external  standardization. 

Thin  layer  chromatography  was  used  extensively  for  isolation  of 
drug.  Appropriate  amounts  of  samples  were  streaked  on  EM  pre-coated 
silica  gel  F-254  TLC  plates  (EM  Laboratories,  Ltd.,  Elmsford,  NY) 
and  developed  for  10  cm  for  the  origin  using  either  n-butanol : acetic 
acid:water  (66:17:17  by  volume)  or  benzene:methanol  (3:1  by  volume) 
as  solvent  systems.  After  air  drying,  the  plates  were  visualized 
with  UV  light  (254  nm)  and  scanned  with  a Varian  Model  6000  Radio- 
scanner with  integrator  (time  constant  = 1 sec;  speed  = 4 in/hr; 
attenuation  = 10  cps).  A standard  streak  of  WR  1 80,409-1 4q- H3PO4 
was  placed  on  each  plate  as  a comparison  standard. 

c.  Results  and  discussion: 


The  disposition  of  DL-threo-a-(2-piperidyl )-2-trifluoro- 
methyl -6-(4-tri fl uoromethyl phenyl )-4-pyridinemethanol  phosphate 
(WR  180,409-H3P04)  was  studied  over  a 240  hr  period  after  20  mg/kg 
of  the  C-14  labeled  drug  was  administered  orally  to  mice.  About  84% 
and  5.5%  of  the  drug-derived  radioactivity  was  excreted  via  feces 
and  urine  respectively  (Table  11).  The  excretion  of  the  drug-derived 
radioactivity  in  urine  and  feces  peaked  at  the  time  period  between  48 
and  72  hr.  Approximately  4.4%  of  the  administered  radioactivity  was 
recovered  in  the  carcasses.  A total  of  about  94%  of  the  administered 
dose  was  recovered  from  the  mice. 

One  mouse  was  dosed  as  described  and  placed  into  a small  glass 
metabolism  cage  which  was  connected  to  acid  and  base  air  scrubbing 
columns  to  determine  possible  elimination  via  expired  air.  Samples 
of  expired  air  trapping  solutions  were  taken  as  described  for  192  hr. 
A total  of  0.32%  of  the  administered  radioactive  dose  was  recovered 
in  the  expired  air  by  192  hr.  Peak  levels  of  radioactivity  in  the 
expired  air  were  also  found  at  the  time  period  between  48  and  72  hr. 

Radioactivity  in  urine  and  feces  was  analyzed  by  thin  layer 
chromatography  (TLC).  TLC  analysis  showed  that  the  fraction  as 
parent  drug  decreased  with  time  in  both  urine  and  feces  (Table  12). 
When  the  data  were  plotted  in  a semi -log  graph,  linear  regression 
analyzed  and  the  slope  of  the  line  determined,  apparent  elimination 
half-lives  of  the  parent  drug  (T  1/2)  were  calculated  to  be  21.1  hr 
and  25.9  hr  for  urine  and  feces  respectively. 

The  concentration  of  14C-drug  equivalents  in  the  plasma  and  red 
blood  cells  (RBC)  of  the  mouse  was  determined  after  a single  oral 


1007 


Each  tissue  pool,  as  well  as  the  carcasses,  was  homogenized 
with  methanol.  Samples  were  taken  from  the  homogenates  for  radio- 
assay and  the  remaining  homogenate  was  packed  into  a glass  column. 
After  the  homogenate  was  thoroughly  extracted  with  methanol,  the 
volume  of  the  methanol  eluates  was  measured  and  aliquots  were  taken 
for  radioassay.  The  remaining  eluates  were  evaporated  to  dryness 
and  reconstituted  in  small  amounts  of  methanol  for  TLC  analysis. 

Hydrolysis  of  urine  and  fecal  extracts  was  carried  out.  Repre- 
sentative aliquots  of  urine  and  fecal  samples  were  placed  in  separate 
flasks  with  5 ml  of  the  following  media:  phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4) 

as  control;  700  units  of  6-glucuronidase  in  pH  7.4  phosphate  buffer; 
6-glucuronidase/arylsulphatase,  29,000  units  in  pH  7.4  phosphate 
buffer;  and  0.2  N HC1 . The  flasks  were  incubated  at  37°C  for  3 hrs. 
The  samples  were  extracted  3 times  with  15  ml  diethyl  ether  each 
time.  The  extracts  were  evaporated  to  dryness  and  reconstituted  in 
0,5  ml  of  methanol.  Aliquots  of  the  extracts  were  taken  for  radio- 
assay and  the  remainders  analyzed  by  TLC. 

Plasma  protein  binding  was  investigated  using  mouse  plasma. 

Blood  was  collected  from  the  mice  as  described  previously.  Aliquots 
of  the  pooled  blood  were  taken  for  hematocrit  determinations.  The 
blood  was  centrifuged  and  the  plasma  was  separated.  An  aliquot  of  a 
solution  of  WR  180,409-^c  was  added  to  phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4) 
such  that  the  final  concentration  of  drug  was  1,000  ng  (base)/ml, 

Prom  this  stock  solution,  solutions  with  concentration  of  50,  100, 

500  and  1,000  ng  (base)/ml  were  made.  Duplicate  aliquots  (1  ml)  of 
each  solution  were  subjected  to  equilibrium  dialysis  against  the 
plasma  in  multicavity  dialysis  cells  (Model  I Multicavity  dialysis 
cells,  National  Scientific  Co.,  Cleveland,  OH).  The  samples  were 
incubated  for  20  hr  at  25°C  in  a Dubnoff  metabolic  shaker  at  100 
strokes  per  min.  Radioactivity  was  determined  on  both  rides  of  the 
membrane  and  the  percentage  of  drug  bound  to  plasma  proteins  cal- 
culated. 


Both  the  pKa  and  partition  coefficients  of  the  drug  were 
measured.  For  the  pKa  determination,  solutions  of  WR  180.409-H3P04 
were  made  by  dissolving  10  mg  of  the  drug  in  10  ml  of  deionized  water 
and  titrating  with  0.005  N sodium  hydroxide  solution.  A Beckman 
expanded  scale  pH  meter  was  used  for  pH  measurement.  A phosphate 
baseline  curve  was  determined  and  subtracted  from  the  drug  curves. 

The  pKa  was  determined  graphically.  For  the  partition  coefficients, 
a solution  of  WR  180, 409-1 4c. H3PO4  (4  yg/ml , 3.71  uCi/mg)  was  pre- 
pared in  phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4).  Aliquots  of  tnis  solution  were 
taken  to  determine  the  total  radioactivity.  Duplicate  1 ml  aliquots 
of  this  solution  were  shaken  with  1 ml  of  various  organic  solvents 
for  2 hr  at  25°C.  After  centrifugation,  aliquots  of  both  phases  were 
withdrawn  for  radioassay.  Kp  was  calculated  as  the  ratio  of  radio- 
activity in  the  organic  phase  to  that  in  the  buffer  phase. 


1008 


dose  of  the  drug.  The  plasma  and  RBC  concentration  curves  for 
WR  1 80 ,409-1 4c  and  total  l^c-drug  equivalents,  expressed  as  pg  of 
drug  equivalents  per  ml,  are  summarized  in  Table  i3.  The  highest 
levels  of  apparent  parent  compound  and  total  radioactivity  (0.86 
ug/ml  and  2.03  pg/ml  respectively)  were  observed  at  2 and  4 hr 
respectively.  In  RBC,  the  peak  concentration  of  apparent  parent 
compound  and  total  radioactivity  (2.96  pg/ml  and  3.71  pg/ml)  were 
observed  at  12  hr.  The  el imination  T 1/2  of  WR  T 80 ,409-1 4c  in 
plasma  and  in  RBC  was  estimated  to  be  26.2  hr  and  27.4  hr  respec- 
tively. 

The  distribution  of  WR  1 80 ,409-1 4c  in  selected  tissues  was 
studied.  Of  the  organs  investigated,  the  major  sites  of  distribu- 
tion of  WR  180,409-derived  radioactivity  were  the  lungs,  liver, 
kidneys,  small  intestine  and  contents,  and  residual  carcasses 
(6.21%,  14.22%,  5.95%,  18.22%  and  31.24%  of  the  administered  dose) 
two  hr  after  oral  administration  of  the  drug  (Table  14).  Two  hr 
after  the  administration  of  the  drug,  a total  of  about  61%  of  the 
dose  was  accounted  for  when  adding  the  radioactivity  in  the  sub- 
maxillary salivary  glands,  heart,  lungs,  liver,  kidneys,  spleen, 
gall  bladder  plus  bile,  plasma,  RBC  and  residual  carcasses  after 
removal  of  the  entire  gastrointestinal  tract  with  associated 
contents.  This  indicates  that  at  least  61%  of  the  dose  was  absorbed 
by  2 hr  after  oral  administration  of  the  drug.  In  terms  of  ug  of 
drug  per  g of  tissue,  the  major  sites  of  deposition  of  drug  derived 
radioactivity  were  the  lungs,  1 iver,  kidneys  and  gall  bladder  plus 
bile  48  hr  after  oral  administration  of  the  drug  (Table  15).  A 
high  percentage  of  unchanged  WR  180,409-1 4c  in  these  tissues  was 
identified  by  TLC  analysis  (Table  16). 

Several  TLC  solvent  systems  were  tested  for  the  metabolic  profile 
of  WR  180,409.  Two  were  selected.  These  are  n^-butanol : acetic  acid: 
water  (66:17:17  by  volume)  and  benzene:methanol  (3:1  by  volume). 

Table  17  shows  the  TLC  profiles  of  urine  and  fecal  extracts.  The 
chromatography  plates  were  developed  two  dimensionally  with  the  two 
chosen  solvent  systems.  The  results  show  that  four  major  bands  were 
separated  by  these  two  solvent  systems  and  that  one  of  these  bands 
was  found  to  be  identical  to  the  parent  drug. 

The  plasma  protein  binding  of  WR  180,409  was  studied  by  equi- 
librum  dialysis  of  fresh  mouse  plasma.  Table  18  shows  that  99%  of 
the  drug  (concentration  range  from  100  ng/ml  to  5,000  ng/ml)  was 
bound  to  the  mouse  plasma. 

Representative  aliquots  of  urine  and  fecal  extracts  were  sub- 
jected to  3-glucuronidase,  3-glucuronidase/arylsuphatase  or  0.2  N 
HC1.  These  enzyme  and  acid  hydrolysis  conditions  did  not  cause  any 
significant  changes  in  the  chromatographic  profile  of  the  relative 


1009 


composition  of  the  radioactivity  as  analyzed  by  TLC. 

The  lipophilic  characteristic  of  this  drug  was  estimated  by 
studying  its  partition  between  phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4)  and  various 
organic  solvents.  The  results  of  this  study,  presented  in  Table  19, 
indicate  that  WR  180,409  has  high  lipid  solubility.  The  pKa  of 
WR  180,409  was  determined  to  be  8.1. 

8.  The  cardiorespiratory  effects  of  WR  180,409- H3PO4. 

a.  Background: 

This  investigation  was  undertaken  to  define  the  acute 
cardiorespiratory  actions  of  the  candidate  antimalarial  drug,  DL- 
threo-ct-(2-pi  peri dyl ) -2-tri fl  uoromethyl -6- (4-tri f 1 uoromethyl phenyl ) 
-4-pyridenemethanol  phosphate  (WR  180,409- H3PO4)  after  intravenous 
administration  to  anesthetized  dogs. 

b.  Materials  and  methods: 

Ten  mongrel  dogs  of  either  sex  weighing  between  15.0  and 
22.7  kg  were  anesthetized  with  30  mg/kg  sodium  pentobarbital  admin- 
istered intravenously.  The  first  four  animals  were  used  to  deter- 
mine the  basic  cardiorespiratory  activity  of  WR  180,409-H3P04.  The 
left  femoral  artery  and  vein  were  cathetherized  for  measurement  of 
arterial  pressure  and  drug  administration.  An  oral  endotracheal 
tube  was  positioned  and  respiration  monitored  by  a pneumotachometer. 
The  Lead  II  electrocardiogram  was  recorded  and  its  signal  was  fed 
into  a cardiotachograph  for  measurement  of  heart  rate.  All  measure- 
ments were  recorded  on  a Hewlett-Packard  7700  series  recorder. 

Body  temperature  was  monitored  via  a rectal  thermistor  probe  and 
maintained  near  normal  by  application  of  external  heat.  At  the 
termination  of  the  experimental  procedures,  animals  still  alive  were 
euthanized  with  Lethane. 

WR  180,409-H3P04  was  obtained  from  bottle  number  BE  99420,  Lot 

AD.  The  drug  was  dissolved  in  a vehicle  with  the  following  composi- 
tion: 6.25%  propylene  glycol#  12.5%  absolute  ethanol,  and  81.25% 

dextrose  5%  in  distilled  water.  The  drug  concentration  in  the 
solution  was  25  mg/ml.  At  this  concentration,  the  drug  remained  in 
solution  it  kept  at  body  temperature,  37°C. 

The  cumulative  effect  of  intravenous  WR  180,409-H3P0^  on 
cardio-respiratory  responses  was  assessed  in  the  first  animal  (Dog 
#1).  The  drug  was  administered  as  an  iv  bolus  at  20  minute 
intervals  in  increasing  doses  and  cardiorespiratory  responses  were 
observed.  Progressive  doses  of  0.1  mg/kg,  0.1  mg/kg,  0.3  mg/kg, 

O. 3  mg/kg,  1.0  mg/kg  . . . were  administered  until  death  occurred 


lOIO 


and  the  cumulative  fatal  dose  was  recorded.  In  a second  animal 
(Dog  #2)  a 3 mg/kg  dose  of  WR  1 80 ,409 * H3PO4  was  administered  as  an 
iv  infusion  over  40  minutes.  A 3 mg/kg  dose  was  then  injected  iv  20 
minutes  after  termination  of  the  infusion  and  again  20  minutes  later. 
After  vagotomy,  an  additional  3 mg/kg  iv  injection  was  made.  Twenty 
minutes  after  the  last  injection,  a 10  mg/kg  dose  of  WR  1 80,409 * H3PO4 
was  administered  iv  to  determine  whether  vagotomy  protected  the 
animal  from  a larger  dose  of  the  drug.  The  ability  of  WR  180,409- 
H3PO4  to  modify  the  cardiorespiratory  effects  of  1.0  ug/kg  doses  of 
epinephrine  hydrochloride,  isoproterenol  hydrochloride,  acetyl- 
choline hydrochloride,  histamine  phosphate,  and  serotonin  creatinine 
sulfate  monohydrate,  administered  iv  as  the  salt,  was  assessed  in  a 
third  animal  (Dog  #3)  before  and  after  a 40  minute  iv  infusion  of  3 
■ug/kg  WR  1 80 ,409 * H3PO4 . Following  these  injections,  3 mg/kg 
WR  1 80 ,409 • H3PO4  was  injected  as  an  iv  bolus.  In  a fourth  animal 
(Dog  #4),  after  the  iv  bolus  injection,  and  an  additional  3 mg/kg 
dose  of  WR  180.409-H3P04  was  administered  as  an  iv  bolus. 

The  next  series  of  four  animals  (Dogs  #5-8)  was  used  to  evalu- 
ate the  effects  of  a 60  minutes  infusion  of  WR  180,409-H3P04,  15 
mg/kg.  In  addition  to  measuring  the  parameters  described  earlier, 
central  venous  pressure  (CVP)  and  the  pre-ejection  period  to  left 
ventricular  ejection  time  ratio  (PEP/LVET)  were  monitored.  CVP  was 
measured  from  a catheter  placed  in  the  inferior  vena  cava  via  the 
left  femoral  vein.  Drug  infusions  were  made  through  a catheter 
placed  in  the  right  femoral  vein.  PEP/LVET  has  been  used  as  a non- 
invasive  method  of  assessing  drug  activity  on  myocardial  function. 

An  increase  in  the  ratio  is  indicative  of  depressed  myocardial 
function  (Rinehart  et  al . , 1974).  For  these  studies,  PEP  was 
measured  as  the  interval  between  the  initiation  of  the  R wave  in  the 
Lead  II  ECG  and  the  beginning  point  of  the  rapid  rise  to  systolic 
pressure  observed  in  the  arterial  pressure  curve.  LVET  was  measured 
as  the  interval  between  the  beginning  point  of  the  rapid  rise  to 
systolic  pressure  and  the  dicrotic  notch  observed  in  the  arterial 
pressure  curve.  The  standard  25  mg/ml  solution  of  WR  180,409- H3PO4 
was  diluted  with  the  vehicle  so  that  the  infusion  consisted  of 
0.25  mg/kg  WR  180,409- H3PO4/  0.247  ml  vehicle/min.  Following  the 
one  hour  infusion,  the  animals  were  observed  for  an  additional  one 
hour  period.  The  paired  t test  of  significance  was  used  to  compare 
baseline  values  with  values  obtained  during  and  after  the  infusion 
period.  Values  were  considered  significant  if  the  computed  t 
exceeded  the  tabular  t value  for  5 % level  of  significance. 

Ascending  aortic  blood  flow  and  myocardial  contractility  were 
monitored  in  the  final  two  animals  (Dogs  #9  and  10)  during  and  after 
infusing  iv  15  mg/kg  WR  1 80 ,409 • H3PO4  over  a 60  minute  period. 

Blood  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  monitored  as  in  previous  animals. 


1011 


The  two  animals  were  artifically  respired  with  room  air  by  positive 
pressure  ventilation  and  the  chest  was  opened  by  midline  incision. 

The  pericardial  sac  was  then  cut  so  as  to  expose  the  right  ventricle 
and  ascending  aorta.  The  sac  remained  sufficiently  intact  to  cradle 
the  heart.  The  ascending  aorta  was  cleared  of  connective  tissue  and 
an  electromagnetic  flow  probe  was  placed  around  the  ascending  aorta. 
The  impulse  from  the  flow  probe  was  calibrated  so  that  the  flow  could 
be  read  in  liters/min.  A Wal ton-Brodie  strain  gauge  arch  was  sewn 
onto  the  right  ventricular  muscle  mass.  Myocardial  contractility  was 
recorded  as  a percentage  change  in  the  baseline  measurements.  Total 
peripheral  resistance  (TPR)  was  calculated  in  peripheral  resistant 
units  (PRU),  obtained  by  dividing  mean  arterial  pressure  (mm  Hg)  by 
aortic  blood  flow  (ml/sec).  A PRU  value  of  less  than  one  is 
associated  with  vasodilation  or  a decrease  in  resistance  while  a 
value  greater  than  one  denotes  vasoconstriction  or  an  increase  in 
peripheral  resistance. 

c . Results  and  discussion: 

The  cardiorespiratory  responses  to  repeated  administration 
of  increasing  doses  of  WR  180.409-H3P04  are  given  in  Table  20.  In 
this  animal,  0.1  and  0.3  mg/kg  had  little  effect  upon  the  measured 
parameters.  WR  180,409- H3PO4 , 1 mg/kg,  produced  a bradycardia,  a 
slight  hypotension,  and  a brief  period  of  apnea  followed  by  tachypnea. 
Increasing  the  dosage  to  3 mg/kg  produced  a more  profound  hypoten- 
sion. Arterial  pressure  returned  to  control  values  within  the  20 
minute  interval  between  injections.  Heart  rate  returned  to  control 
levels  within  the  20  minute  interval  except  prior  to  injection  of 
10  mg/kg.  Beginning  with  the  1 mg/kg  dose,  there  were  marked 
changes  in  respiration.  The  tachypnea  following  the  postinjection 
apnea  had  not  returned  to  control  levels  within  the  20  minute 
interval  between  injections.  A summary  of  the  cardiorespiratory 
responses  to  an  iv  bolus  injection  of  WR  180.409-H3P04 , 3 mg/kg,  is 
given  in  Table  21.  The  hypotension,  bradycardia,  and  respiratory 
depression  observed  after  WR  180.409-H3P04  is  similar  to  the  Bezold- 
Jarish  response  observed  v/ith  the  injection  of  veratrum  alkaloids. 
Administration  of  veratrum  alkaloids  stimulates  afferent  vagal  fibers 
in  the  coronary  sinus  and  left  ventricle  resulting  in  a brief  period 
of  hypotension  and  bradycardia.  Veratrum  alkaloids  also  depress 
respiration  by  an  action  on  pulmonary  stretch  receptors  (Nickerson, 
1971).  The  effect  of  vagotomy  upon  the  cardiorespiratory  actions  of 
WR  180.409-H3P04  is  given  in  Table  22.  Vagotomy  reversed  the  chrono- 
tropic response,  attenuated  the  hypotension,  abolished  the  period  of 
apnea,  and  markedly  reduced  the  tachypnea  observed  after  injection 
of  WR  1 80 ,409 • H3PO4 . These  responses  are  qualitatively  similar  to 
those  obtained  with  veratrum  alkaloids  after  vagotomy. 


1012 


Dog  #1  died  after  a cumulative  dose  of  18.8  mg/kg  of  WR  180,409- 
H3PO4.  Dog  #2  was  administered  9 mg/kg  of  WR  180,409-83804,  in  three 
3 mg/kg  doses,  was  vagotomized  and  given  an  additional  3 mg/kg  dose 
of  WR  1 80 , 409 • H3PO4 . Finally,  a 10  mg/kg  dose  was  administered  which 
resulted  in  death  of  the  animal.  Vagotomy,  although  it  modifed 
cardiorespiratory  responses,  did  not  appear  to  protect  the  animal  since 
a cumulative  dose  of  22  mg/kg  WR  1 80,409 • H3PO4  was  fatal  to  Dog  #2. 

In  Dogs  #1  and  #2,  the  pH  and  hematocrit  of  the  venous  blood  were 
monitored  at  different  intervals.  The  control  value  for  pH  of  venous 
blood  averaged  7.37  while  the  hematocrit  averaged  37%.  The  pH  values 
decreased  with  increasing  doses  of  WR  180, 409-83804  and  the  final 
value,  obtained  prior  to  the  10  mg/kg  dose,  averaged  7.15.  During  the 
same  period  the  hematocrit  increased  to  56%  with  definite  hemolysis 
present  in  the  two  dogs.  Autopsy  of  Dogs  #1  and  #2  revealed  a marked 
pulmonary  congestion.  Rapid,  repeated  intravenous  injections  of 
WR  180,409-H3804  produced  profound  alterations  in  the  cardiorespira- 
tory systems  resulting  in  a loss  of  vascular  fluid  into  the  lungs. 

This  could  explain  the  hemoconcentration  and  acidosis  observed  in 
these  two  animals. 

Infusing  the  3 mg/kg  dose  of  WR  1 80,409 • H3PO4  over  a 40  minute 
period  produced  a decrease  in  heart  rate  but  no  change  in  blood 
pressure  or  respiratory  rate  (Table  23).  WR  180, 409-83804,  3 mg/kg, 
infused  over  a 40  minute  period,  did  not  appear  to  modify  the  magni- 
tude or  duration  of  the  cardiorespi ratory  responses  following  iv 
injections  of  epinephrine,  isoproterenol , acetylcholine,  histamine  and 
serotonin  (Table  24). 

The  maximum  oral  dose  of  WR  180,409-83804  that  will  be  adminis- 
tered to  humans  is  projected,  at  this  time,  to  be  one  gram.  Based  on 
a 70  kg  man,  this  is  a dose  of  approximately  15  mg/kg.  But  doses  of 
3 mg/kg,  when  administered  as  an  iv  bolus  injection,  produced  marked 
cardiorespiratory  alterations  in  the  dog.  Consequently,  an  experiment 
was  designed  to  approximate  the  gastric  absorption  of  an  oral  dose  of 
WR  180,409-83804.  A dose  of  15  mg/kg  of  the  drug  was  infused  slowly 
over  an  hour  while  recording  the  appropriate  cardiorespiratory 
responses.  The  results  of  these  studies  are  given  in  Table  25. 

WR  180,409-83804,  15  mg/kg,  administered  in  an  iv  infusion  over  one 
hour,  produced  a significant  decrease  in  heart  rate  throughout  the 
entire  observation  period  following  the  infusion  and  produced  a 
significant  increase  in  8E8/LVET  for  30  minutes  following  termination 
of  the  infusion.  These  results  indicate  a depression  of  myocardial 
function.  However,  PEP/LVET  values  during  the  remainder  of  the  obser- 
vation period  were  returning  to  baseline  levels.  The  infusion  had 
little  effect  on  mean  arterial  pressure,  central  venous  pressure,  or 
respiration. 


1013 


Results  of  the  WR  180,409-H3P04  infusion  studies  in  open  chest 
animals  are  given  in  Table  26.  The  initial  decrease  in  arterial 
pressure  recorded  in  these  animals  may  be  attributed  to  a decrease 
in  peripheral  resistance  as  ascending  aortic  flow  remained  unchanged 
during  the  initial  portion  of  the  infusion.  The  decrease  in  arterial 
pressure  observed  after  peripheral  resistance  had  returned  to  base- 
line values  may  be  attributed  to  the  progressive  decrease  in  myo- 
cardial contractility  which  resulted  in  a decrease  in  aortic  flow. 

The  decrease  in  arterial  pressure  observed  in  the  open  chest 
animals  was  in  contrast  to  the  relatively  stable  blood  pressure 
obtained  in  the  closed  chest  experiments  even  though  those  animals 
also  had  depressed  myocardial  function  as  indicated  by  the  PEP/LVET 
ratios.  These  differences  in  blood  pressure  responses  may  be  due  to 
the  experimental  model  since  opening  the  chest  and  artifical  ventila- 
tion may  disrupt  reflex  mechanisms  which  would  normally  work  to 
maintain  constant  aortic  pressure.  These  experiments  indicate  that 
WR  180.409-H3P04,  15  mg/kg,  has  negative  inotropic  activity  when 
infused  over  a 60  minute  period  in  both  closed  and  open  chest 
animals.  However,  this  depression  of  myocardial  function  observed 
with  infusion  of  WR  180.409-H3P04  may  not  be  clinically  relevant 
since  the  closed  chest  animals  were  able  to  maintain  a stable  blood 
pressure  and  appeared  to  be  recovering  from  the  drug  effects  druing 
the  observation  period. 

9.  Studies  on  the  oral  efficacy  and  toxicity  of  candidate  anti- 
malarial  s and  the  effect  of  modification  of  host  drug-metabolizing 
capacity  on  these  parameters. 

a.  Background: 

On  the  basis  of  the  rationale  and  methodology  outlined  in 
previous  Annual  Progress  Reports,  investigations  of  candidate  anti- 
malarials  of  the  8-aminoquinol ine  class,  as  well  as  of  those  classes 
offering  promise  against  drug-resistant  malaria,  have  continued  in 
mice. 

Prior  to  projected  investigations  on  possible  interactions 
between  candidate  antimalarials  and  other  drugs, and  on  the  impact 
of  such  interactions  on  efficacy  and  toxicity,  it  is  usually 
necessary  to  conduct  preliminary  investigations.  Such  pilot  studies 
not  only  provide  specific  data  required  for  planning  and  conducting 
more  detailed  and  systematic  studies  but  also  often  provide  unique 
information  beyond  this.  Some  of  the  investigations  herein  described 
are  in  this  category. 


1014 


r 


FI 


I 


f 

i 

l 


. 

i 

i 


i 

i 

s 

i 


b.  Comparison  of  the  oral  curative  activities  of  racemic 
4-methyl  primaquine  (WR  181,023)  and  its  dextro  (WR  221  ,033)  a'nd 
levo  (WR  221,036)  enantiomers  against' trophozoite-induced  P.  be'rghei 
infections  in  mice:  

Recently,  the  dextro  and  levo  forms  of  racemic  4-methyl - 
primaquine  became  available  for  study  in  limited  quantities.  The 
oral  efficacy  of  racemic  4-methyl  primaquine  was  shown  to  be  greater 
than  that  of  primaquine  against  trophozoite-induced  infections  in 
mice;  cures  could  be  obtained  with  apparently  non-toxic  doses  of 
WR  181,023,  whereas  doses  of  primaquine  in  the  lethal  range  were 
required  to  effect  cures  under  the  same  conditions.  Moreover,  while 
the  lethal  toxicity  (LD-50,  7-day  endpoint)  of  WR  181,023  was 
approximately  one-half  that  of  primaquine  qualitative  differences  in 
toxicity  resulting  from  these  two  agents  were  observed.  Notable 
among  these  was  the  gross  liver  damage  that  occurred  in  mice  after 
large  doses  of  4-methyl  primaquine  but  not  after  similar  doses  of 
primaquine. 

Accordingly,  it  was  important  to  learn  whether  differences  in 
oral  antimalarial  efficacy  and  oral  toxicity  were  experimentally 
discernible  among  4-methyl  primaquine  and  its  optical  isomers. 

Table  27  shows  the  results  of  two  identically  performed 
experiments  in  which  4 groups  of _P.  be rghei -infected  mice  were 
treated  once  by  gavage  on  Day  3 of  infection  with  either  agent 
vehicle  (MCT)  alone,  WR  181,023,  WR  221,033,  or  WR  221,036.  The 
agents  were  given  in  equivalent  doses  of  base.  194.5  mg/kg  was 
used  since  WR  181,023  at  this  level  was  well  tolerated  and  cured  16 
of  21  mice. 

In  the  first  experiment  (Table  27,  Experiment  A),  all  control 
animals  died  of  malaria  whereas  100%  of  the  mice  were  cured  by 
treatment  with  WR  181,023  or  its  optical  isomers.  However,  in  this 
experiment  percentage  parasitemia  was  considerably  below  the  usual 
Day  3 level.  In  the  repeat  experiment  (Table  27,  Experiment  B), 
percentage  parasitemia  was  at  a higher,  more  desirable  level  at  the 
time  of  treatment  on  Day  3.  The  results  show  again  that  all  mice 
given  vehicle  control  died  of  malaria  and  that  a majority  of  cures 
was  achieved  with  each  of  the  agents;  both  the  racemate  and  the  levo 
isomer  effected  a cure  rate  of  about  75%  while  the  dextro  isomer 
effected  a cure  rate  of  92%.  These  differences  are  not  statistically 
significant,  however.  The  cure  rate  afforded  by  WR  181,023  is  in 
close  agreement  with  the  76%  cure  rate  previously  observed 
using  this  same  dose  under  similar  conditions. 


Both  experiments,  therefore,  strongly  suggest  that  the  dextro 
and  levo  forms  are  no  less  efficacious  in  curing  trophozoite-induced 
infections  in  mice  than  is  the  parent  racemate.  The  relative 
parasitemia-suppressing  activity  of  these  3 agents  when  given  in 
smaller,  subcurative  doses  remains  to  be  determined,  however. 
Additional  experiments  will  also  be  required  to  ascertain  whether  or 
not  the  dextro  isomer  possesses  a greater  antimalarial  activity. 

It  is  noteworthy,  as  footnoted  in  Table  27,  that  of  the  unin- 
fected mice  (toxicity  controls)  run  in  parallel  with  the  infected  mice 
in  each  experiment  and  treated  with  either  of  the  agents,  only  those 
given  the  dextro  isomer  suffered  toxic  deaths  (3  of  a total  of  12 
mice)  during  the  course  of  the  experiment.  This  suggested  that 
WR  221,033  might  be  less  well  tolerated  than  the  other  two  agents. 

c.  Comparison  of  the  acute  oral  toxicity  of  4-methyl  primaquine 
racemates  with  that  of  its  optical  isomers  in  uninfected  mice: 

The  results  of  Experiment  A in  Table  28  show  that  toxic 
deaths  did  not  result  from  oral  administration  of  194.5  mg  base/kg 
of  WR  181,023  or  its  levo  isomer,  while  one  death  did  result  after 
this  dose  of  the  dextro  isomer.  These  findings  are  consistent  with 
those  obtained  with  the  uninfected  toxicity  controls  in  the  fore- 
going study  (Table  27).  Combining  the  latter  data  with  those  of 
Experiment  A,  Table  28,  the  overall  7-day  mortality  for  the  groups 
dosed  with  the  racemate  or  the  levo  form  is  the  same,  viz.,  0% 

(0/22),  while  that  for  the  dextro  form  is  18%  (4/22). 

Experiment  B in  Table  28  contrasts  the  cumulative  mortalities 
following  administration  of  each  of  the  agents  at  a dosage  of  base 
equivalent  to  the  estimated  LD-50  (7-day  endpoint)  of  WR  181,023, 
viz.,  423  mg  base/kg.  The  data  shown  were  pooled  from  two  identical 
experiments  since  the  results  from  each  were  similar.  At  this 
higher  dose,  each  of  the  agents  produced  a significant  mortality  by 
7 days;  the  60%  mortality  caused  by  the  racemate  was  intermediate 
between  that  caused  by  the  dextro  isomer  (80%)  and  the  levo  isomer 
(30%).  Only  the  difference  in  mortality  between  the  levo  and  dextro 
forms  is  statistically  significant,  however. 

It  is  noteworthy  that  in  a previous  more  intensive  comparison  of 
the  acute  oral  toxicities  (7-day  endpoint)  of  racemic  primaquine  and 
its  dextro  and  levo  forms,  the  dextro  form  is  the  most  toxic  and  the 
levo  form  the  least  toxic  of  the  three  agents.  In  regard  to  the 
order  of  toxicity,  then,  there  is  a tentative  correspondence  among 
the  respective  forms  of  primaquine  and  those  of  its  4-methyl 
analogue,  WR  181 ,023. 


1016 


It  is  noteworthy,  that,  at  the  dose  levels  studied,  neither 
WR  181,023  nor  its  dextro  or  levo  forms  produced  facial  edema  or 
gross  skeletal  muscle  changes  in  the  mice  as  seen  previously  with 
racemic  primaquine  and  its  dextro  form. 

Gross  examination  of  the  livers  of  non-surviving  mice  and  of 
7-day  survivors  revealed  that  all  3 forms  of  4-methylprimaquine 
produced  signs  of  hepatotoxicity  when  given  at  a dose  of  423  mg 
base/kg.  Gross  liver  abnormalities  were  not  seen  in  7-day 
survivors  that  received  these  agents  at  a dose  of  194.5  mg 
base/kg,  however. 

d.  Comparison  of  the  oral  suppressive  efficacy  of  primaquine  and 
3-methyl  primaquine  (WR  211,814)  against  trophozoite-induced  infec> 
tion,  when  given  onde  to  mice  in  equivalent  doses  of  base: 

Peters,  on  the  basis  of  results  from  his  mouse  causal 
prophylaxis  model,  has  reported  that  WR  211,814,  the  3-methyl 
analogue  of  primaquine  "...  has  proved  to  be  one  of  the  most 
active  8-aminoquinolines  we  have  encountered  ..."  and  that  the 
fully  active  dose  was  less  than  0.1  mg/kg  subcutaneously.  Since  a 
dose  of  30  mg/kg  was  non-toxic,  he  indicated  that  this  compound 
clearly  has  a high  therapeutic  ratio  in  his  rodent  model  system. 

More  recently,  he  reported  that  the  minimum  fully  active  dose  of 
this  "outstandingly active"  8-aminoquinol ine  was  between  0.1  and  0.3 
mg/kg  s.c.  (Peters,  1975b). 

It,  therefore,  became  of  interest  to  examine  3-methylprimaquine's 
activity  against  trophozoite-induced  infection  (Table  29)  and  also 
its  toxicity  (Table  30)  when  given  once  by  gavage  instead  of 
parenteral ly.  The  effects  of  3-methyl  primaquine  were  compared  in 
parallel  with  those  of  primaqine. 

The  results  in  Table  29  show  clearly  that  3-methyl  primaquine 
either  as  the  diphosphate  (Group  C)  or  as  the  di hydrochloride 
(Group  D)  exhibits  blood  schizontocidal  activity  and  that  this 
activity  is  significantly  greater  than  that  of  primaquine  (Group  B). 
However,  while  the  dose  of  primaquine  used  was  deliberately  not 
curative,  neither  was  the  same  dose  of  3-methyl  primaquine  of  either 
salt  form. 

Two  groups  of  uninfected  mice  of  5 each  (not  shown  in  Table  29), 
serving  as  toxicity  controls,  were  treated  on  Day  3 with  either  of 
the  salt  forms  of  3-methyl  primaquine  precisely  as  were  infected 
Groups  C and  D.  These  control  mice  appeared  in  good  health  19  days 
after  treatment,  when  all  infected  mice  (Groups  A to  D)  were  dead. 
Upon  killing  and  autopsy,  none  of  these  controls  showed  any  gross 
abnormalities  as  a consequence  of  the  3-methyl  primaquine  they  had 
received. 


1017 


Thus,  3 *■  methyl  primaquine  given  orally  at  a dose  of  20.7  mg 
salt/kg  (.11.4  mg  base/kg)  caused  no  toxic  deaths  or  other  apparent 
drug-related  abnormalities  in  uninfected  mice;  in  infected  mice  it 
exhibited  greater  parasitemia  suppressing  activity  than  an  equivalent 
dose  of  primaquine,  but,  like  the  latter,  did  not  effect  any  cures. 


e.  Comparison  of  the  acute  oral  toxicities  of  i 
3-methyl  primaquine  (WR  211,814)  in  uninfected  mice: 


irimaquine  and 


Table  30  shows  that  3-methyl  primaquine  (Groups  II  to  IV), 
like  primaquine  (Group  I),  can  evoke  overt  swelling  of  the  snout  and 
tongue  of  mice  during  the  first  6 hours  after  oral  treatment.  How- 
ever, these  effects  of  3-methyl  primaquine  generally  occurred  in  fewer 
mice  per  group,  developed  more  slowly,  and  were  considerably  less 
severe  than  after  the  standard  dose  of  primaquine  used.  Moreover, 
as  compared  to  primaquine,  wnich  caused  swelling  of  the  tongue  and 
snout  to  an  equally  severe  degree,  3-methyl  primaquine  appeared  to 
cause  more  pronounced  swelling  of  the  tongue  than  of  the  snout, 
especially  in  individual  mice. 

From  the  cumulative  mortality  results  in  Table  30  it  is  evident 
that  the  lethal  toxicity  of  3-methyl  primaquine  is  greater  than  that 
of  primaquine.  Since  91.2  mg  base/kg  of  primaquine  is  approximately 
one-half  of  the  LD-50  (7-day  endpoint)  it  is  estimated  that  the  lethal 
toxicity  of  WR  211,814  is  approximately  four  fold  greater  than  that  of 
primaquine. 

Hindleg  weakness  and  prostration  (oftimes  lasting  for  hours  but 
with  retention  of  good  eye  color  and  wink  reflex)  were  observed  in 
mice  destined  to  die  after  treatment  with  3-methyl  primaquine. 

Necropsy  of  such  animals  usually  revealed  gross  evidence  of  liver 
abnormality;  livers  appeared  mottled  due  to  swirls  of  pallor,  or 
were  uniformly  pale  and  presumably  fatty,  often  with  reddish 
speckling.  Abnormal  appearing  livers  with  focal  lesions  were  also 
seen  upon  kil  ling  and  autopsy  of  3-methyl  primaquine-treated  mice  that 
survived  7 days,  but  not  in  any  of  the  primaquine-treated  7-day 
survivors.  In  contrast,  8 of  10  of  the  latter  mice  showed  necrotic 
lesions  of  the  diaphragm  and/or  tongue,  whereas  none  of  the  former 
(a  total  of  6 mice)  showed  such  changes.  In  view  of  the  limited 
number  of  mice  available  for  examination  in  this  study,  we  can  only 
tentatively  conclude  that  gross  skeletal  muscle  changes,  akin  to  those 
seen  after  primaquine,  do  not  occur  after  3-methylprimaquine. 

3-methyl  primaquine  (WR  211,814),  but  not  4-methyl  primaquine 
(WR  181,023)  causes  acute  overt  facial  swelling  in  mice,  as  does 
primaquine.  It  would  be  of  interest  to  learn  whether  this  toxic 
property  of  3-methylprimaquine  racemate  is  ascribable  solely  to  its 
dextro  component  as  is  the  case  with  primaquine  racemate. 


1 


f . The  effect  of  prior  modification  of  host-drug-metabolizing 
capacity  (by  phenobarbetal  stimulation  and  SKF  525-A  inhibition)  on 
the  parasitemia  suppressing  activity  of  WR  184,806  AJ: 

WR  184,806  is  the  most  recent  quinolinemethanol  antimalarial 
to  be  formulated  and  submitted  for  clinical  trials.  It  joins  two 
already  highly  successful  predecessors  of  this  chemical  class, 

WR  30,090  and  WR  142,490. 

Since  we  had  previously  investigated  the  effects  of  prior 
stimulation  (phenobarbi tal  pretreatment)  and  inhibition  (SKF  525-A 
pretreatment)  of  host  drug  metabolism  on  the  oral  antimalarial 
efficacy  of  WR  30,090  and  WR  142,490  in  mice,  it  was  of  interest  to 
examine  similarly  the  third  member  of  this  series,  WR  184,806. 

Table  31  presents  a comparison  of  6 groups  of  mice  that  were 
studied  side-by-side  and  subjecte''  to  the  experimental  and  control 
manipulations  indicated.  The  results  may  be  summarized  briefly  as 
follows:  First,  none  of  the  mice,  regardless  of  type  of  pretreatment 

regimen  or  treatment  on  Day  3,  were  cured  of  malaria.  Second,  all 
mice  given  control  treatment  (water  only)  on  Day  3 (Groups  I to  III), 
irrespective  of  pretreatment  regimen,  behaved  similarly  regarding  the 
course  of  malaria  infection.  Third,  the  oral  dose  of  WR  184,806  AJ 
used,  viz.,  5 mg  salt/kg,  was  clearly  suppressive  (Group  IV  vs  Groups 
I,  II,  or  III).  Fourth,  phenobarbital  pretreatment  significantly 
reduced  the  suppressive  efficacy  of  this  dose  of  WR  184,806  AJ  (Group 
V vs  Group  IV)  to  essentially  control  levels  (Group  V vs  Groups  I,  II 
or  III).  Fifth,  SKF  525-A  pretreatment  significantly  increased  the 
efficacy  of  WR  184,806  AJ,  this  was  reflected  by  the  significantly 
lower  parasitemias  on  Days  6,  8 and  10  (Group  VI  vs  Group  IV). 

The  findings  that  modification  of  host  drug  metabolism  by 
both  pretreatment  regimens  (Groups  V and  VI)  significantly  affected 
the  oral  efficacy  of  WR  184,806  AJ,  and  that  phenobarbital  stimula- 
tion and  SKF  525-A  inhibition  decreased  and  increased  efficacy, 
respectively,  suggest  that:  the  liver  ordinarily  processes  this 

antimalarial;  this  processing  serves  to  terminate  its  parasitemia- 
suppressing activity  which  is,  therefore,  probably  due  to  the 
administered  parent  chemical  and  not  to  metabolic  by-products;  and 
finally,  medications  known  to  alter  drug  metabolism  may  affect  the 
activity  of  this  antimalarial. 

The  pattern  of  change  in  the  oral  antimalarial  efficacy  of 
WR  184,806  AJ  observed  after  the  pretreatment  regimens  is  identical 
to  that  found  in  our  previous  studies  with  the  other  two  quinoline- 
methanols  (WR  30,090  and  WR  142,490). 


1019 


10.  Evaluation  of  WR  122,455  and  WR  171,669  for  antimalarial 
activity  in  man. 


a.  Background: 

During  World  War  II  two  phenanthrenemethanols  were  shown  to 
have  blood  schizontocidal  activity  against  P_.  vi vax  in  man.  In  the 
late  1 960 * s another  phenanthrenemethanol , WR  33,063,  was  shown  to  be 
curative  in  man  for  both  chloroquine-resistant  and  -sensitive  strains 
of  P_.  falciparum.  These  results  led  to  the  selection  for  clinical 
trials  of  two  more  phenanthrenemethanols,  WR  122,455  and  WR  171,669. 

b.  Methods : 

Subjects  for  these  investigations  were  healthy  male  inmates 
of  the  Kansas  City  Corrections  Institute.  Subjects  were  carefully 
advised  of  the  nature  and  risks  of  these  studies  before  written 
consent  was  granted.  A double  blind  two  by  two  rising  dose  design 
was  used  for  Phase  I studies.  One  day  befe-ra  and  1,  7 and  14  days 
after  drug  administration,  extensive  patient  interviews,  physical 
examinations,  and  clinical  and  laboratory  tests  were  carried  out. 

For  Phase  II  studies  clinical  malaria  was  induced  by  intravenous 
injection  of  lO^-lO?  parasitized  red  cells.  Subjects  were  treated 
soon  after  parasitemia  developed  and  followed  for  8 weeks  after 
parasite  clearance.  Two  strains  of  £.  falciparum  were  used: 

African  Uganda  I,  which  is  sensitive  to  all  common  antimalarials  and 
Vietnam  Smith,  which  is  chloroquine-resistant. 

c.  Results : 

Phase  I:  Tolerance  and  toxicity.  WR  122,455  in  single  oral 
doses  was  tolerated  up  to  and  including  800  mg.  A multiple  dose 
regimen  of  240  mg  twice  daily  was  tolerated  for  3 to  5 days  but 
symptoms  developed  in  subjects  receiving  drug  for  6 days.  Intol- 
erance to  WR  122,455  was  manifested  by  abdominal  cramps  and  diarrhea. 

WR  171,669  was  tolerated  in  single  oral  doses  of  750  mg,  the 
highest  dose  tested.  A multiple  dose  trial  of  420  mg  3 times  per 
day  was  tolerated  for  one  but  not  2 and  3 days.  A regimen  of  250 
mg  every  6 hours  for  19  doses  induced  symptoms  in  one  of  2 subjects. 
Intolerance  to  WR  171,669  was  also  manifested  by  gastrointestinal 
symptoms  of  abdominal  pain,  cramps,  and  diarrhea.  No  significant 
alterations  in  clinical  or  laboratory  findings  were  noted  in  any 
case. 


Phase  II:  Antimalarial  efficacy.  Single  oral  doses  of  440- 
880  mg  WR  122,455  promptly  cleared  parasitemia  and  fever  in  five 
subjects,  but  recrudescences  developed  in  all  subjects.  However, 


1020 


WR  122,455  at  480  mg/day  for  3 to  6 days  cured  9/9  cases  of 
chloroquine-resistant  and  4/4  cases  of  chloroquine-sensitive  f\ 
falciparum.  Parasite  and  fever  clearance  times  in  subjects  cured 
with  WR  122,455  were  3.1  days  and  66  hours,  respectively.  WR  171,669 
at  one  gram/day  for  3 days  cured  6/6  cases  of  chloroquine-resistant 
and  3/3  cases  of  chloroquine-senstive  infections.  In  patients  cured 
with  WR  171,669  parasite  and  fever  clearance  times  were  3.5  days  and 
42  hours,  respectively. 

d.  Discussion: 

Intolerance  to  WR  122,455  and  WR  171,669  was  manifested  by 
gastrointestinal  symptoms,  although  no  gastrointestinal  blood  loss, 
laboratory  abnormalities  or  weight  loss  were  seen  in  symptomatic 
subjects.  Phase  II  efficacy  studies  showed  that  WR  122,455  and 
WR  171,669  are  highly  effective  drugs  for  treatment  of  chloroquine- 
resistant  and  -sensitive  P_.  falciparum  infections.  The  full 
potential  of  these  agents  must  be  determined  by  further  studies 
against  naturally  acquired  malaria  infections  in  areas  of  known  drug 
resistance. 

11 . Development  of  new  antimalarial  drugs. 

a.  Background: 

The  Department  of  Pharmacology  is  also  charged  with  the 
responsibility  of  writing  Notice  of  Claimed  Investigational  Exemption 
for  New  Drug  (IND)  submissions.  These  include  planning  and  designing 
the  experiments,  and  assembling,  evaluating,  coordinating  and  corre- 
lating the  data  required  for  both  the  initial  submission  and  all 
supplementary  submissions  for  each  drug,  lne  data  must  be  continu- 
ously monitored  and  evaluated  from  both  in-house  and  contract 
sources,  as  well  as  proprietary  and  open  literature  sources. 

b.  Investigational  New  Drug  submissions: 

Two  new  IND  applications  were  written.  They  were  WR  30,090 
free  base  in  oil  and  WR  180.409-H3P04 . 

Thirteen  supplements  to  IND  submissions  were  written.  They 
were  for  10  single  drugs  and  3 combinations. 

c.  Technical  monitoring  of  contracts  necessary  for  data  genera- 
tion: 

Fourteen  active  contracts  were  closely  guided  by  the  Depart- 
ment. These  ranged  from  pharmacological  areas  such  as  toxicology. 


1021 


drug  metabolism  and  bioavailability  of  the  drugs  to  those  of  their 
formulation  and  development  of  methods  to  determine  blood  levels  of 
drugs. 


Table  1 


Retention  Volumes  (VR)  for  Mefloquine  and  WR  184,806 
upon  Reverse  Phase  or  Normal  Phase  Partition  Chromatography 


Reverse  Phase 

Partition  Chromatography9 

Vr  (ml) 

Mobile  Phase 

WR  142,490 

WR  184,806 

Methanol/0.1  M NaH2P04 

(3:2  v/v) 

5.4 

4.0 

2:1  v/v 

4.6 

2.9 

(4:1  v/v) 

3.0 

2.2 

Normal  Phase  Partition  Chromatography^ 

Mobile  Phase 

Vr  (ml) 

WR  142,490 

WR  184,806 

Isopropyl  ether/p-dioxane/ 

glacial  acetic  acid 

(3:2  v/v  + 0.5%) 

4.4 

10.3 

(2:3  v/v  + 0.5%) 

3.7 

6.5 

(1:4  v/v  + 0.5%) 

20.5 

42.5 

auBondapak  C-|g  column  (4  mm  ID  x 30  cm).  Waters  Associates. 
kyBondapak  CN  column  (4  mm  ID  x 30  cm) , Waters  Associates. 


1 

i 

i 


Table  2 

Recovery  of  Mefloquine  and  WR  184,806  from 
Spiked  Whole  Blood  Specimens3 


Percent  Recovery  + S.D. 

Mefloquine  Added,  yg/mlb 

Mefloquine 

WR  184,806 

1.00 

95.4  + 2.4 

95.5  + 1.3 

0.50 

99.1  + 8.3 

96.3  + 4.9 

0.10 

105.2  + 13.6 

95.3  + 9.3 

MEAN 

99.9  + 9.3 

95.7  + 5.4 

aChromatographic  conditions  are  described  under  methods. 
bFour  samples  at  each  concentration  level. 


Table  3 


Precision  of  the  Method  for  the  Determination  of  Mefloquine 
in  Spiked  Whole  Blood,  Plasma  and  Urine  Specimens3 


Mefloquine 
Added,  pg/mlb 


Assayed  Mefloquine  Concentration,  yg/ml* 


Whole  Blood 
4.96  + 0.25 
1.04  + 0.02 
0.54  + 0.04 


0.05  + 0.004 


Plasma 


5.20  + 0.11 
1.00  + 0.06 


0.47  + 0.07 


0.05  + 0.004 


Urine 


4.76  + 0.14 
0.97  + 0.06 
0.48  + 0.05 
0.25  + 0.04 


Mean  Percent 
Recovery  + R.S.D. 


102.9  + 6.7% 


99.5  + 9.5% 


97.1  + 9.4% 


a Chromatographic  conditions  are  described  under  methods. 
bThe  concentration  of  internal  standard  was  1.96  yg/ml . 
cMean  + S.D.  for  four  replicates  at  each  level. 


Table  5 


Precision  Data  for  the  Determination 
of  Mef’oquine  in  Spiked  Whole  Blood  Specimens3 


WR  184,806 

Assayed  WR  184,806  Levelsc 

Added,  ug/ml^ 

yg/ml 

% Recovery 

5.00 

5.22  + 0.19 

104.4  + 3.8 

1.00 

0.96  + 0.03 

96.3  + 3.0 

0.50 

0.47  + 0.02 

94.0  + 4.0 

0.25 

0.26  + 0.02 

104.0  + 8.0 

0.10 

0.10  + 0.001 

100.0  + 1.0 

MEAN 

100.1  +4.6 

! 


aChromatographic  conditions  are  described  under  methods. 
bThe  concentration  of  internal  standard  was  1.00  yg/ml. 
cMean  + S.D.  for  four  replicates  at  each  level. 


Table  6 


Comparative  Molar  Absorbance  Values  for  Four  Antimalarial  Drugs 


Compound 

X max  (nm)  (Solvent) 

E 

WR  1 42 , 490a 

283.0  (water) 

5620  (+  0.6%) 

WR  184,806b 

283.0  (MeOH) 

6060  {+  0.8%) 

WR  1 77 ,602c 

282.5  (EtOH) 

5850  (+  1.0%) 

WR  180,409^ 

278.0  (MeOH) 

11,000  (+  0.4%) 

aLot  AH,  BE  16387. 
bLot  AO,  BE  19520. 
cLot  AD,  BE  77728. 
dLot  AC,  BE  56685. 


rmm. 


Partition  Coefficients  of  WR  1 77 ,602a 


Organic  Phase 

Kp 

Ethyl  Acetate 

139.9 

Ethyl  Ether 

98.8 

n-Butanol 

87.1 

Chloroform 

72.0 

Benzene 

41.0 

n-Heptane 

1.4 

aKp  is  expressed  as  the  ratio  of  the  concentration  of  drug 
in  the  organic  phase  to  that  in  the  aqueous  phase,  Sorensen 
phosphate  buffer  (pH  7.4).  Data  are  averages  of  four  deter 
minations. 


1029 


Z£Z*JZ s? 


Table  8 


Precision 

Data  for  the  Determination  of  WR 
in  Spiked  Whole  Blood  Specimens3 

177,602 

WR  177,602  . 
Added,  ng/ml° 

Assayed  WR  177,602 

Levels0 

ug/ml 

% Recovery 

5.000 

5.430  + 0.114 

108.6  + 2.3 

1.000 

1.034  + 0.062 

103.4  + 6.2 

0.500 

0.506  + 0.016 

101.2  + 3.2 

0.100 

0.098  + 0.010 

98.0  + 10.0 

MEAN 

102.8  + 6.2 

aChromatographic  conditions  are  described  under  methods. 
bThe  concentration  of  internal  standard  was  1.96  yg/ml . 
cMean  + S.D.  for  four  replicates  at  each  level. 


1030 


L>  ifc  m ■<  : t 


Table  9 


Precision  Data  for  the  Determination  of  WR  180,409 
in  Spiked  Whole  Blood  Specimens3 


WR  180,409 
Added,  yg/mlb 

Assayed  WR  180,409 

Levels0 

ug/ml 

% Recovery 

4.800 

4.617  + 0.133 

96.2  + 2.8 

0.960 

0.933  + 0.069 

97.2  + 7.2 

0.480 

0.442  + 0.015 

92.1  + 3.0 

0.096 

0.102  + 0.008 

105.9  + 8.4 

MEAN 

97.9  + 4.6 

aChromatographic  conditions  are  described  under  methods. 
bThe  concentration  of  internal  standard  was  1.96  yg/ml . 
cMean  + S.D.  for  four  replicates  at  each  level. 


1031 


Table  10 


Human  Serum  and  Blood  Concentrations  of  Mefloquine 
after  Dosing  with  Mefloquine  on  Days  1 and  8 


Group  20 
Subject  No 

Dose 

Day  0 

Serum  Concentration  ( pg/ml ) 
Day  2 Day  3 Day  7 Day  9 

Day  10 

Day  14 

85 

1.00  g 

0.00 

0.64 

0.77 

0.42 

1.18 

1.17 

1.27 

86 

Placebo 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

87 

1.00  g 

0.00 

0.70 

0.85 

0.35 

1.00 

1.13 

1.32 

88 

Placebo 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

Group  21 
Subject  No 

Dose 

Day  0 

Serum  Concentration  (yg/ml) 
Day  2 Day  3 Day  7 Day  9 

Day  10 

Day  14 

89 

Placebo 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

90 

1.25  g 

0.00 

1.00 

0.85 

0.65 

2.15 

1.75 

1.00 

91 

Placebo 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

92 

1.25  g 

0.00 

1.25 

1.25 

1.00 

2.55 

2.06 

1.25 

Group  22 
Subject  No 

Dose 

Whole  Blood  Concentration  (wg/ml) 

Day  0 Day  2 Day  3 Day  7 Day  9 Day  10 

Day  14 

93 

Placebo 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

94 

1.50  g 

0.00 

1.20 

1.14 

1.16 

2.04 

1.96 

1.82 

95 

1.50  g 

0.00 

1.34 

1.53 

0.90 

2.42 

2.12 

1.26 

96 

Placebo 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

0.00 

i 

[ j 
\ 


1032 


tz-.t  ~ " v3ttt*h 


Table  11 


Percent  of  WR  180,409-14c  Derived  Radioactivity  Recovered  in  the 
Urine  and  Feces  of  Mice  after  Oral  Administration  of  the  Drug3 


Percent  Recovered*5 


Time  (hr) 

Urine 

Feces 

0-12 

0.19 

7.79 

12-24 

0.79 

8.56 

24-48 

1.06 

13.54 

48-72 

1.89 

19.73 

72-96 

0.33 

11.91 

96-120 

0.35 

8.15 

120-144 

0.21 

5.53 

144-168 

0.25 

3.21 

168-192 

0.22 

2.63 

192-216 

0.14 

1.92 

216-240 

0.02 

0.85 

Total  Recovery  ( %)c 

5.47 

83.82 

i 


Table  12 


] t 


TLC  Analysis  of  Total  Radioactivity  in  Urine  and 
Feces  After  Oral  Administration  of  WR  1 80 ,409 -1 to  Mice3 


Time  (hr) 

Urine 

Feces 

Db 

Mc 

Db 

Mc 

0-1? 

78.3 

21.7 

69.5 

30.5 

12-24 

57.1 

42.9 

54.5 

45.5 

24-36 

37.9 

62.1 

42.5 

57.5 

36-48 

26.9 

73.1 

38.8 

61.2 

48-60 

15.0 

85.0 

25.6 

74.4 

60-72 

16.0 

84.0 

25.3 

74.7 

72-84 

12.6 

87.4 

14.2 

85.8 

84-96 

11.6 

88.4 

17.0 

83.0 

aWR  180,409-14C  was  administered  20  mg/kg  orally. 

bTheareaof  radioactivity  with  Rf  value  corresponding  to 
standard  for  WR  1 80 ,409- ' on  TLC. 

CA11  radioactive  peaks  not  included  under  (b). 


the 


1034 


j 


Table  13 

Concentration  of  ^C-Drug  Equivalents  in  the  Plasma  and 
RBC  of  the  Mouse  after  a Single  Oral  Dose  of  WR  180,409- ' xa 


Time  (hr)d 

Drug  Equivalents  (yg/ml) 

Plasma 

Red  Blood  Cel  1 sc 

Total 

WR  1 80 , 409d 

Total 

WR  180,409d 

2 

1.45 

0.86 

2.52 

2.17 

4 

2.03 

0.77 

3.28 

2.31 

12 

1.54 

0.65 

3.71 

2.96 

24 

1.99 

0.47 

2.87 

1.67 

48 

1.73 

0.17 

2.55 

0.59 

72 

1.31 

0.16 

1.79 

0.49 

96 

0.99 

0.06 

1.20 

0.23 

120 

0.67 

0.04 

0.89 

0.14 

aWR  180,409-^C  was  administered  20  mg/kg. 

bFour  mice  per  time  period  with  a single  determination  from 
their  pooled  blood. 

cRadioactivity  for  plasma  samples  was  determined  directly,  for 
red  blood  cells  it  was  calculated  from  the  following  equation: 
RBC  ug/ml  = Whole  blood  (yg/ml )-[Plasma  (yg/m1)  x (1-Hct)]. 

Hct 

dArea  of  radioactivity  on  TLC  plate  corresponding  to  the  refer- 
ence sample  of  WR  180,409  after  development  in  n-butanol: 
glacial  acetic  acid:water  (66:17:17;  V : V : V) . 


.-a* 


jX.  ~ ;■  vs m 


Table  14 


Percent  of  Dose  of  Total  Radioactivity  Derived  from  WR  180,409-^0 
Recovered  from  Selected  Tissues,  Excreta  and  Carcasses  of  Mice3 


% He  Recovered 

Tissue 

2 hrb 

4 hrb 

24  hrb 

48  hrb 

Submaxi  11  ary  Salivary  Glands 

1.40 

1.60 

0.91 

0.90 

Heart 

0.92 

0.96 

0.58 

0.38 

Lungs 

6.21 

5.47 

6.24 

4.00 

Liver 

14.22 

11.27 

13.36 

9.70 

Ki dneys 

5.95 

7.58 

3.15 

3.74 

Spleen 

0.66 

0.69 

0.67 

0.45 

Gall  Bladder  + Bile 

0.17 

0.22 

0.05 

0.19 

Stomach  + Contents 

8.69 

6.09 

3.45 

2.51 

Small  Intestine  + Contents 

18.22 

17.63 

13.83 

0.27 

Cecum  + Contents 

1.45 

2.20 

2.59 

3.20 

Large  Intestine  + Contents 

2.57 

4.58 

3.69 

4.11 

Plasma 

0.12 

0.11 

0.25 

0.21 

Red  Blood  Cells 

0.22 

0.22 

0.31 

0.16 

Feces 

- 

0.11 

21.69 

35.19 

Urine 

0.029 

0.25 

2.39 

1.31 

Carcasses 

31.24 

30.45 

23.51 

15.39 

Total  Recovery  {%) 

90.07 

89.43 

96.67 

91.71 

aWR  180,409-^C  was  administered  20  mg/kg  orally. 


bHours  postdose  at  sacrifice,  4 mice  per  time  period. 


1036 


Distribution  of  Radioactivity  Derived  from  WR  180,409-14C  in 
Tissues  of  Mice  after  a Single  Oral  Dose  of  the  Drug3 


Tissue^ 

pg/g 

2 hrc 

4 hrc 

24  hrc 

48  hrc 

Submaxi  11  ary  Salivary  Glands 

33.69 

66.43 

29.43 

22.03 

Heart 

38.06 

34.98 

21.38 

13.82 

Lungs 

192.82 

171.88 

214.23 

104.03 

Liver 

99.92 

71.64 

40.06 

68.13 

Kidneys 

105.08 

127.22 

44.80 

47.50 

Spleen 

74.37 

64.81 

50.56 

28.18 

Gall  Bladder  + Bile 

56.39 

37.32 

47.38 

69.33 

Stomach  + Contents 

227.22 

89.50 

20.30 

28.59 

Small  Intestine  + Contents 

98.39 

83.32 

35.88 

30.81 

Cecum  + Contents 

42.02 

54.62 

34.53 

45.47 

Large  Intestine  + Contents 

32.09 

54.02 

41.07 

40.73 

Abdominal  Fat 

13.20 

12.62 

10.99 

8.95 

Skeletal  Muscle 

26.82 

25.42 

16.18 

11.05 

aWR  180,409-14C  was  administered  20  mg/kg  orally. 


bMethanolic  extracts. 

cHours  postdose  at  sacrifice,  4 mice  per  time  period. 


1! 


r 


Table  16 

TLC  Analysis  of  the  Methanolic  Extract  of  Radioactivity  in  Selected 
Tissues  after  Oral  Administration  of  WR  180,409-%  to  Mice3 

% Unchanged  WR  180,409b 


Tissue 

2 hrc 

4 hrc 

24  hrc 

48  hrc 

Submaxi  11  ary  Salivary  Glands 

92.8 

89.5 

79.3 

62.6 

Heart 

66.8 

90.3 

61.9 

46.5 

Lungs 

90.5 

90.6 

87.4 

89.4 

Liver 

96.0 

96.6 

79.1 

63.9 

Kidneys 

97.1 

92.6 

88.3 

64.4 

Spleen 

90.0 

86.5 

82.5 

76.6 

Gall  Bladder  + Bile 

63.4 

77.0 

70.0 

39.0 

Stomach  + Contents 

93.5 

92.7 

72.7 

54.0 

Small  Intestine  + Contents 

86.7 

82.9 

82.2 

60.6 

Cecum  + Contents 

53.4 

48.7 

46.5 

31.6 

Large  Intestine  + Contents 

78.1 

67.3 

53.8 

43.0 

Abdominal  Fat 

75.5 

68.0 

67.0 

62.6 

Skeletal  Muscle 

89.5 

95.0 

67.3 

52.5 

Plasma 

58.4 

37.9 

23.8 

10.0 

Red  Blood  Cells 

86.2 

70.3 

58.4 

23.1 

Feces 

- 

- 

54.5 

38.8 

Urine 

- 

- 

67.2 

25.5 

Carcasses 

91.9 

92.6 

79.4 

89.7 

aWR  180,409-%  was  administered  20  mg/kg  orally. 


bThe  area  of  radioactivity  with  the  Rf  value  corresponding  to  stan 
dard  for  WR  180,409-%  in  TLC. 

cTime  period  postdose  at  sacrifice,  four  mice  per  time  period. 


I * 


i 


Table  17 


Relative  Rf  Values  for  WR  180,409  and 
Metabolites  as  Determined  by  TLC 


Solvent  System3 

Rf 

WR  180,409 

M]b 

m2c 

m3c 

m4c 

A 

0.70 

0.70 

0.92 

0.97 

0.83 

B 

0.37 

0.37 

0.30 

0.62 

0.81 

aA  = n-Bu0H:H0Ac:H20;  66:17:17  (V:V:V). 

B = Benzene :MeOH;  3:1  (V:V). 

^Tentatively  identified  as  WR  180,409. 

cUncharacterized  metabolites,  listed  from  greatest  proportion  to 
the  least. 


Table  18 


Percent  Binding  of  WR  180,409-^0^04  to  Mouse  Plasma 
as  Determined  by  Equilibrium  Dialysis 


Concentration  of 
WR  180,409- '4C  (ng/ml )a 


% Bound  to  Plasmab 


1 ,000 

5,000 


Concentration  of  WR  1 80 ,409- ^ (base)  in  the  plasma  solution 
prior  to  dialysis. 

b Average  of  two  determinations. 


Tablt  19 


Partition  Coefficients  (Kp)  of  WR  180,409a 


Organic  Phase 

Kpb 

Chloroform 

151 

Ethyl  Acetate 

147 

Diethyl  Ether 

125 

n-Butanol 

70 

Benzene 

66 

n-Heptane 

6 

aKp  is  expressed  as  the  ratio  of  the  concentration  of 
drug  in  the  organic  phase  to  that  in  the  aqueous 
phase  (pH  7.4  phosphate  buffer). 

bAverage  of  three  determinations. 


1041 


Dose  of 

MR  180,409-H^P0/ia  Basel i ne  After  Drug  Baseline  After  Drug  Baseline  After  Drug 


id  in  void  * * * * 


00  00  o 

00  00  <— 


a>  = 

S-  CT> 

00 

QJ  3 

• 

4->  S- 

00 

to  O 

1 — 

C 1- 

4- 

■r-  0) 

o 

E -*-> 

-a  4- 

QJ 

*o  c 

to 

r 

O 

(/> 

“O 

oj  •* 

5 t/> 

OJ 

c 

> 

• 

< U o 

•f 

ro 

1/)  *r— 

+-> 

0J 

O -M 

03 

C 

-o  o 

t— 

a. 

a) 

3 

>> 

-C  •»“) 

E 

-C 

u c 

3 

u 

03  T- 

O 

03 

UJ 

4-> 

ai 

03 

3 

>> 

• &- 

TD 

-Q 

to  T3 

OJ 

1— • 

> 

T3 

03  o 

■r— 

<D 

> +-> 

QJ 

L. 

O 

O 

QJ  S- 

QJ 

4->  O 

i- 

C T- 

o 

•r—  S- 

T3 

4- 

O. 

ro 

QJ 

-C 

aj 

4->  >>  • 

4-> 

3 i—  C 

0) 

3 

C OJ  o 

X 

C 

•r-  -M  *r- 

E (O  -M 

E 

•r-  U 

■ 

O -O  0) 

c 

OJ 

c\J  (U'n 

o 

c 

E C 

•r- 

o 

4->  E *r- 

■♦-> 

ro  *p- 

03 

>> 

o> 

S- 

(O  0J  3 

4-> 

"aj 

3-0  5- 

to 

-M 

-—(0-0 
O B . 


> i-  +J 

•r-  01  4- 

X to 
c 

HO  in  (U 
cn+-> 
in  c 3 
to  •>-  c 

TJ  •!- 

TJ  (O  E 
OJ  <u 
i~  i.  f- 
0) 

+j  = at 
in  ai  TJ 

c-5  g 

i ^ oj 

TJ  in  l- 

<0  to  CD 
00  J 
OJ  = 

i-  in 

<U  cn 

5 aJ.= 

lO  UT3 

aj  •»-  oj 

(A  J Q) 

O -M  t. 


ro 

to 

cn 

o 

o 

<d 

<D 

L. 


cn 

\ 

cn 

E 

CO 

o 

CL 

cn 


CT> 

r-  O 
CM  ^ 

" g 

JQ  r- 
(0 

h-  Qi 


O 

cn 


CJ 

CD 


£ 

o 

■*-> 

(TJ 

u 

■I — 

CL 

cn 

(D 

i. 

o 

■a 

s~ 

« 

o 


o 

4-  S. 
O 4-> 
c 

V5  O 
o 


'S' 

o 
a. 
co 
oo  Oi 
• -x. 
CT\  N 
O cnj 
<3-  E 

9« 

o ro 
oo 


0£ 


oo 

<D 

c 


<D 

(/I 

(O 

00 


CTi 


CO 

CO 


CO 


cn 

co 


*3 

co 

cn 


o 

co  co 

CX>  +| 


r-«. 


co  oo 


o co 


co  «*. 
co  + 1 


o rs. 
on  + 1 


cm  oo. 
r-  +1 


o co  co 


o cn 


<Ti 

CO  + | 


OO  CM. 

on  + 1 


CO  *3-, 

— +1 


CTI 


□c 

• 

CD  i— 

E 

T3 

E 

tO  CD 

c 

N 

*u 

E "O 

i 

•r— 

o 

c 

r0 

E 

0) 

<o 

CD  E 

<D 

CO 

S- 

S- 

CO 

<D  CD 

3 

X s- 

l/> 

i 

to 

« 

CD 

<✓) 

0) 

CM 

co  5 

0) 

U 

c 

CD 

E 

s- 

<D 

CL 

c in 

5. 

Q- 

■U 

<c 

(/) 

•«“  cn 

jQ 

cn 

T3  C 

oc 

c 

o 

rO  *r~ 

1 

to 

o 

Q 

<D  T> 

>> 

•r— 

C-  03 

<u^-> 

L 

L-  * 

E 

0) 

+J  LU 

CD  LU 

O LU 

U LU 

O 

CD  L- 

re  oo 

4->  CO 

4->  CO 

CD  CO 

L- 

C 

on 

i-  . 

to  , 

^4- 

•r- 

+ 

c + | 

s.  +| 

C + 1 

f—  3 

4J 

•f“ 

<a 

<D  S- 

S-  3. 

c a 

o.  a 

-M  a 

•M 

to  “O 



fO  ■ — " 

co  — 

i/>  — 

r0 

03 

CD 

CD 

CD 

o 

Q 

CD 

3 

or 

a. 

<3 

JD 

<u 


<3- 

o 

O. 

CO 


CT>  C 
O O 

- +-> 
o <o 
00  s~ 

I—  +J 

cn 

on  •!- 
3 C 

•r 

4-  E 
O X) 

ITJ 

C 

O *3- 
•r-  O 
+->  O. 
U CO 

<u  m 

•r-j  . 

c cn 

•i-  o 

«3 
o « 
+->  o 
00 
L.  I— 

o 

■r~  on 

5-  3 
Q. 

s- 

>»  CD 

r—  4J 

<V  4- 
4->  co 
rO 

•r-  QJ 
X>  +j 
CD  3 
E c 

•r-  E 


1043 


Respiratory  response  to  the  injection  was  a period  of  apnea  followed  by  tachypnea.  The 
postinjection  respiratory  rate  refers  to  the  tachypnea. 


m o 

in  o 

o in 

o 

00  c 
f—  o 

•r— 

• • 

• • 

• • 

OC  4-> 

LO  CO 

C\J  o 

CO  CO 

00  o 

3 <0 

CD  00 

co  vo 

o>  cvj 

rv 

S- 

*4-  +-> 
O </) 
•n 
C C 
O *r- 

•»”  E 
+->  -O 
O ro 

a 

E 

co 

QJ«— 

0) 

U 

u 

* 

• 

Q)  <D 

c 

3 C 

c 

c 

5 "O 

o 

</>  o 

• o 

IQ  O 

s 

■r- 

(/)  ■!— 

•r- 

0)  •<- 

to  E 

4~>  >, 

ai  ♦->  >, 

«J  4->  >, 

c 4J  >y 

CD 

e o e 

t-  o e 

DUE 

CL  O E 

• 

C CD 

ao  o 

CL  01  o 

0)  o 

< 0»  O 

•r-  L. 

JO 

io-tW 

•l-J+J 

"O  0) 

c o 

i—  c o 

oc  c o 

c c o 

03  J 

i >-<  cn 

U •— i CT> 

i-t  o> 

o — > on 

“O 

a» 

•o 

•i-  <0 

>*  « 

•r-  IQ 

c 

j.  </) 

ai » 

U r—  » 

Lf-> 

■M  »-  > 

ro 

CD 

4J  o 

ai  o 

O O 

O O 

a>  c 

>a  s. 

1_  V. 

«J  U U 

11  L L 

CVJ 

C *r- 

Q£  4J  0) 

L L QJ 

11 

■OP  H 

=*= 

•r-  -O 

c •*■> 

< C *J 

L C 

C C 4-> 

r—  (O 

4->  O >«- 

O <4- 

t-  O <4- 

•*-  O <4- 

if) 

0)  0) 

S-  (_)  c 

c c_>  c 

au  c 

4JO< 

o> 

10  i- 

>0 

a 

v) 

VI 

O 

ro 

B 

0> 

6 

o 

O 

CQ 

X 

X 

ae 

a. 

<T3 

-Q 

Respiratory  response  to  the  control  injection  was  a period  of  apnea  followed  by  tachypnea. 
The  postinjection  respiratory  rate  refers  to  the  tachypnea. 


o 

•r-  ro 
to  to 

13  0> 
4-  O 

c o 

» — < 

CD 
0)  QJ 
4->  S- 
3 -C 


z c 


o 

*3- 


co 

a> 
03  -* 

CM 

4-  03 

QJ 

O E 
to  CO 

!o 

4-> 

03 

U * 

\— 

a;  *3- 

4-  o 
4-  Q_ 
LU  CO 

zxz 
>>  • 
5.  O 
O O 
+-> 

<o  * 

S-  o 

•r-  00 

Q-r— 

CO 

qj  q: 
V-  3 
O 

•r- 

T> 

03 

o 


-Q 

to 

0) 

4-> 

13 

C 


s 


o 

>3- 


o 

CVJ 


o| 


O CM 

CO  co 

O 

CO  CO 

co  co 

CO  vf) 

VO  1— , 

o , 

>—  + 1 

r-  +1 

QJ 

C 

-*-> 

a;  o 

3 

x:  -r- 

c 

-♦->  to 

co 

r^.  ^ 

CO  03 

•r— 

3 

• • 

• • 

• • 

E 

TJ  4- 

r—  CM 

VO  -ej-. 

CO  CO 

C C 

r~-  «— . 

CM  + | 

» — 

o 

03  •*- 

r-  + | 

+ 1 

QJ 

C OJ 

-C 

O -C 

•»-  4-> 

to 

3 4- 

• 

4-  O 

CO 

c 

a> 

•I-  c 

+-> 

o 

co  co 

O CO 

O CM 

3 

a;  -r- 

• • 

• • 

• • 

c 

x:  +-> 

*1-  VO 

co  to 

co 

•r 

4->  05 

r-» 

o . 

f— 

E 

C 

<—  + | 

■-  + 1 

+ 1 

4-  •»- 

o 

° E 

v. 

4->  QJ 

S-  -M 

<u 

03 

co  o 

O CO 

4-> 

4->  L- 

• ■ 

• • 

• • 

4- 

00  0) 

r—  CM 

CO  VO 

VO  CO 

03 

4-> 

00  r-, 

cn 

r— 

a»  4- 

— + 

+ 

"O 

X (TJ 

QJ 

-L> 

4-> 

>, 

03 

o •— 

c 

+->  QJ 

•r 

ct> 

x 


«r- 

T3  4->  QJ 

0J 

E 

C ro 

s- 

rO  »r-  ro 

3 

“O  4-» 

to 

O 0J 

to 

i 

E to 

QJ 

aj  5 <o 

E 

s~ 

CD 

E 3C 

Q. 

CL 

+-> 

•r— 

-Q 

to 

4J  C C 

r— 

Od 

QJ  O 

1 

03 

+*  JX  ‘ f- 

>> 

• 

ro  <0  4-> 

OJ 

u 

s- 

03 

QJ  ^ 

C > 

*3  LU 

•M  LU 

4->  LU 

3 V)  i. 

or  t/> 

L-  00 

03  00 

TJ 

CO  03  QJ 

C . 

S-  . 

C 

QJ  5 to 

■M  + | 

+ 1 

•r-  + | 

fO 

-Q  X) 

S. 

c 

Q- 

c o 

03  3 

03  3. 

to  a 

• 

to  o 

QJ  — 

QJ  — 

0J  — - 

CO 

03  t-  QJ 

IT 

2: 

a: 

=»fc 

5 P«P 

tO  3 

C > C 

CM 

O S-  «»- 

=*: 

QJ  E 
to  to 

to 

3.0  0 

CO 

4—  O 

o 

C 

o 

»— • 

-O 

Ei-  ro 
O -r- 
<U  -r-  TJ 
-t->  S-  <D 
Q.  E 

</> 
ns 
X i 

<u  c 


1045 


" ■'  *.■■— -,^ 


t 


CO  LD  00  CT)  C\J 


ro  03  m m in 

CVJ  in  00  O 


CO  00  CM  i—  i— 

inior-ioo 
co  «r  cm  o o 


un  co  i—  un  ( 


«3-  tr>  oi  cm  i 
OlflOl— I 


JO  • 
i/i  cn 
*o  ^ 
c — 

3 Ol 
O E 
Q. 

E CO 
O 

c_>  io- 
cs 
0)  o. 

> CO 

•«-  :r 


o o in  o o 

oor-mo 
co  co  r«*  co  o 


omoioo 

un  cm  un  cm  un 
o o o o o 


ooinino 

un  un  r-.  co  in 
m r-  rv  co  in 


in  in  in  o o 


lOlDICfOQ- 

ij-  If  Cv  in 


inooino 

r-  <J  CM  ro  o 


o o o o o 
• • • ■ • 
r—  Ol  r—  CM  O'* 


C\J 

iu 

in  P 

0) 

cn  o 

O 

_a 

Q C 

*3 

O 

H- 

O •!— 
5 m 
l—  3 

P 

P c 

O i — ' 

in  0) 
0J  P 
in  3 

o *f  r-»  vo  r^. 
CM  lO't  o 

r—  un  ID  00  CTl 


un  o o un  in 


cm  in  o cm  N 
CM  un  N 03  CTl 


0003NN 

cm  id  r-»  cm  id 

OlCOr-OO 


*1-  <3-  l£>  CO  00 
• • ■ • • 
uncMf'-io**- 
i-COi-CMO 


un  un  in  o in 
• • • • • 
o un  m cm  co 
in  r—  cn  oo 

* — C\J  i — f — i — 


lo  un  o o o 
Mn  o cm  i— 


in  o o in  un 
• • • • • 
Mninrss 
OOOlO 


in 

m r—  QJ 

oj  o c 

4.  oj  c •>- 
acjlr- 

•i-  4-  O 0J  C 

■—  i.  aj  .c  c •!- 

co  .c  p <j  -r-  c 

•r-  Q.  O I—  E o 

s_  oj  4-  >,  <o  p 

OJ  C CL  P P o 

+j  t o 0)  in  s. 

4-  a.  m o t oj 

< u w < i in 


un  un  o un  o 

co  oo  in  cm 
iDinioios 


un  un  in  in  in 
■ • • • • 
in  oo  oo  cn  o 


0) 
o c 

QJ  C "r- 
COJi— 

E fr  J-  O 0J  C 

a.  4.  QJ  -E  c-r- 

Xi  -C  +->  o •<-  c 

l CL  O <—  E O 

oj  oj  u >>  <o  p 

P C CL  P P o 

<c  o oj  in  4. 

oc  a in  u •!-  o 

li|M<I(/) 


=**=  r—  QJ 

O C 

0)0  C.r 
P C 0J  r— 
f0  *r-  4-  o Q>  C 
OC  i~  0J  JC  C -r- 
X P <_>•>-  C 
>,aOr-  E o 
4-  QJ  4-  >,  !S  P 

O C CLP  P O 

Pi-  O OJ  « 4. 

r0  CL  in  O •<-  OJ 

S_  LlI  t-1  < X uo 


aDogs  #9  and  #10. 





Table  27 

Comparison  of  the  Curative  Activities  of  Racemic  WR  181,023  and  Its 
Optical  Isomers  WR  221,033  (+)  and  WR  221,036  (-)  When  Given  Once 
Orally  in  Equivalent  Doses  of  Base  (194,5  mg  base/kg)  to  F\  berghei 
(Trophozoite)  - Infected  Mice3 


Group 

Treatment 

on 

Day  3b 

Median  % 
Parasit- 
emia 
on 

Day  3C 

No.  of 
Mice 
Usedd 

No.  of 
Mice 
A1  i ve 
on 

Day  28e 

% Malaria  Cures 
|No.  cured/No. 
used)' 

Experiment  A 

I 

control 

(MCT)3 

<1 

12 

0 

0 (0/12) 

II 

WR  181,023 

<1 

11 

11 

100  (11/11) 

III 

WR  221 ,033 

<1 

10 

10 

100  (10/10) 

IV 

WR  221  ,036 

<1 

12 

12 

100  (12/12) 

| Experiment 

B 

I 

control 

(MCT) 

2 

12 

0 

0 (0/12) 

II 

WR  181,023 

2 

11 

8 

73  (8/11) 

III 

WR  221  ,033 

2 

12 

11 

92  (11/12) 

IV 

WR  221 ,036 

2 

12  ; 

10e 

75  (9/12) 

a0n  Day  0,  Groups  I -IV  were  inoculated  i.p.  with  ca  500,000  P. berghei 
parasitized  (drug-sensitive  KBG  173  strain)  RBC.  On  Day  3,  after 
smears  were  taken,  mice  were  given,  p.o.,  one  of  the  3 agents  pre- 
pared in  0.2%  methylcellulose  and  0.4%  Tween  80  in  sterile  0.9% 
saline  (MCT),  or  MCT  alone  as  control  (Group  I).  The  injection 
volume  was  1%  of  the  body  weight.  In  each  experiment  3 additional 
uninjected  groups  of  6 mice  each  (not  shown)  were  treated  p.o. on 
Day  3 with  either  of  the  3 agents;  these  served  as  toxicity  con- 
trols. Of  these,  only  mice  given  WR  221,033  suffered  toxic  deaths 
during  the  first  week  after  treatment,  viz.  2 mice  in  Exp.  A and 
one  mouse  in  Exp.  B;  all  other  toxicity  controls  survived  in  ap- 
parent good  health  until  Day  28  (25  days  post-treatment). 


1050 


Footnotes  to  Table  27  (cont.) 


bWR  181,023,  the  diphosphate,  is  58%  base;  the  dextro  and  levo  iso- 
mers are  sesquiphosphates  and  each  65%  base. 

cIn  Exp.  A,  smears  were  taken  on  Days  3,7,10,14  and  27  and  in  Exp.B 
on  Days  3,6,8,10,14  and  27. 

^Groups  I to  IV  each  consisted  of  12  mice  initially.  Mice  were  ex- 
cluded from  the  study  when  the  cause  of  early  death  (by  Day  9) 
could  not  be  ascertained  (Exp.  A,  Group  II)  or  appeared  related  to 
causes  other  than  malaria  (Exp.  A,  Group  III;  Exp.  B Group  II). 

One  28-day  survivor  (Exp.  A,  Group  III)  was  excluded  because  its 
Day  3 smear  taken  just  before  treatment  was  negative  for  parasites. 

e0ne  28-day  survivor  (Exp.  B,  Group  IV)  had  malaria.  All  other  28- 
day  survivors  appeared  healthy,  had  negative  smears,  and  upon  au- 
topsy after  exsanguination  presented  no  gross  visceral  abnormali- 
ties indicative  of  malaria;  all  of  the  latter  had  shown  positive 
smears  on  Pay  3 before  treatment. 

^Twenty-eight  day  survivors,  apparently  malaria-free  (See  footnote 
"e"),  were  exsanguinated  under  light  ether  anesthesia.  Each 
mouse's  total  bleeding  volume  (0.6  to  1.0+  ml)  was  separately  col- 
lected in  a heparin-moistened  syringe  and  was  promptly  injected 
i.p.  into  a previously  normal  recipient.  Recipients  alive  28  days 
after  subinoculation,  with  negative  smears,  healthy  appearance, 
and  absence  of  signs  of  malaria  upon  autopsy  were  taken  as  evidence 
that  their  corresponding  donors  had  been  cured  of  malaria. 


Table  28 


E ' 

I 


Comparison  of  the  Acute  Toxicity  of  4-Methyl  primaquine  Racemate 
(MR  181,023)  with  That  of  Its  Dextro  (WR  211,033)  and  Levo  (MR  221, 
036)  Isomers  when  Given  Once  Orally  (Day  0)  in  Equivalent  Doses  of 
Base  to  Uninfected  Mice3 


Group 

Agent 

Dose,  I 

mq/kq  as: 

Cumulative  Mortality,  % 

Days  After  Dosing 

Salt  Base 

l 1 

2 

3 

7 

! Experiment  A (N=l 

0) 1 

I 

WR  181,023 

334 

194. 5b 

0 

0 

0 

0 

II 

WR  221 ,033 

229 

194. 5b 

0 

0 

10 

1C 

III 

WR  221,036 

299 

194. 5b 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Experiment  B (N=2 

'07  | 

IV 

WR  181,023 

729c 

423 

0 

20 

35 

60e 

V 

WR  221,033 

650 

423 

5d 

10 

45 

80 

VI 

WR  221 ,036 

650 

423 

5d 

10 

15 

30f 

aAl 1 agents  were  prepared  in  MCT  and  given  in  a volume  equivalent 
to  1%  of  the  body  weight. 

bSame  dose  as  was  used  in  the  efficacy  study  (Table  27). 


cThis  dose,  with  confidence  limits  of  671  to  794  mg  salt/kg,  is  the 
estimated  LD-50  (7-day  endpoint)  for  WR  181,023  previously  report- 
ed. 


d0ne  mouse  died  within  30  min.  after  dosing;  death  was  not  due  to 
misinjection. 


includes  one  mouse  that  died  several  minutes  after  the  7-day  end- 
point. 


^As  calculated  by  Chi-square,  using  Yates'  correction,  only  the 
difference  in  mortality  on  Day  7 between  Groups  V and  VI  is  sta- 
tistically significant  (p  < 0.05). 


1052 


u.  7 - > 

ifalia  -»■«« 


I 

1 


Table  29 


Comparison  of  The  Parasitemia  Suppressing  Activities  of  Primaquine 
1WR  2975)  and  Two  Salts  of  3-Methyl  primaquine  (WR  211.814)  When 
Given  Once  Orally  in  Equivalent  Doses  of  Base  to  P_.  berghei  (Troph- 
ozci te)-Infectod  Mice3 


Group 

Treatment*3 

Median  % Parasitemia0  (No. 

of  Mice) 

Agent 

Dose, 

Day 

of  Infection 

mg  base/kg 

Before  Oral  Rx 

After  Oral 

RX 

3 

6 

8 

10 

14 

A 

Vehicle 

(Control) 

(1%  BW)a 

1 .8 
(10) 

51.2 

:io) 

69.7 

(4) 

(lj 

(0) 

B 

WR  2975  AG 

11.4 

2.1 

(10) 

1.0+ 

(10) 

8.7 

(10) 

27.9 

(6) 

56.5 

(4) 

C 

WR  211 ,814 
AA 

11.4 

2.0d 

(10) 

1.0+d 

pc' 

0.7e 

(10) 

18. 2d 
(10) 

43. 7d 
(5) 

D 

1 

WR  211 ,814 
AB 

11.4 

(1°) 

) . 0+ef 
:<°) 

0.8ef 

0°) 

24.1df 

iiL 

a0n  Day  0,  Groups  A to  D were  inoculated  i.p.  with  ca  500,000  P_. 
bet  ghei -paras i ti zed  (drug-sensitive  KBG  173  strain)  RBC.  On  Day 
3,  after  smears  were  taken,  mice  were  given,  p.o.,  one  of  the 
3 agents  prepared  in  MCT  vehicle  (See  Table  27), or  MCI  alone 
(Group  A).  The  injection  volume  was  1%  of  the  body  weight.  To 
serve  as  toxicity  controls,  two  additional  uninfected  groups  of 
5 mice  each  (not  shown)  were  treated  the  same,  respectively,  as 
Group  C and  D on  Day  3.  All  of  these  controls  survived  in  appar- 
ent good  health  through  Day  22  (19  days  post-treatment)  and  were 
killed  and  autopsied.  By  tir's  time  all  mice  from  Groups  A to  D 
were  dead  from  malaria.  Autopsy  of  the  controls  revealed  no  ab- 
normal changes. 

bWR  2975  AG  is  the  diphosphate  salt  of  primaquine  (57%  base); 

WR  211,814  AA  and  WR  211,914  AB  are,  respectively,  the  diphos- 
phate sesquihydrate  (55%  base)  and  dihydrochloride  (79%  base) 
salts  of  3-methylprimaquine.  All  are  racemates. 


1053 


K~V 


Footnotes  to  Table  29  (cont.) 


ft 


^Percentage  parasitemia  is  routinely  based  on  the  examination  of 
250-300  RBC  on  a Giemsa-stained  thin  blood  film.  When  this  ini- 
tial examination  reveals  no  parasites,  the  blood  film  and  its  re- 
plicate are  thoroughly  scanned.  Percentage  parasitemia  is  desig- 
nated 0.0+%  when  this  secondary  search  reveals  parasites  and  0.0% 
when  it  does  not.  Values  for  fewer  than  three  mice  are  not  pre- 
sented. The  Mann-Whitney  rank  test  was  used  for  all  statistical 
comparisons.  Statistical  significance  was  set  at  p<0.05.  The 
dose  of  11.4  mg  base/kg  was  chosen  because  prior  experience  with 
WR  2975  at  this  level  indicated  it  to  be  appropriately  suppres- 
sive but  subcurative  in  all  mice  tested. 


difference  from  Group  B is  not  statistically  significant, 
difference  from  Group  B is  statistically  significant. 


Difference  from  Group  C is  not  statistically  significant. 


T-’3.7  Jr  i 

> tUk  XUtSksxm.  I 1 f~  ''  "if  i'i'  ' " i!  :n 


IK 


Table  30 


* oo 

>1 

4->  QJ  >> 

CD  00 

•r—  CJ>  A3 

o * 

r—  C Q 

•("  F— 

(O  cu 

s:  r— 

4->  f— 

OsJ 

S-  i— 

-o 

o (C  N 

<D  or 

S ^ v 

+->  3 

o >> 

u 

<U  4->  ro 

CD  5- 

> in  CD 

«+-  o 

•*-  O 

c 

ro 

c 

r-  <U  r- 

ZD  O 

3 E w 

O.  ^ 

C roo 

•r-  ZL  CM 

c\j  nz 

>)  ID 
-M  • • 

■r  dlr- 
r-  C • 

<T3  *• — 

4->  =3  O 
i-  CT  CL 
O ro  ro 
s:  E 3: 

•I-  C\J 

OJ 

> Q.  • 

■M  <U 
(OOC 
r—  ^ *r— 
3 3 

EUT  cr 

3 (O 
OWE 
OvJ  -i- 

-O  s- 
CQ£  a 
•O  3 <- 

, >» 
cmt-  x: 

C O +J 

•r-  aj 

r-'-'i: 

I—  o l 

<u  ro 
X >>-— 
to  (O 

o 

<j  — 


to  <u 

cn 

+->£>  c 
v.  <u  <u 
<u  3 <— 

> oi  >—  o 
o c ra 
o -c  >, 
4-  F-  O ra 

O -V.  Q 

+J  in 

a)  3 o 
<u  o Q- 
s-  c 
cri  to  <u 
<u  E 


o o 

CTl  CTl 


o o 
co  cti 


ra 

a> 

CO  o 

•I-  CM  «3- 

3 


O O 

cti  on 


E t~  >, 

3 I—  <0 


C • — - 

0)  CM  o 


■ • — 1CM  — - it 1 CM  — -^CO I 


i o -Ho  Ho  * — -Ho  -H 

f— 1"^  MD|\  r^fs.  ro  I 

' cm  ' — -ICO  ^-—jro  — ]ro  •~-Hi — 


o >—  o i—  o «—  r-  ro  o o 

S — <S — — H — - 

CM  r-  ro  o 


aj 

-t-J  • >> 

c a>  a> 

aj  in  -M  in 

r-  « 3 C 

u o 

> IT3  *r- 

•i-  crS  +-> 

3 in  ai  u 

crun  sz  ra 
a>  -t->  ai 
■o  s- 

m cv 
E ra  o o 

3 -i- 

. - fcS>  4-  X 
o r-»  r-  o 

> in  ra  4-> 


*t  CM  - 
-O 
ad  a) 

• 3 m 
I—  => 
<_>  -o 
S on. 
ra 

<u  cn 
i—  o cm 
o < 

•i-  ad 

cios. 

a) 

> crm- 
CM  o 
<u 

jz  a co) 
fs  in 
O' 

C -O 


o Ho  o --  o Ho  —H 

\ o s o^o  soko 
o '—o^c  — o '-H 


o a; 

(U 

ro 

c a> 

•*  (O 

00 

o c 

QiI3  L 

(/)  *r— 

to  a>  a> 

• 

•r-  CO 

o cn  CL±£ 

f— • 

s- 

<o  c 

Q E 

o> 

a.  <d 
E > 

0J 

O -r- 

u - — - 

O C3 

Q.  •!-  -O 

3 • s:  oj 

o 

O O in 
S-  Z 4-  O 


imaor-cM^r 

,ra"  CO  CTl  00  lO 


B P g 


i*-1  !-■  > 


"S  a>t- . 
S.»  • 

£ >i  o 

°-o% 

in  X i E 
ro  Qj  I 
5 <U  O' 
-C  <0 
+J4J  i-i 


U 

rO  O O S-  •»- 
UJ  -Pco 
ro 


mmmm 


>,  t—  3 X 
• l-  r—  a» 

Q.  IX  IX  >, 

E 1-  0)  ■ > ix 

«+j  Em  ■— 

■ (0  - CO. 

H l/l  O It)  l/l 

i — i-  a i t- 

ig  a am-  Ex 

0 x o 

•i-  e +->  <o  +j 

CD  (X  I/I  £ lO 

S-  >,  i—  4->  X 

3 C £3  (X  4-> 

I/)  O > CD 

Ul  1.  C * 

<X  0)  •(-  X 

r-  IX  4->  4->  O 

1-  4->  5 C (X  f- 

01  C r—  T-  I—  S- 

x>  o>  ix  3 ai 

C XI  4-»  O Q. 

3 C » IX  (— 

QJ  S_  no  0) 

x aaix  u E 

ai  oj  4->  a;  -r- 

CX+J+J  C 4-> 

•i-  C IX  O -r- 

E •>-  I — c X 

<0  0)  X O 

X X 0)  X O)  ix 

0)  0)  X TO  0) 

i-  4->  0»  3 

XJ  O 5-  r—  +J 

c u i-  a>  u (o 

ix  id  o 2 c 

4-  • 

-x  gj  oi  a. 

O £ 0)  0)  3 

0)0)  S_  U o 

c ;x  o ai  l 

C U 2 CD 

0)  01  ID  I/I 

X 3 in  s. 

4->  CD  - r—  aj  0) 

cm  id  i-  a 

4-  O 1-0 

O 4-»  « CD  U O) 

CM  0)  ID  U 

4-  XI  4-»  -r- 

4—  C • C O E 

3 IX  f—  -r-  V- 

1-  0)  4- 

<->•—- X C N O 

ui  id  c a) 

CL/oo)  u • 

0)  •<-  2 • 0)  0) 

X 1-  4->  = X 3 

4->  0)  0)  O E CD 

Ol  E X = 3 C 

>»  c C co 

-Q  -I-  O O)  X)  +J 

x 4-  4->  a)  0) 

X 3 (Ol-Xi- 

Q)  r—  0)  ■«-  O •*->  O 

ID  O X X <_> 

•r-  C 4->  0)  ID  ID  X 

<0  •(-  E •(-  c 

1-  — ' t t ID  (X 

O 0)  (X  ID 

>,4.)  4-  4->  2 a>  4-i 

>—3  C ID  3 

4->  o ro  cd  a)  O 

c c c x c 

0)  ID  1-  ID  •(-  4->  ID 

CD  O O)  I—  c 

0)  1-  I—  0)  0) 

ID  X « O 0)  1-  X 

<X  4")  CM  O 2 IX  4-* 

2 i/i  id  a 

4-  * 4- 

111  Or-  4-  C O 

ID  • O l— I 

3 CD  4-  i.  CD 

O C O 0)  0)  c 

E •(“  > O • r- 

i—os-cci— 
X r—  i — 0)  0)  2(— 

U II  « ID  ID  O tl 

(X  2 O X X X 2 

UJ  00  ID  O IX  ID  ID 

X 


■*■«*!* 


■T 


•v-» 


Tv  - SHN 


*«■ 


SKF  525-A  3.2h»i(10)  0.0+Jk(10)  4.0Jk(10)  20.1%)  1 67.7h(6) 


Representative  Chromatograms  @ of  a Whole  Blood  Extract  Containing 
0.98  ug  of  Internal  Standard  (WR  184,806)  and  @ of  a Whole  Blood 
Extract  Containing  0.05  yg  of  Mefloquine  and  0.98  yg  of  Internal 
Standard  (WR  184,806) 


u 

3 o.oi  - 


Figure  1 


t ■!  £ 


„ T»,.W.  ■■■■.  i .uMiwwmMiiiu  III. i 

~ 1 

I 


Representative  Chromatograms  (&)  of  a Urine  Extract  Containing  0.98 
yg  of  Internal  Standard  (WR  184,806)  and  (§)  of  a Urine  Extract 
Containing  0.125  yg  of  Mefloquine  and  0.98  yg  of  Internal  Standard 
(WR  184,806) 

3 


Figure  2 


Whole  Blood  Concentrations  of  Mefloquine  in  a Man  Following  a Single 
Oral  Dose  of  5QQ  mg  of  Mefloquine-HCl 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  309  Determination  of  pharmacological  effects  of  anti- 
malarial  drugs 

Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Canfield,  C.  J.  and  Rozman,  R.  S.:  Clinical  testing  of  new 

antimalarial  compounds.  Bull.  Wld.  Hlth.  Org.  50:203-212,  1974. 

2.  Trenholme,  6.  M. , Williams,  R.  L.,  Desjardins,  R.  E., 
Frischer,  H.,  Carson,  P.  E.,  Rieckmann,  K.  H.  and  Canfield,  C.  J.: 
Mefloquine  (WR  142,490)  in  the  treatment  of  human  malaria.  Science. 
190:792-794,  1975. 

3.  Rieckmann,  K.  H.,  Trenholme,  G.  M. , Williams,  R.  L.,  Carson, 

P.E.,  Frischer,  H.  and  Desjardins,  R.  E.:  Prophylactic  activity  of 

mefloquine  hydrochloride  (WR  142,490)  in  .'rug-resistant  malaria. 

Bull.  Wld.  Hlth.  Org.  51:375-377,  1974. 

4.  Clyde,  D.  F. , McCarthy,  V.  C. , Miller,  R.  M.  and  Hornick, 

R.  B.:  Suppressive  activity  of  mefloquine  in  sporozoite-induced 

human  malaria.  Antimicr.  Agents  Chemothe*.  1:304-386,  1976. 

5.  Mu,  J.  Y.,  Israili,  Z.  H.  and  Dayton,  P.  G. : Studies  of 

the  disposition  and  metabolism  of  mefloquine-HCl  (WR  142,490),  a 
quinolinemethanol  antimalarial,  in  the  rat.  Limited  studies  with  an 
analog,  WR  30,090.  Drug  Metabol .Disp.  1:198-210,  1975. 

6.  Grindel , J.  M.  and  Tilton,  P.  F.:  Quantitation  of  the  anti- 

malarial, mefloquine,  in  blood,  plasma  and  urine  using  high  pressure 
liquid  chromatography.  J.  Pharm.  Sci.  (Submitted). 

7.  Rinehart,  J.  J.,  Lewis,  R.  P.  and  Balcerzak,  S.  P.: 
Adriamycin  cardi otoxicity  in  man.  Ann.  Int.  Med.  81_: 475-478,  1974. 

8.  Nickerson,  M. : Antihypertensive  agents  and  the  drug 

therapy  of  hypertension.  In,  The  Pharmacological  Basis  of  Thera- 
peutics (Goodman,  L.  S.  and  Gilman,  A.,  eds.)  The  MacMilhn  Company* 
New  York,  N.Y.,  1971,  pp.  734-735. 

9.  Peters,  W. : Chemotherapy  of  rodent  malaria.  Drug  action 

against  exo-erythrocytic  stages  and  drug  resistant  strains.  1st 


1064 


Quarterly  Technical  Report.  Contract  No.  DAJA  37-75-C-1723.  1 Nov 

1974  to  31  Mar  1975. 

10.  Peters,  W.;  Chemotherapy  of  rodent  malaria.  P*uq  action 
against  exo-erythrocytic  stages  and  drug  resistant  strains.  Final 
Technical  Report.  Contract  No.  DAJA  37-75-C-l 723 , October  1975. 

11.  Einheber  A.,  Palmer,  D.  M.  and  Aikawa,  M. : Plasmodium 

berghei : phase  contrast  and  electron  microscopical  evidence  that 

certain  antimalarials  can  both  inhibit  and  reverse  pigment  clumping 
caused  by  chloroquine.  Exper.  Parasit.jin  press. 

12.  Rinehart,  J.,  Arnold,  J.  and  Canfield,  C.:  Eva’uation  of 

two  phenanthrenemethanols  for  anti  malarial  activity  in  man: 

WR  122,455  and  WR  171,669.  Amer.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.,  in  press. 

Publications: 

1.  Grunewald,  G.  L.,  Grindel,  J.  M. , Vincek,  W.  C.  and 

Borchardt,  R.  T. : Importance  of  the  aromatic  ring  in  adrenergic 

amines.  Non-aromatic  analogs  of  phenyl  ethanol  amine  as  substrate: 
for  phenylethanolamine-N-methyltransferase.  Mol.  Pharmacol.  1Jj694- 
699,  1975. 

2.  Trenholme,  G.  M. , Williams,  R.  L. , Desjardins,  R.  E. 
Frischer,  H. , Carson,  P.  E.,  Rieckmann,  K.  H.  and  Canfield,  C.  J.: 
Mefloquine  (WR  142,490)  in  the  treatment  of  human  malaria.  Science. 
290:792-794,  1975. 

3.  Grindel,  J.  M. , Rozman,  R.  S.,  Leahy,  D.  M.,  Molek,  N.  A. 

and  Gillum,  H.  H.:  The  absorption,  distribution  and  excretion  of  a 

quinoline-methanol  antimalarial , 2,8-bis(trifluoromethyl )-4-[l- 
hydroxy-3-(N-t-butylamino)propyl]quinoline  phosphate  (WR  184,806). 
Drug  Metab.  Dlsp.  4:133-139,  1976. 

4.  Grunewald,  G.  L. , Grindel,  J.  M. , Patil,  P.  N.  and  Salman, 

K.  N.:  Importance  of  the  aromatic  ring  in  adrenergic  amines.  2. 

Synthesis  and  adrenergic  activity  of  some  non-aromatic  six-  and 
eight-membered  ring  analogs  of  e-phenylethanolamine.  J.  Med.  Chem. 
29:10-16,  1976. 

5.  Chung,  H.,  Gillum,  H.  H.  and  Rozman,  R.  S.:  The  absorption, 

distribution  and  elimination  of  threo-a-(2-piperidyl)-2-trifluoro- 
methyl -6-(4-trifluoromethyl phenyl )-4-pyridinemethanol  phosphate 

(WR  1 80 ,409 . H3PO4 ) in  mice.  Fed.  Proc.  3£:328,  1976. 


1065 


r 


t 

l 


\ 


1 


(U)  Blood  level  Assay  for  Antlmalarlal  Drugs 


1 OA  T C FMIW  luEAY 

75  07  01 

« KIND  OF  SUMMARY 

r . - 

I IUMMARV  ICT  V* 

u 

1 NOAM  It  CUM  Y •A' 

V 

NA 

II  Dt 

SEN  IHITN'M 

L 

tt  IFtCIFIC  OATA  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACC til 
£^VCI  D HQ 

• LtVtL  OF  |u« 
A RMI  UMIT 

10  MO  COOCS*  FROGRAM  ELEMENT 

FROJCCT  NUMBER 

•ORK  UNIT  MUNICH 

A.  MAHIAAV 

62759A 

3A762759A829 

on 

315 

k.  CONTRIBUTING 

Ptiffl)  ******  x 

CARDS  1141' 

002300  Biochemistry  002900  Biology 


I#  •ItBONKtLl  DOO  OROANI  I ATION 


II.  ITART  CATC 

64  07 

II  tl'lMATtO  COMFLtTlON  0AT«~ 

76  06 

IS  FUNDING  AOCNCV 

DA  | 

is  mrformancc  bcVmoo 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT  GRANT 

W RtSOUNCII  IITIMATI 

A FROFCSSMMAL  MAN  > NS 

4 FuNOG  f*  RMtMN) 

A OATtl/t  F FtCTlWt  NA 

FISCAL 

75 

3 

290  ; 

C TYFI 

4 AMOUNT: 

▼ CAR 

t.  CUM.  AMT. 

76 

3 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I iHK t ACCIUm7 

DA  OA  630 A 


hv^ 

76  06  30 


urn  r comnoL  maot 
DDDRLEfARttib 


1 IClCHTI.IC  AMO  .CCNMOLOQICAl  .HI. I* 


.aii1  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
aoomu:*  Washington,  DC  20012 


HIIHONIIHLC  IHOlVIOV.l 

....  Joy,  COL  R.J.T. 

202-576-3331 


t(LlA,DNI: 


a*  HIH.OMHH  0 OH  A*NI  IATMM 

• Walter  Reed  Armv  Institute  of  Research 


Div  Biochemistry 
• Washington,  DC  20012 


AHIHCIAAL  IHMITIOAIOH  .?<***•  I.HH  .1  „ | ,UA 

ham*  Demaree,  LTC  C.K. 
ml.hhm.  202-576-221  1 


•OCIAL  ItCURI  T Y ACCOUNT  NUN  Of  A 
AMOCIATI  IN  VlSTlOATORS 

ham.  Rleeman,  H.K.,  Ph.D. 
hahi,  Demaree,  LTC  O.K. 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

II.  H^ViAhSh  IRmN KIR  hTR  IMHII,  CIAMIHMHAA  CMHf 

(U)  Antimalarials;  (il)  Pharmacokinetics:  (U)  Pharmacodynamics 


DA 


II  TICNNIC AL  OI1ICY • Vt  .*  li  APPROACH.  II  FAOGNtSI  fPiNHlMA  IR «*GMaJ  IBmMBrS  * mpN*  P*«*wP»  Mai  •'  *#*»  Mil  •••'Ml*  c»«»iR**n»  C<*  > 

23.  (U)  The  technical  objective  of  this  work  unit  is  to  study  the  pharmacoklnet lcs  of 
antlmalarlal  drugs  and  to  correlate  these  findings  with  pharmacodynamics  in  animal 
models  in  order  to  predict  the  chemotherapeutic  and  toxic  effects  of  these  drugs  in 
military  personnel. 


24.  fU)  Instrumental , chemical  and  Immunol  og  leal  techniques  for  analysis  and  Identifi- 
cation of  experimental  antlmalarlal  drugs  In  biological  materials  will  he  developed 
and  evaluated  In  animal  model  experiments  for  application  to  clinical  specimens.  These 
findings  will  be  correlated  with  stuules  on  the  pharmacological  and  toxic  effects  of 
the  drugs  in  animal  models. 


25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Chromatographic  systems,  Tl.C,  0C,  and  HPLC,  have  been  developed 
for  the  analysis  of  antlmalarlal  drugs  in  biological  fluids.  Tl.C  lacks  sensitivity. 

CC  with  extraction  and  derlvatization  and  HnLC  are  promising.  Organic  extracts  of 
blood  and  derlvatization  permitted  the  detection  by  CC  of  25  ng/ml  of  mefloquine.  Pre- 
liminary results  with  HPLC  of  spiked  plasma  samples  gave  results  similar  to  those 
found  with  CC.  Attempts  to  produce  antibodies  to  the  antimalarials  have  been  un- 
successful. The  injection  Into  rabbits  of  chloroquine  conjugated  to  polvlysine  pro- 
duced po  antibodies  detectable  by  complement  fixation  or  a globulin  filtration  system. 
For  technical  report,  see  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress 
Report,  1 Jun  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


4 to  cunlwcloii  it 


DD,:°“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARC  OIIOLCTE  DO  FORMS  I ASS  A 1 NOV  SI 

AND  14(11  I MAR  ••  (FOR  ARMV  USC I ARC  OBSOLETE 


1066 


r* -Tic-  r.jTTT y-  r . . * ->»vrv»r way 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  315  Blood  level  assays  for  anti-malarial  drugs 


Investigators. 
Principal : 
Associate : 


LTC  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC 

H.  Kenneth  Sleeman,  Ph.D. ; Betty  J.  Boone,  Ph.D. ; 

Leo  Kazyak,  B.S.;  Elvio  A.  Levri,  M.S.;  Ann  R.  Berman, 
B.S.;  SP5  Omaya  A.  El-Soukkary;  SP5  Cynthia  D.  Kindell; 
CPT  Horace  K.  Webster,  MSC;  John  A.  Kintzios,  B.S.; 
Jean  E.  Matusik,  B.S.;  SFC  Evelyn  Moore. 


The  major  effort  under  this  work  unit  involved  attempts  to  develop 
methods  for  the  analysis  of  experimental  antimalarials  in  biological 
materials,  and  the  extension  of  the  studies  on  the  biochemical  effects 
of  antimalarials  on  the  hos  . Specific  studies  reported  for  FY  76  in- 
clude: 

1.  Development  of  chromatographic  methods  for  analysis  of  antimalarials 
in  biological  materials. 

2.  Synthesis  of  conjugated  haptens  of  antimalarials. 

3.  Production  of  antisera  to  antimalarial  haptens. 

4.  Biochemical  effects  of  antimalarials. 

1.  Development  of  chromatographic  methods  for  analysis  of  anti- 
malanals  in  biological  materials. 

A method  was  developed  for  the  analysis  of  a- (2 -piper idyl) -2, 8 Bis 
(Trifluoramethyl) -4-quinoline  methanol  hydrochloride  (Mefloquine -Hd, 

WR  142490)  in  biological  materials  by  gas  chromatography  (GC)  using  an 
electron  capture  detector.  The  optimum  conditions  for  drug  extraction, 
derivatization,  and  chromatography  were  established.  The  method  was 
evaluated  using  Mefloquine *HC1  fortified  human  blood  and  plasma,  and 
rat  whole  blood,  plasm  and  erythrocytes  after  ingestion  of  the  drug. 

The  distribution  of  Mefloquine «HC1  between  aqueous  and  organic 
phases  was  determined  with  Mefloquine-1 4C-HC1.  Aqueous  solutions  of 
the  drug  and  serum  with  added  drug  were  extracted  with  various  organic 
solvents,  ethyl  acetate,  diethyl  ether,  benzene  containing  1.5%  iso- 
pentanol,  hetane  containing  1.5%  isopentanol,  n-butanol,  or  chloroform 
containing  4.0%  ethanol.  The  recovery  of  Mefloquine *HC1  was  maximum 
with  ethyl  acetate,  101%  from  water  and  93%  from  serum.  However,  ethyl 
acetate  also  extracted  many  other  polar  compounds  from  biological 
materials,  which  interferred  with  GC  analysis,  so  chloroform: ethanol 


1067 


Vt£  - 


(96:4)  was  the  solvent  of  choice  for  the  extraction  of  biological 
samples  (88%  and  68%  extraction  of  drug  from  water  and  serum, 
respectively) . 


One  milliliter  of  the  specimen  was  diluted  with  3 ml  of  0.05  M 
phosphate  buffer,  pH  8.0,  and  extracted  (2  min)  with  25  ml  chloroform: 
ethanol.  The  organic  phase  was  separated,  evaported  to  dryness  over 
low  heat  with  a stream  of  nitrogen.  The  walls  of  the  flask  were  washed 
with  methanol  and  again  evaporated  to  dryness.  The  residue  was  dis- 
solved in  dimethyl  fomamide  (50  to  250  pi)  and  reacted  with  a 10-fold 
excess  of  N,  0,  Bis  (Trimethyl  silyl)  acetamide  (IMS)  for  30  min  at 
25°C.  (The  optimum  time  and  temperature  for  silylation  was  determined 
experimentally. ) Volumes  of  1 yl  were  injected  onto  the  column  for 
analvsis.  A standard  curve  was  prepared  by  injecting  on  column  6 
levels  (0.25  to  15.00  ng)  of  Mefloquine-TMS. 

TABLE  1 

MEFLOQUINE'  STANDARDS 


Mass 

Injected 

(ng) 

Mean* 

Integrator 

Response 

Range 

Integrator 

Response 

Coefficient** 

of 

Variance  (%) 

0.25 

3769 

2899  - 4970 

14.73 

G.50 

7097 

5787  - 8150 

10.30 

1.00 

15293 

13270  - 18760 

11.28 

5.00 

61429 

54770  - 69780 

6.82 

10.00 

106325 

101000  - 114600 

4.14 

15.00 

152331 

140700  - 163600 

4.29 

*Mean  of  17  samples 


^’'Coefficient  of  variance  (%)  = °_j_  = Standard  Deviation 

y Mean 

The  gas  chromatograph  was  a Hewlett-Packard  Model  7600A  with  auto- 
sample injector,  an  electron  capture  detector  (63Ni),  and  a digital 
integrator  interfaced  to  a 2166C  Hewlett-Packard  computer.  The  column 
was  packed  with  3%  OV-17  on  Gas  Chrom  Q (80/100  mesh).  Other  column 
packings  investigated  were  3%  OV-1,  OV-225,  silar  5CP,  EGSP-Z,  and 
QF-1,  each  on  Gas  Chrcm  Q.  A column  temperature  of  155°  was  used.  The 
retention  time  of  Mefloquine *TMS  was  14.80  min  on  3%  OV-17. 


1068 


The  results  of  aninal  experiments  indicate  that  analysis  of  drug 
from  biological  fluids  can  be  performed  quantitatively.  The  amount  of 
drug  present  in  the  blood  was  dose  related,  and  the  highest  levels  of 
drug  were  found  in  the  washed  erythrocyte  fractions. 

TABLE  2 


GO  ANALYSIS  OF  RAT  BLOOD  FOLLOWING  DRUG  INGESTION 


mg  Drug/Kilo 

Whole  Blood 
ng/ml 

Washed  Cells* 
ng/ml 

Plasma 

ng/ml 

25 

854.2 

789.4 

86.4 

25 

782.0 

631.4 

68.1 

10 

244.0 

236.2 

230.4 

22.31 

10 

235.1 

266.1 

21.8 

5 

210 

237.0 

228.8 

18.40 

5 

Animal  died 

as  a result  of  surgery 

Vehicular 

Control 

0 

0 

0 

Animal : Rat : Sprague-Dawley 

Weighed  and  given  drug/kilo  body  weight  mg/kilo 
Animal  sacrificed  24  hrs  after  dosing 
*Cells  corrected  for  HCT. 

The  Mefloquine  -IMS  structure  was  confirmed  by  mass  spectrometry. 
Two  additional  peaks  were  found  in  the  erythrocytes  of  rats  which  were 
given  Mefloquine  at  retention  times  of  2.97  and  7.79  min  respectively. 
These  peaks  may  represent  metabolites  of  Mefloquine.  Further  studies 
of  these  possible  metabolites  are  required. 

The  method  developed  is  specific,  sensitive,  and  quantitative  for 
Mefloquine.  It  was  shovm  to  be  useful  in  detecting  low  drug  levels  in 
biological  specimens. 

2.  Synthesis  of  antimalarial  haptens  for  protein  conjugation. 

Chloroquine  or  Primaquine  were  conjugated  to  polylysine  through  an 
a-bromo-t-butyl  acetate  bridge.  Ultraviolet  analysis  of  the  complex 
showed  that  140  pg  Chloroquine  or  90  pg  of  Primaquine  were  contained 
in  each  milligram  of  polylysine-drug  conjugate. 


1069 


A method  for  the  conjugation  of  WR  142490  to  protein  has  been 
investigated  without  success.  Treatment  of  WR  142490  with  succinic 
anhydride  or  a-bromo-t-butyl  acetate  formed  respectively  an  irnide  and  a 
lactone,  both  unsuitable  for  protein  conjugation.  Attempts  to  oxidize 
the  secondary  alcohol  to  a ketone  with  meta-chloroperbenzoic  acid  pro- 
duced cleavage  of  the  a-piperdyl  ring  but  no  ketone.  The  use  of  milder 
oxidizing  conditions  to  produce  a ketone  (i.e.,  chromium  trioxide)  are 
now  in  progress.  Even  the  use  of  a milder  oxidation  procedure  will 
probably  open  the  piperdyl  ring  but  hopefully  will  not  cleave  it  from 
the  molecule.  The  synthesis  of  the  molecule  with  a reactive  functional 
group  is  another  possible  approach. 

3.  Production  of  antisera  to  antinBlarial  haptens. 

The  Chloroquine-polylysine  and  Primaquine-polylysine  conjugates  were 
dissolved  in  saline,  mixed  with  Freund's  complete  adjuvant  and  injected 
either  subcutaneously  (multiple  sites)  or  into  the  footpads  of  rabbits. 
Two  rabbits  each  were  injected  with  conjugate  which  contained  10,  25, 

50,  and  100  yg  of  the  hapten.  Booster  injections  of  the  same  amount  of 
hapten  were  given  14  days  after  the  initial  injection,  and  the  rabbits 
bled  for  antibody  analysis  at  10  days  and  twice  weekly  for  2 weeks  after 
the  booster  injection. 

The  rabbit  sera  were  tested  for  antibody  titer  using  two  methods, 
the  complement  fixation  test  and  a millipore  filter  system  (method 
described  in  Annual  Report,  Department  of  Biological  Chemistry).  No 
antibody  production  was  found  in  these  sera  using  these  tests.  Again 
booster  injections  of  conjugate  which  contained  10  yg  hapten  were  given 
subcutaneously  to  four  rabbits  that  had  been  injected  previously  with 
50  and  100  yg  of  hapten  subcutaneously.  The  rabbits  were  bled  twice 
weekly  for  two  weeks  and  the  sera  tested  as  before.  The  tests  were 
negative  for  hapten  antibodies. 

Studies  will  be  continued  using  other  hapten-protein  conjugates  and 
other  methods  for  antibody  detection.  Antibody  isolation  prior  to 
testing  for  specific  antibodies  will  be  investigated. 

4.  Biochemical  effects  of  antimalarials. 

Studies  were  continued  on  the  biochemical  effects  of  antimalarials. 
The  objectives  of  these  studies  were  to  develop  a test  to  monitor  adverse 
biochemical  reactions,  and  to  determine  the  mechanism  of  drug  action. 

This  report  covers  primarily  the  biochemical  effects  of  the  antimalarial 
WR  142490. 

Mate Sprague-Dawley  rats  (250-300  g)  were  administered  by  gastric 
intubation  vehicle,  5,  25  or  125  mg  (free  base)  per  kilogram  body  weight 
of  WR  142490.  The  suspending  vehicle  was  methyl  cellulose,  0.5%,  and 
Tween  80,  0.1%.  Four  groups  of  six  rats  per  group  were  given  drug 


1070 


daily  for  14  days  (125  mg/kilo  group:  10  days  because  of  drug  toxicity) , 
anesthesized  with  sodium  pentobarbital,  bled  from  the  abdominal  aorta, 
and  selected  tissues  removed. 


The  rats  were  weighed  prior  to  starting  drug  administration  and 
again  prior  to  sacrifice.  The  vehicle  control  and  the  5 mg/kg  groups 
increased  weight  normally,  the  25  mg/kg  group  had  no  weight  increase, 
and  the  125  mg/kg  group  lost  weight.  The  125  mg/kg  exhibited  signs  of 
toxicity,  diarrhea,  red  exudate  around  nostrils,  ruffled  fur,  and  rapid 
breathing.  The  organ  weights  (wt/100  g body  weight)  of  the  adrenals, 
lungs,  spleen,  kidneys  and  li*/er  were  similar  with  all  drug  doses  and 
controls.  The  thyroid  weight  was  decreased  in  25  mg/kg  and  125  mg/kg 
groups . 

The  blood  hematocrit  and  hemoglobin  content  was  not  affected  by  any 
drug  dose.  The  WBC  of  the  125  mg/kg  group  was  increased  34%  over  the 
vehicle  control  group. 

Selected  serum  enzyme  activities  were  studied  to  assess  possible 
drug  related  enzyme  induction  and/or  tissue  damage.  The  LDH  activity 
was  increased  in  the  25  and  125  mg/kg  groups.  The  25  mg/kg  group 
showed  a pronounced  increase  in  LDH  isoenzymes  1 and  5 (electrophoretic 
bands),  while  the  125  mg/kg  group  showed  a major  increase  in  LDO  iso- 
enzymes 1 and  5 and  some  increase  in  LDH  isoenzymes  2,  3,  and  4.  The 
SGOT  activity  in  the  125  mg/kg  group  showed  a 4-fold  increase  over  the 
vehicle  control  group  with  an  increase  in  all  the  SGOT  isoenzymes.  The 
SGPT  activity  in  the  125  mg/kg  group  was  increased  2-fold  over  vehicle  - 

control  with  an  increase  in  one  isoenzyme.  These  preliminary  plasm 
enzyme  results  suggest  that  the  liver  and  kidney  my  be  affected  by  the 
drug. 

The  biochemical  effects  of  WR  142490  on  serum  corticosterone  and  T3 
and  T4  were  investigated.  The  serum  corticosterone  levels  were  not 
affected  by  the  administration  of  this  drug.  However,  WR  142490  admin- 
istration produced  a dose  related  decrease  in  serum  T4  (3.6  ug/100  ml 
in  untreated  rats  to  1.8  yg/100  ml)  in  the  125  mg/kg  group.  T3  and  T3 
uptake  (the  relative  saturation  of  thyroxine  binding  protein)  were  not 
affected.  Results  suggest  a mild  depression  of  thyroid  function,  or 
interference  with  thyroxine  binding  to  carrier  protein. 


1071 


- * -4.  - tjnfiftffrr 1,1 


Project  2A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  315  Blood  level  assays  for  anti-malarial  drugs 
Literature  Cited. 

Publications: 

1.  Rice,  K. , Boone,  B.J.,  Rubin,  A^ , Paulo,  T.:  The  synthesis 

and  biological  properties  of  benzo-(h) -quinoline  methanols.  J.  Med. 
Chon.  19:  887,  1976. 

$ 


J 


I A0IHCV  ACCCftSlo7 

DA  OA  6514 

r 


jcw^^o^ummarv^" 

76  07  01 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

TTummam^!^^ 


•o*»"T»TuiwT^ 

U 


•iromr  ca*t wot  » rmmoL 

Dl)  URh  *i  'AR }*36 


k.  oati  phcv  tun 

75  07  01 


• ino  or  iu(w««« 


D.  Change 


7 RtOMAMMG* 

NA 


V*  Otiri  INITI'N 

I NL 


spiciric  oat*  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACC  f SI 
' 0 Tf » □ WO 


lkvCl  or  ftu* 
A.  <Ml  UNIT 


<0  NO  COOfS  • MOOAAH  ILCMINT 

62759a 


PWOjICT  numhn 


TASK  A*t  A NUUK* 


Ja762759a829 


JXL 


an 


k-  CONTRIBUTING 


jfmmunu 


CARDS  1 14F 


TITLI  P'«<«—  .1..  (.—.If,  C— — J* 

(U)  Biological  Studies  of  Insect  Infection  and  Disease  Transmission 


II  SCICMTiriC  AMO  TtCMNOLOOICAL  AMI  Al* 


002600  Biology 


II.  ITAMT  D A T I 

65  07 

U IITIMATIO  COMRLt  TION  DAT! 

CONT 

1*  FUNDING  AOINCY 

DA  | 

l«  NCNFONMAMCC  MftHOO 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT  GRANT 
A OAT|»/tF*«CT!v$A 

*#  RCIOURCti  IITIMATI 

A FRO  F ■ Ml  OH  At.  MAN  VMS 

0 FUN  DA  f7« 

URINATION 

Fl|C  Al 

76 

4 

.5 

■>  . 

t TVMt 

N KINO  OF  AM  AMD' 

4 AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 

V«AR 

77 

4 

.3 

?;/ 

t|  NftRONtiMil  OOO  OHO  AMI  (AVION 


Mf  ArOMtMMO  OMOANIIATKM 


«*««•  Walter  Reed  Array  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


MtSPOMStatl  INDIVIDUAL 


"*«•  Joy,  COL  R.J.T. 
202-576-3551 


II  OCMCKAL  Ult 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 
nun 


««««•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  CD&I 

*°°*«“* Washington,  DC  20012 


RNIRCIMAC  IN  Vl»  TIG  A TOM  MAM  H V I A 

Eldrldge,  COL  B.  F. 
..L.A.O..  202-576-3719 

SOCIAL  SCCUM'TV  ACCOUNT  NUUM* 

ASSOC  i 
HAH) 


Schneider,  Dr,  I. 
Wilkinson,  MAJ  R.  N. 


i>  WTWNH7BS Ttrrm  arian;  msnssscxr 

(U)  Anopheles;  (U)  Mosquitoes;  (U)  Malaria;  (V)  Immunization;  (U)  Plasmodium 


• TICMMIC  3L  OMJlCTIVt.*  14  AMMMOACM.  IS  KOOMU  IsA'IAmI  *p*|*mA>  M <hmiN»  ?*•«•«•  real  ClA*FlRc*lf«i  C«*  ; 

23.  (U)  Development  of  physiological  means  of  interrupting  malaria  transmission 
through  an  understanding  of  factors  influencing  susceptibility  of  anophelene  vectors 
to  malaria  and  of  the  various  factors  affecting  gametocyte  infectivity  in  vivo  and 
in  vitro.  Test  systems  are  developed  for  studying  the  mechanisms  underlying  sporozoite 
Induced  immunity  for  the  eventual  prevention  and  control  of  malaria  in  military  troops. 

24.  (U)  Studies  are  conducted  to  determine  quantitatively  such  parameters  as  the 
minimum  number  of  sporozoites  required  for  the  initial  immunizing  dose  as  well  as  the 
spacing,  number  and  strength  of  the  subsequent  boosters.  Attempts  to  develop  one  or 
more  serological  assays  for  demonstrating  the  course  of  the  immune  response  in  the 
blood  serum  of  animals  immunized  against  the  sporozoite  stage.  Evaluation  of  the 
effects  of  various  environmental  stresses  upon  the  infectivity  of  the  gametocytes.  Iso 
lation  of  these  forms  from  the  other  blood  stages  on  density  gradients  for  subsequent 
use  in  culture  systems. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06.  Congenitally  athymic  mice  were  completely  susceptible  to 
sporozoite  challenge  after  either  a single  dose  of  -irradiated  Plasmodium  berghei 
sporozoites  or  a series  of  5 such  doses,  whereas  immunized  normal  mice  were  completely 
protected.  This  demonstrates  that  the  ability  of  mice  to  mount  a sporozoite-induced 
protective  response  is  T-cell  dependent.  A technique  for  the  isolation  of 

P.  cynomolgi  ookinetes  from  mosquitoes  was  developed.  Such  ookinetes  were  found  to 
develop  to  the  oocyst  stage  when  cultured  in  vitro.  For  technical  reports  see 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 
Support  in  the  amount  of  $48,000  from  FT  7i'  Funds  is  programmed  For  the  period  1 Jul- 

— » **id**f*'t  am — 


DD,'°V‘J498 


1073 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 


Work  Unit  318  Biological  studies  of  insect  infection  and  disease 
transmission 


l 

I 

[ 

! 


Investigations 

Principal:  Imogene  Schneider,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  COL  Bruce  F.  Eldridge,  MSC;  MAJ  Rowland  N.  Wilkiv.ron,  MSC; 

CPT  Anthony  B.  Bosworth,  MSC;  Jerome  E.  Freier,  PL.D.; 
Talmadge  Nea.  , B.S.;  Raymond  Fleming,  B.S.;  SP5  Lawrence 
Macken;  SP5  Amy  Federman;  PFC  Caesar  Butkiewicz; 

PVT  Cynthia  Skelton 

Description 

The  major  objectives  of  this  work  unit  have  been  (1)  understanding 
the  mechanisms  underlying  sporozoite- induced  immunity  in  Plasmodium 
berghel  malaria  and  (2)  isolating  and  concentrating  £.  cynomolgi 
ookinetes  on  density  gradients  for  subsequent  utilization  in  an  iji  vitro 
culture  system.  Studies  have  also  been  undertaken  to  determine  the 
feasibility  of  isolating  gametocytes  on  density  gradients  for  initiating 
the  sporogonic  cycle  of  the  malaria  parasite  _in  vitro.  In  addition, 
preliminary  attempts  have  been  made  to  evaluate  the  use  of  a cell  line 
derived  from  tissues  of  the  tsetse  fly,  Glossina  morsitans , to  support 
the  growth  of  the  insect  cycle  of  Trypanosoma  brucei . 

Progress 


1.  Immunization  against  berghel  malaria  with  y-attenuated 
spor  >zoites 

Previous  studies  at  WRAIR  and  at  other  institutions  have  shown  that 
immunization  of  rodents  with  repeated  injections  of  y-irradiated 
J?.  berghel  sporozoites  results  in  extensive  and  often  complete  protection 
against  a subsequent  challenge  of  infectious,  homologous  sporozoites. 

In  an  attempt  to  determine  the  relationship  between  protection  afforded 
by  immunization  of  mice  with  £.  berghel  sporozoites  and  cellular  induced 
factors,  Balb/c  congenitally  athymic  and  Balb/c  homozygous  mice  were 
immunized  with  either  a single  dose  of  7.5  x 1(F  y-irradiated  sporozoites 
or,  in  addition,  received  four  boosters  of  1 x 103  or  1 x 10^  sporozoites 
at  2-week  intervals.  The  mice  were  maintained  in  a specific  pathogen 
free  environment  throughout  the  course  of  the  experiments.  All  3 groups 
received  intravenous  challenges  consisting  of  1 x 1(T  homologous  sporo- 
zoites 2 weeks  after  the  last  immunization.  In  each  instance  following 
challonge,  the  immunized  nude  mice  developed  a parasitemia  and  died 
whereas  both  the  heterozygous  and  homozygous  mice  never  developed  patent 
infections.  By  contrast,  the  course  of  sporozoite- induced  infections  in 
non- immunized  nude  and  homozygous  mice  did  not  differ  significantly  from 
each  other  in  the  length  of  the  prepatent  period,  the  subsequent  parasi- 
temia or  the  mean  day  of  death  (Table  1).  Thus,  the  ability  of  Balb/c  mice 


I 


1 

1 


1074 


to  mount  a sporozoite-induced  protective  response  appears  to  be  T-cell 
dependent  but  once  the  infection  has  been  established,  no  appreciable 
difference  exists  between  a fully  immunocompetent  or  T-cell  deficient 
mouse  in  the  ability  to  handle  the  infection. 

Following  this  study,  attempts  were  made  to  demonstrate  immunity 
in  mice  by  adaptive  transfer  of  sensitized  cells.  One  or  2 spleen  or 
peritoneal  cell  equivalents  from  mice  3,  5,  7 and  10  days  post  immuniza- 
tion were  innoculated  IV  or  IP  to  syngeneic  recipients  and  the  latter 
challenged  2-4  hours  later  with  1 x Kr*  sporozoites.  In  no  instance 
was  any  detectable  immunity  demonstrated.  Similar  results  were  obtained 
with  peritoneal  exudate  transfers  7 days  post-immunizations. 

Currently,  transfer  experiments  are  being  carried  out  with  frac- 
tionated cell  subpopulations  in  an  attempt  to  determine  whether  the 
above  results  are  due  to  an  activated  macrophage  or  a T-cell  suppressor 
phenomenon . 

2.  Isolation  of  £.  cynomolgi  parasites  on  density  gradients  and  the 
cultivation  of  the  ookinete  stage  in  vitro. 

The  successful  demonstration  of  sporozoite- induced  immunity  in 
rodent,  primate  and  human  malarias  has  necessitated  an  urgent  require- 
ment for  the  mass  production  of  sporozoites.  Attempts  to  define  the 
nature  of  the  immune  response  has  been  hampered  by  the  limited  and 
variable  development  of  malaria  parasites  in  mosquitoes.  The  main  goal 
of  this  research  has  been  to  devise  a method  of  obtaining  large  numbers 
of  sporozoites  for  use  as  antigens  while  minimizing  the  role  of  the 
mosquito.  Research  efforts  were  directed  at  isolating  ookinetes  from 
mosquito  midguts,  placing  these  parasites  in  culture  and  attempting  to 
maintain  the  cultures  until  the  oocysts  matured  and  sporozoites  formed. 

Prior  to  isolation  and  cultivation,  it  was  necessary  to  determine 
the  optimal  period  for  infecting  A.  Stephens i mosquitoes  with  £.  cynomolgi 
from  rhesus  monkeys.  Since  mosquito  infections  are  dependent  upon  the 
presence  of  viable  gametocytes,  a detailed  investigation  was  made  on  the 
influence  of  various  physical  and  chemical  factors  on  gametocyte  infectiv- 
ity.  P_.  cynomolgi  blood  infections  demonstrate  parasitemia  cycles  with  a 
periodicity  of  approximately  7 days.  The  daily  course  of  blood  induced 
£.  cynomolgi  infections  was  observed  on  thin  smears  and  the  number  of 
trophozoites,  schizonts  and  gametocytes  per  10,000  erythrocytes  deter- 
mined. Whether  the  parasites  were  in  the  early,  middle  or  late  phase 
of  each  stage  was  also  recorded.  Mosquitoes  were  fed  each  day  on  in- 
fected monkeys  and  the  incidence  and  degree  of  mosquito  infection  de- 
termined by  counting  oocysts  on  the  midgut  7 days  after  a blood  meal. 
Attempts  were  made  to  correlate  parasitemia  factors  with  mosquito  in- 
fections to  establish  indicators  of  optimal  periods  to  initiate 
sporogony.  The  mean  values  for  16  infections  in  rhesus  monkeys  showed 
that  during  the  course  of  an  18  day  infection  (Figs.  1-3)  each  parasite 
stage  had  at  least.  2 complete  cycles.  From  this  study  it  was  concluded 


. Zi.:  "i  _ .jjpj T . wctk 


i-M  luu  i. . p.. u MJumuv '.-Mi iji 1 1. 


that  first  peak  oocyst  infections  in  mosquitoes  can  be  predicted  on  the 
basis  of  changes  in  gametocyte  population  density.  The  greatest  number 
of  oocysts  was  found  in  mosquitoes  fed  during  the  increasing  phase  of 
the  gametocyte  cycle  just  prior  to  the  peak  when  6+2  gametocytes/10^1 
RBC  were  observed.  However,  second  peak  mosquito  infections  did  not 
always  correspond  to  the  rise  in  gametocytemia.  Frequently,  peak  in- 
fections occurred  24  to  48  hours  after  a detectable  increase  in  the 
number  of  gametocytes.  The  only  constant  factor  for  second  peak  in- 
fections was  that  they  occurred  7 days  after  the  first  peak.  This  ob- 
servation was  used  to  predict  the  best  time  to  infect  mosquitoes  during 
the  second  cycle  (Table  2) . 

3 

Erythrocyte  and  leukocyte  numbers  per  mm  and  packed  cell  volume 
were  also  determined  in  conjunction  with  parasitemia  observation^. 

Results  showed  (Fig.  4)  that  while  the  number  of  erythrocytes /mm J and 
the  packed  cell  volume  steadily  and  synchronously  declined,  the 
leukocyte  number  displayed  two  complete  cycles  with  a periodicity  and 
a rate  of  change  identical  with  the  mean  gametocytemia  curve  (see 
Fig.  3).  Thus,  leukocyte  counts  may  also  be  of  value  in  predicting 
subsequent  mosquito  infections. 

After  determining  the  periods  of  optimal  parasite  infectivity,  an 
attempt  was  made  to  quantitatively  study  the  conditions  affecting  gameto- 
cyte infectivity.  A miniature,  constant  temperature  blood  feeding 
chamber  was  designed  to  bloassay  gametocyte  response  to  temperature 
changes,  centrifugal  force  and  chemicals  such  as  anticoagulants.  Mosqui- 
toes from  the  same  batch  were  fed  on  infected  blood  through  the  membrane 
which  was  composed  of  sheep  mesentary.  Membrane  fed  mosquitoes  were 
fed  both  before  and  after  treatment  of  the  blood.  Additional  mosquitoes 
were  fed  on  the  same  donor  monkey  to  serve  as  controls.  Preliminary  ex- 
periments compared  the  infectivity  of  gametocytes  fed  on  monkeys  to 
those  fed  via  a membrane  and  without  any  special  treatment.  Results  from 
these  experiments  showed  that  the  number  of  oocysts  in  mosquitoes  fed 
through  a membrane  was  similar  to  those  in  mosquitoes  fed  directly  on  a 
monkey (Table  3).  The  cyclic  pattern  of  mosquito  infectivity  was  also  shown 
in  the  oocyst  infections  from  the  membrane  fed  group.  Frequently,  the 
number  oi  developing  oocysts  was  greater  in  mosquitoes  fed  through  the 
membrane.  This  may  have  been  due  to  the  gametocytes  settling  and  con- 
centrating near  the  surface  of  the  membrane  and  thus  becoming  more 
readily  available  to  mosquitoes  than  those  obtained  from  host  capillaries. 

Further  experiments  with  the  bioassay  system  evaluated  the  ability 
of  gametocytes  to  remain  viable  after  centrifugation.  Forces  of  1000  x g 
resulted  in  a small  loss  of  infectivity  compared  with  the  controls  (Table  4). 
After  centrifugation,  the  plasma  layer  was  replaced  with  an  equal  volume 
of  unsupplemented  Medium  199  (M199)  and  the  suspension  fed  to  mosquitoes. 

The  presence  of  oocysts  was  observed  on  days  17  and  18  after  a sporozoite 
induced  infection  but  feeding  on  subsequent  days  failed  to  produce  oocysts 
as  well  as  oocytes  even  though  numerous  females  were  engorged  with  the 
M199-blood  cell  mixture. 


1076 


Proposals  for  cultivating  the  sporogonic  cycle  from  the  gametocyte 
stage  usually  involve  the  use  of  density  gradients  for  the  isolation  of 
the  gametocytes.  Therefore,  a series  of  experiments  were  performed  to 
determine  the  effect  of  density  gradient  media  on  gametocyte  viability. 
Results  from  these  experiments  showed  that  10-15%  Ficoll  (a  high  molecular 
weight  polymer  of  sucrose),  Renografin  (a  polyiodbenzoic  acid  isopaque 
solution)  and  bovine  serum  albumin  (BSA)  all  adversely  affected  gametocyte 
viability  (Tables  5-7,  respectively).  Incubation  of  gametocvtes  in 
Ficoll  or  Renografin  resulted  in  no  oocyst  development  even  when  the 
medium  was  supplemented  with  BSA.  However,  BSA  alone  was  able  to  main- 
tain viability  for  up  to  60  min.  (Table  7). 

The  influence  of  temperature  on  gametocyte  development  was  studied 
by  withdrawing  blood  from  monkeys  and  feeding  half  the  blood  immediately 
to  mosquitoes  while  the  remainder  was  incubated  at  either  4,  24,  or  37  C 
for  60  min.  Almost  invariably,  a complete  loss  of  gametocyte  infectivitv 
resulted  after  this  interval  regardless  of  the  temperature  maintained 
(Tables  5-7). 

All  experiments,  up  to  this  point,  used  Locke ' s-Heparin  solution 
(4  units  heparin/ml);  however,  the  effect  of  this  anticoagulant  and 
others  upon  gametocytes  was  unknown.  Infective  blood  solutions  containing 
either  0.25%  sodium  citrate;  50  mM  EDTA;  heparin  (70  units/ml);  or 
mechanically  defribrinated  blood  were  tested  to  determine  the  effect  of 
each  method  on  parasite  viability.  Tested  solutions  were  incubated  with 
infected  blood  for  30  min  at  24  C.  Results  of  two  trials  showed  heparin 
to  be  the  most  effective  in  maintaining  gametocyte  infectivity  (Table  8). 
Sodium  citrate,  EDTA  and  defibrination  each  significantly  reduced  the 
level  of  parasite  infectivity  in  mosquitoes. 

Since  in  vitro  cultivation  of  gametocytes  did  not  appear  feasible 
lue  to  their  ephemeral  nature,  attention  was  shifted  to  the  mass  isolation 
of  _P . cynomolgi  ookinetes  and  the  cultivation  of  these  parasites  to 
mature  oocysts  with  sporozoites.  Preliminary  experiments  established 
that  ookinetes  are  present  in  the  midgut  of  A.  Stephens!  from  16-20  hours 
after  an  infective  blood  meal.  The  procedure  for  isolating  ookinetes 
from  midguts  was  as  follows:  midguts  from  mosquitoes  were  dissected  24 
hrs  after  the  blood  meal  and  gently  homogenized.  The  homogenate  was 
centrifuged  at  50  x g and  the  supernatent  suspension  filtered  through  a 
25y  filter.  The  filtrate  was  centrifuged  at  1,100  x g and  the  residue 
layered  onto  a Renografin  (5-40%)-bovine  serum  albumin  (Path-O-Cyte-V , 
17.5-35%)  continuous  density  gradient  and  spun  at  16,000  x g for  90  min. 
Gradients  were  fractionated  from  the  top,  the  refractive  index  of  selected 
samples  determined  anu  each  fraction  diluted  with  5 volumes  of  M199.  The 
diluted  fractions  were  centrifuged  at  1,100  x g for  10  min  and  the  pellet 
resuspended  in  M199  supplemented  with  3%  BSA.  Aliquots  (5pl)  were  spread 
on  somatic  cell  counting  slides  (Bellco),  air  dried,  fixed  with  absolute 
methanol  and  stained  with  Giemsa. 


1077 


Thirty  isolations  of  £.  cynomolgi  ookinetes  have  been  performed  to 
date  and  a representative  profile  of  one  isolation  is  shown  in  Fig.  5. 

An  estimated  3 x 10^  ookinetes  were  recovered  from  the  400  mosquito 
sample.  Recoveries  averaging  300-800  ookinetes  per  midgut  were  frequent. 
Ookinetes  isolated  daily  from  mosquitoes  during  an  infective  cycle  cor- 
respond in  magnitude  to  the  numbers  of  oocysts  that  subsequently  develop 
on  the  mosquito  midgut  (Table  9).  Refractive  index  values  for  each 
ookinete  fraction  on  the  density  gradient  were  converted  to  density  values 
and  the  overall  mean  density  of  bokinetes  recovered  was  1.1156  g/ml 
(Table  10) . Comparisons  were  made  between  the  number  of  ookinetes  re- 
covered from  24  and  48  hr  postfed  mosquitoes  after  both  groups  are 
simultaneously  fed  on  the  same  monkey.  Results  showed  that  ookinete  re- 
coveries from  48  hr  postfed  mosquitoes  were  substantially  less  (<5%)  than 
the  number  isolated  from  24  hr  postfed  mosquitoes.  Hence,  all  subsequent 
ookinetes  recoveries  have  been  confined  to  mosquitoes  infected  24  hrs  be- 
fore the  isolation. 


After  the  ookinetes  were  recovered  from  the  gradient,  they  were 
washed  and  resuspended  in  M199  with  3%  BSA.  Ookinete  containing  frac- 
tions on  each  side  of  the  recovery  peak  were  combined  and  the  parasites 
sedimented  and  resuspended  in  the  final  oocyst  culture  medium  which  was 
composed  of  M199,  10%  fetal  bovine  serum,  500  units/ml  penicillin,  500 
Ug/ml  streptomycin,  200  yg/ml  gentamycin  and  250  yg/ml  Fungizone 
(amphotericin  B).  Continuous  flow  cultures  were  established  using  a 
chemotaxis  chamber  (Bellco)  with  a 0.22  y Millipore  membrane  separating 
the  culture  chamber  into  two  sections,  an  upper  culture  area  and  a lower 
effluent  chamber  with  a siphon.  Isolated  ookinetes  were  injected  into 
the  chamber  with  a syringe  needle  through  a side  port  in  the  culture 
chamber.  An  opposite  port  was  fitted  with  a needle  to  admit  a continuous 
flow  of  culture  medium  and  antibiotics  from  an  elevated  reservoir  using 
gravity  pressure  to  maintain  flow.  Cells  were  maintained  in  culture  for 
48  hrs  (72  hrs  after  the  infective  blood  meal).  Cultures  examined  after 
this  incubation  period  showed  the  presence  of  developing  oocysts.  After 
the  cultures  were  terminated,  mosquitoes  from  the  same  ookinete  source 
were  killed  and  fixed  in  Carnoy's,  embedded  in  wax,  sectioned  at  6y  and 
stained  with  Giemsa/Colophonium.  Morphological  comparisons  were  made 
between  72  hr  oocysts  growing  in  vitro  and  oocysts  of  the  same  age  de- 
veloping in  vivo.  Results  showed  that  in  both  groups  of  parasites  the 
nuclear  chromatin  within  the  7-8  y spherically-shaped  cells  was  distinct 
and,  in  some  cases,  the  chromatin  had  divided  two  or  more  times. 

3.  Cultivation  of  Trypanosoma  brucei  in  a cell  line  of  Glossina 
morsltans 


Studies  on  T.  brucei  and  other  African  pathogenic  trypanosomes  have 
been  hampered  by  the  inability  of  the  infectious  forms  to  grow  irt  vitro. 

Once  placed  in  culture,  development  usually  ceases  at  the  trypomastigote  stage 
(i.e.,  that  found  in  the  midgut  of  the  tsetse  fly).  Development  of  the 
eplmastigote  and  metatrypanosome  (infective)  stages  does  not  take  place. 

Since  a limited  amount  of  success  has  been  achieved  in  cultures  con- 
taining tsetse-fly  tissues,  a cell  line  derived  from  such  tissues  was 


T*.  : -t******** 


to 


established  at  Walter  Reed  to  determine  whether  such  cells  might  act  as  a 
"feeder  layer"  for  the  growth  and  development  of  T.  brucei  in  vitro . 

In  very  preliminary  experiments,  blood-stream  form  trypanosomes  at  a 
concentration  of  1 x l(P/ml  were  innoculated  into  T-30  flasks  containing 
monolayers  of  (>.  morsitans  cells.  Following  a lag  phase  of  approximately 
24  hrs,  the  number  of  parasites  increased  about  50  fold  by  day  4.  Mice 
injected  IP  with  an  0.25  ml  suspension  from  such  cultures  developed 
parasitemias  after  a prepatent  period  of  4-5  days.  By  contrast,  trypano- 
somes cultured  in  medium  alone  rapidly  declined  in  number  and  had  disap- 
peared by  day  3.  Studies  are  currently  under  way  to  subculture  both  cells 
and  trypanosomes  in  an  attempt  to  increase  the  numbers  of  the  latter  with- 
out loss  of  infectivity. 

Conclusions  and  recommendations 


1.  Original  plans  called  for  a two-sided  approach  to  gain  an  under- 
standing of  the  mechanisms  of  immunity  in  sporozoite- immunized  experimental 
animals;  namely,  to  determine  the  relationship  between  protection  and  both 
humoral  and  cellular  induced  factors.  However,  since  the  evidence  for  the 
former  has,  as  yet,  been  inconclusive  whereas  that  implicating  T-cell 
dependency  of  sporozoite  antigens  has  now  been  documented,  emphasis  should 
be  shifted  to  a thorough  understanding  of  cell  mediated  immunity  in  the 

berghei  system.  Studies  on  the  role,  if  any,  played  by  serum  antibody 
may  be  undertaken  if  time  and  resources  permit. 

2.  Bioassay  experiments  have  shown  quite  conclusively  that  the 
gametocyte  stage  of  the  malaria  parasite  is  extremely  sensitive  to  en- 
vironmental changes  and  quickly  loses  the  ability  to  infect  mosquitoes. 

The  failure  of  gametocytes  to  survive  in  either  Ficoll-  or  Renografin-BSA 
solutions  precludes  the  use  of  these  materials  for  the  mass  isolation  of 
viable  parasites  of  this  stage.  By  contrast,  the  feasibility  of  Isolating 
ookinetes  on  density  gradients  has  been  shown  and  their  subsequent  in- 
clusion in  a culture  system  has  led  to  the  formation  of  early  stage 
oocysts.  Additional  studies  are  warranted  to  determine  under  what  condi- 
tions the  oocysts  will  continue  development  iji  vitro  to  the  sporozoite 
stage. 


3.  The  use  of  a cell  line  of  Glossina  morsitans  to  serve  as  a 
"feeder  layer"  for  the  growth  of  Trypanosoma  brucei  in  vitro  appears 
quite  promising.  Additional  studies  are  needed  to  find  the  upper  limits 
of  parasite  multiplication  without  loss  of  infectivity.  Studies  on  the 
metabolism  of  the  epimastigote  and  metatrypanosome  forms  of  £.  brucei 
may  eventually  be  feasible. 


1079 


project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  318  Biological  studies  of  insect  infection  and  disease 
transmission 

Literature  Cited 


References : None 

Publications : 

1.  Bosworth,  A.  B.,  I.  Schneider  and  J.  E.  Freier.  1975  Mass  isola- 
tion of  Anopheles  Stephens!  salivary  glands  infected  with  malarial  sporo- 
zoites. J.  Parasitol.  61.:  769-772. 

2.  Hockmeyer,  W.  T.,  A.  B.  Bosworth,  I.  Schneider,  S.  M.  Phillips 
and  F.  E.  Hemphill.  1976  T-cell  dependence  of  sporozoite  induced  immunity 
in  mice.  Amer.  Soc.  Microbiol.  Abs.  Ann.  Meeting,  p.  86. 


TABLE  1 


Median  survival  time  and  length  of  prepatent  period  of  challenged  non- 
immunized  nude  (DN)  and  Balb/c  (DNO  mice,  immunized  nude  (ISN)  and 
Balb/c  (ISB)  mice  and  immunized,  boosted  nude  (NIS)  and  Balb/c  (NIB) 
mice.  Non- immunized  Balb/c  (ISBC,  NIBC)  mice  served  as  challenge  con- 
trols for  the  immunized  and  immunized,  boosted  groups 


Animal  Group  (No.) 

Median 

Survival 

(Days) 

Median 
Patency 
Time  (days) 

CSP-SNA* 

Activity 

Non- immunized 

DNC  - Homozygotes  (8) 

21.0 

5.0 

DN  - Nudes  (2) 

27.5 

4.5 

Immunized** 

ISB  - Homozygotes  (10) 

Immune 

Immune 

+ 

ISBC  - Homozygotes  (1) 

24.0 

3.0 

ISN  - Nudes  (10) 

23,0 

4.0 

“ 

Immunized*** 

NIB  - Homozygotes  (10) 

Immune 

Immune 

+ 

NIBC  - Homozygotes  (10) 

21.5 

4.0 

NIS  - Nudes  (9) 

23.5 

4.0 

“ 

I 


* CSP-SNA,  circumsporozoite  precipitation  and  serum  neutralizing 
antibodies 


**  Immunized  with  7.5  X 10  sporozoites 


3 4 

***  Immunized  as  above  plus  4 boosters  of  1 X 10  or  1 X 10  sporozoites 


Ur  iA 


p-.r — rv 


L 


TABLE  10 

Density  of  ookinetes  isolated  on  Path-O-Cyte-V:  Renografin 

density  gradients 


Days  After 

Ookinete* 

Density 

Infection 

Peak  Density  (g/ml) 

Range  (g/ml) 

5 

1.1050 

1.1010  - 1.1270 

6 

i' 

1.1250 

1.1105  - 1.1390 

7 

1.1240 

1.0975  - 1.1600 

[ 

8 

1.098 

1.0700  - 1.1440 

13 

1.1200 

1.0865  - 1.1490 

14 

1.1150 

1.0750  - 1.1500 

| 15 

1.1225 

1.0750  - 1.1550 

* Mean  density  of 

ookinete  peaks  - 1.1156 

CAPTIONS  FOR  FIGURES 


Figure  1.  Mean  parasitemia  values  from  16  Rhesus  monkeys  infected  with 
£.  cynomolgi.  Trophozoite  cycles  versus  subsequent  oocyst 
numbers. 


Figure  2.  Mean  parasitemia  values  from  16  Rhesus  monkeys  infected  with 

£.  cynomolgi.  Schizont  cycles  versus  subsequent  oocyst  numbers. 

Figure  3.  Mean  parasitemia  values  from  16  Rhesus  monkeys  infected  with 

£.  cynomolgi.  Gametocyte  cycles  versus  subsequent  oocyst  numbers. 

Figure  4.  Mean  hematological  values  from  16  monkeys  infected  with 
P.  cynomolgi. 

Figure  5.  Number  and  density  of  £.  cynomolgi  ookinetes  Isolated  on  a 
Renograf in-bovine  serum  albumin  gradient. 


**  A t _ l *. 


wmmmmmmm 


[Pll  Redacted] 


17  START  OATS 

64  07 

W.  fctTMATRO  COMPLETION  OATR 

CONT 

IR  RUROlNO  AQENCT 

DA  | 

IR  DRHRORMAHCR  MRTWOO 

C.  In- House 

IT  CONTRACT  ORANT 

IR  ACEOORCIt  EETIRATI 

A RRORRRAlOM AL  MAN  YRf 

b Tun  DM  ftn  Ammni*) 

A DA  TRE/E  R RECTI  VC:  \ \ 

Indication 

RIRCAL 

76 

4 

187 

C TYRE 

4 AMOUNT: 
(.CUM.  AMT. 

YEAR 

77 

4 

239 

IR  REERONEIDLE  OOO  ORRAHI RATION 

1 

N FRRROINRHO  ORRARI 1 ATIOR 

[ 

i 

»■■'  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

Walter  Reed  Army 
Div  of  CDS  I 

Institute  ot  Researcli 

*»**“•  Washington,  DC  20012 

*■»*«•*•  Washington , DC 

20012 

RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

ummar^^^^ 


*.  OATS  R •€  V «UM*AV 

75  07  01 


• HMD  OR  SUMMARY 


1).  Change 


10  MO  CODER  • RROORAH  IlEMInT 


b.  COR YRI OUT imo 


62759A 


A RORM  SC  CUM  T 'r 


RROil C T NUMIIR 


3A762759A829 


mmm  cards  inf 

TITLE  <Pf c«M  «rlRt  l*««r(tT  ClMiinuilai 

(U)  Host  Responses  to  Malaria 


DA  0A  6520 


1 REQNACNMG* 

NA 


I A Mm  INETA* 


76  07  01 


mmpopt  com  no  L trmmoL 

DP  PRhl  ■ AH, t Jt 


NL 


▼ AM  ARE*  NUHKR 


00 


* lob.  SRlClElC  DATA  ■ 
EON  TRACT  OR  ACCCI 

[pltli  Dmq 


• LEVEL  OR  SUM 

. EMI  WET 


324 


a RCItNTIRIC  AMO  TICMHOLOOICAL  ARE Al® 


RfltRONlIRLt  INDIVIDUAL 


.JOY,  R.J.  T.  , COL 
»».  f 2( )2  Y 576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

IX.  KIVHNM  UCH  •!»  I.Mfl,  ■«"—  O* j 


RRIRClRAL  IMVtITlEATOR  fRMNM  MM*  #»  V « , 

.**«•  BURKE,  COL  J.  C. 
▼ELiRMOME  (202)  576-2273 

SOCIAL  RRCUAlTv  ACCOUNT  MURDER 
ASSOCIATE  IHVlITIOATORD 

-*••=  MOON , A.  P. 

HAWS: 


DA 


" (U)  Malaria;  (U)  Irradiation;  (U)  Cellular  Immunity; 
(U)  Lymphocyte;  (U)  Tolerance;  (U)  Serology 


I TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,®  14.  ARRROACM,  IS  RAOQREM  fFMMlMA  InM'lAtal  RNfRRTMA*  IRmmNWmR  *R  ««•*•»  Mill*  Mil  N Hit  MS  |n«ll|  CIMII*I|H«  Cl*  I 

23.  (U)  To  study  the  phys icpathology , immunology  and  serology  of  malaria--a  disease  of 
prime  concern  to  troops  stationed  in  tropical  areas,  causing  considerable  loss  of  man- 
days  due  to  severe  morbidity  and  mortality. 

24.  (U)  Evaluation  of  cellular  and  humoral  immunity  in  rodent  malaria  by  passive- 
transfer  protection  studies  with  lymphocytes,  macrophages  and  serum.  Study  of  mechan- 
isms of  immune  response  to  antigens  of  rodent  malaria  through  induct’on  of  antigen- 
specific  unresponsiveness  (tolerance)  to  P.  berghei. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Two  lines  of  the  17X  strain  of  P.  berghei  yoclii  were  used  to 
demonstrate  protective  immunity  against  murine  malaria.  Both  lines  were  in'">riably 
lethal  to  normal  BALBc  mice.  Gamma  irradiated  P.  yoelii  infected  mouse  cryi  ~ytes 
were  used  as  an  experimental  immunogen.  Although  both  lines  were  immunogenic,  me  one 
derived  from  the  rapidly-killing  strain  elicited  a more  efficient  response  than  that  of 
the  slow-to-ki  1 1 strain  as  shown  by  reduced  parasitemias  and  by  prolonged  survival. 

Once  crisis  was  passed  these  animals  either  exhibited  only  low  grade  parasitemia  or 
they  remained  suhpatent  for  the  duration  of  the  experiment.  Other  mice  were  treated 
with  i rradiateu  P.  berghei  infected  mouse  RBC’s  and  cyclophosphamide  to  determine  spec- 
ific suppression  of  the  protective  ii  .me  response  to  malaria.  Specific  suppression 
occurred  in  excess  of  drug  related  -ecific  suppression  to  both  malaria  and  the 

control  antigen.  The  immune  respon  malarial  immunogens  thus  appears  to  occur  in 

a manner  analagous  to  that  of  non-protect ive  immunogens.  For  technical  report  see 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 .July  75  - 30  June  76. 
Support  in  the  amount  of  $62,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul  - 
30  Sep  76. 


.1498 


PREVlOUl  CD'TIONI  OF  T M I • FORM  ARE  OWDOLlTE  DD  FORM*  HIM  I NOV  DR 

AND  I 4RR-  I I MAR  «R  (FOR  ARMY  UlE  I ARC  OIROLITI 

1097 


j j .u.n\  mmrnmmm 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 
Work  Unit  324  Host  responses  to  malaria 
Investigators 

Principal:  COL  James  C.  Burke,  MSC 

Associate:  COL  C.  L.  Diggs,  MC ; MAJ  L.  K.  Martin,  MSC:  MAJ  D.  R. 

Stutz,  MSC;  MAJ  R.  A.  Wells,  MSC 

1.  An  inbred  model  for  protective  immunization  against  malaria  in  BALB/c 
mice. 

Several  different  approaches  have  been  used  in  attempts  to  induce  pro- 
tective immunity  against  rodent  malaria.  Drug-modified  infections  of  P. 
berghei  have  resulted  in  protection  of  mice  against  challenge.  Protection 
by  in  vitro  attenuation  of  a previously  virulent  strain  of  P.  berghei  was 
accomplished  by  Weiss  and  Degiusti.  Immunization  of  rodents  against 
malaria  by  extracts  of  parasite  origin  has  been  reported  by  several  workers. 
Zuckerman  et  al.  immunized  weanling  rats  with  extracts  of  P.  berghei  pre- 
pared by  saponin  lysis  of  infected  red  cells  while  D'Antonio  et  al. 
immunized  mice  against  P.  berghei  by  use  of  partially  purified  extracts 
also  derived  from  infected  erythrocytes.  Another  approach  to  protective 
immunization  against  rodent  malaria  has  been  the  use  of  irradiated  para- 
sites. Spitalny  and  Nussenzweig  reported  protection  in  mice  through 
immunization  with  irradiated  sporozoites  of  P.  berghei.  Wellde  and  Sadun 
reported  a significant  protection  of  young  rats  and  mice  following  treat- 
ment with  irradiated  P.  berghei  infected  erythrocytes;  multiple  injections 
are  required  to  induce  a sufficient  response  to  protect  most  of  the  animals 
from  a fatal  outcome  on  challenge.  Briggs  and  Wellde  provided  evidence  that 
escape  of  the  parasite  from  the  immune  response  may  result  from  antigenic 
variation  in  the  case  of  P.  berghei  infections. 

The  present  studies  examined  protective  immunization  against  two 
strains  of  P.  berghei  yoelii  (P.  yoelii)  with  irradiated  blood  forms  of 
these  parasites  serving  as  the  immunogen.  The  goal  of  this  work  was  to 
develop  an  inbred  murine  model  for  further  studies  on  the  mechanisms 
involved  in  the  protective  immune  response  and  to  better  characterize 
the  immunogenic  features  of  the  antigens. 

Animals.  Female  6-8  week  old  BALB/cJ  mice  from  Jackson  Laboratories, 
Bar  Harbor,  Maine,  were  utilized  throughout  these  experiments. 

The  lines  of  P.  yoeJ ii  used  in  these  studies  were  originally  designed 
as  17XL  and  17XNL.  The  17XL  line  is  a derivative  of  17XNL  which  developed 
during  passage  at  the  NIH  in  a manner  analogous  to  the  development  of  the 
lethal  line  of  P.  yoelii  described  by  Yoeli  and  Hargreaves  and  Hargreaves, 
et  al.  During  the  course  of  the  present  investigations  it  was  found  that 
both  lines  produced  lethal  infections  in  unprotected  BALB/cJ  mice,  but 


1098 


that  the  course  for  each  strain  was  markedly  different.  The  strains 
were  therefore  redesigniated  as  either  rapidly-killing  lethal  (RAF)  or 
slow-to-kill  lethal  (SLO)  P.  yoelii.  The  parasites  were  maintained  by 
serial  blood  passage  and  were  prepared  for  immunization  or  passage  from 
blood  collected  into  heparin  by  heart  puncture  from  BALB/cJ  mice  3 or  4 
days  after  inoculation  with  2X10?  RAP  strain  parasitized  erythrocytes  or 
7 days  after  inoculation  with  1X1CP  SLO  strain  parasitized  erythrocytes. 

Immunization  and  Challenge.  One  volume  of  infected  blood  was  sus- 
pended in  two  volumes  of  saline  citrate.  The  blood  was  then  centrifuged 
at  900g  for  10  minutes  at  4°C  and  the  supernatant  fluid  discarded.  The 
packed  cells  was  resuspended  in  2 volumes  of  chilled  saline  citrate  and 
the  number  of  parasitized  erythrocytes  per  ml  determined  by  the  vital 
staining  technique  of  Hillyer  and  Diggs.  The  infected  cells  were  diluted 
to  the  desired  concentration  in  chilled  saline  and  used  to  infect  mice 
or  irradiated  for  use  as  immunogen.  For  the  latter  purpose  infected  blood 
was  placed  in  50  ml  plastic  tubes  and  exposed  to  20,000  r of  gamma 
irradiation  in  a 60  Co  irradiator  described  by  Rice  and  Smythe.  The 
inocula  were  kept  in  an  ice  bath  until  injection  into  recipient  except 
during  the  time  of  irradiation.  Mice  were  given  selected  immunzing 
regimens  as  described  for  the  individual  experiments,  and  challenged  at 
selected  time  intervals  with  a standard  inoculum  of  1X10^  p.  yoelii 
infected  BALB/c  erythrocytes.  Immune  status  was  evaluated  by  determina- 
tion of  parasitemia  as  estimated  from  thin  blood  films  and  mortality  after 
challenge.  Parasitemia  levels  were  recorded  as  the  number  of  infected 
erythrocytes  per  500  cells.  A slide  was  considered  to  be  negative  when  no 
parasites  were  seen  in  20  microscope  fields.  Deaths  of  the  challenged 
animals  were  recorded  at  24  to  72  hour  intervals. 

Effect  of  Homologous  or  Heterologous  Challenge  Against  7 RAP  or  7SLO  Immuni- 
zation 

Preliminary  studies  indicated  that  infection  with  either  RAP  or  SLO 
parasites  resulted  in  100$  mortality  of  BALB/c  mice.  We  therefore  studied 
the  effects  of  7RAP  and  7SLO  immunzation  on  these  infections.  Mice  were 
given  1X10°  irradiated  P.  y.  infected  mouse  erythrocytes  of  either  the  17X 
rapidly-killing  strain  ^RAP)  or  the  17X  slow-to-kill  strain  (7SLO)  of 
the  parasite.  After  1 week  all  animals  were  challenged  with  1X105  non- 
irradiated  RAP  or  SLO  infected  erythrocytes.  Figure  1 illustrates  the  mean 
parasitemias  of  mice  treated  with  each  regimen.  There  was  no  evidence 
of  protection  of  mice  which  had  been  injected  with  7SLO  parasites,  when 
they  were  challenged  with  the  homologous  parasites;  the  resulting  para- 
sitemia was  similar  to  that  of  the  normal  control  group.  In  contrast, 
this  7SLO  immunogen  induced  resistance  against  challenged  with  the  RAP 
strain  as  compared  to  the  normal  RAP  challenged  mice.  Again  the  para- 
site levels  were  nearly  identical  to  those  of  normal  mice  challenged 
with  the  SLO  parasites.  On  the  other  hand  when  7RAP  immunogen  was 
followed  by  challenge  with  the  homologous  parasite  there  was  a markedly 
lower  parasitemia  than  in  nonimmunized  RAP  controls.  On  day  9 after 
challenge  the  control  group  showed  a mean  parasitemia  of  42  per  cent  as 
as  contrasted  to  that  of  15  per  cent  in  the  immunized  groups.  In  one 


mouse  reduction  in  parasitemia  (days  12,  Ik)  was  followed  by  ,a  re- 
crudescence on  day  1 6.  All  /RAP  immunized,  RAP  challenged  mice 
remained  subpatent  after  day  23.  There  was  also  evidence  of  protection 
when  the  /RAP  immunogen  was  followed  by  challenge  with  the  SLO  parasite. 

Here  the  resultant  parasitemia  was  similar  to  that  of  the  homologus 
(/RAP-RAP)  challenge  for  the  first  19  days.  After  day  19,  however, 
relapses  emerged  among  these  mice,  some  of  which  were  self-limiting  and 
others  which  were  fatal. 

Table  I summarizes  the  survival  of  mice  in  this  experiment.  Among  the 
6 groups  studied  the  most  marked  protection  as  shown  by  survival  was  in  the 
/RAP-RAP  group  where  7 or  10  animals  were  alive  at  the  end  of  the  experiment. 
There  was  an  indication  of  transient  protection  in  the  /RAP-SLO  group  in 
that  8 of  10  of  the  mice  were  alive  on  day  21;  yet  only  2 of  10  survived 
to  the  end  of  the  study  (day  35).  There  was  no  apparent  protective  immuni- 
zation in  either  of  the  two  groups  initially  treated  with  /SLO  as  compared 
to  nonimmunized  controls  mice  challenged  with  the  SLO  parasite. 

Effect  of  Time  After  Immunization  on  Immune  Status 

Mice  were  treated  with  1 dose  of  1X10^  /RAP  with  subsequent  homologous 
challenge  at  selected  intervals.  The  data  summarized  in  Figure  2 is  pooled 
from  2 experiments  as  results  from  these  studies  were  indistinguishable 
from  each  other;  Normal  mice  challenged  with  the  RAP  parasite  showed  an 
expected  peak  parasitemia  on  day  8 with  death  shortly  thereafter.  In  those 
mice  challenged  3 weeks  after  immunization  there  was  an  early  peak  in  para- 
sitemia on  day  6 with  all  animals  clearing  infections  by  day  13.  All 
animals  in  these  groups  remained  subpatent  until  day  29  when  a transient 
low-grade  infection  (less  than  1%)  was  noted  in  one  mouse.  Mice  challenged 
2 weeks  after  immunization  showed  similar  patterns  of  parasitemias  as  in 
the  1 week  interval  group.  All  mice  in  the  2 week  interval  groups  were 
subpatent  by  day  15,  and  then  showed  occasional  transient  low-grade  in- 
fections beginning  on  day  20.  Animals  challenged  1 week  after  antigen 
showed  a rebound  type  pattern  of  parasitemia  between  days  8 and  29.  All 
mice  in  the  1 week  groups  became  subpatent  by  day  22  and  showed  occasional 
low-grade  parasitemia  starting  on  day  22.  Mice  given  antigen  on  the 
same  day  as  challenged  showed  high  parasitemia  levels  which  peaked  on 
day  15;  thereafter  the  2 surviving  animals  became  subpatent  by  day  20  and 
so  remained  throughout  the  study.  Table  II  summarizes  the  survival  of 
the  mice  who  parasitemias  were  described  above.  In  brief,  a similar 
degree  of  protection  (survival)  was  noted  where  a 1,  2 or  3 week  interval 
was  allowed  between  antigen  and  challenge.  There  was  little  evidence  of 
protection  when  mice  were  given  antigen  on  the  same  day  as  challenge. 

Effect  of  Dose  of  Immunogen  on  Immune  Status 


Figure  3 shows  the  parasitemias  of  mice  treated  with  selected  single 
doses  of  /RAP  antigen  prior  to  homologous  challenge  1 week  later.  Normal, 
RAP-challenged  mice  showed  a typical  peak  parasitemia  on  day  7 and  all  mice 
were  dead  before  day  21.  Mice  immunized  with  1()9  / RAP  showed  a marked 
capacity  to  suppress  their  infections.  The  mice  in  this  group  were  sub- 


1102 


'■<*'  *!•  • 


patent  by  day  9 and  remained  so  for  the  duration  of  the  experiment. 

Mice  in  groups  treated  with  10®,  107  or  1C P 7RAP  antigen  showed  variaDle 
levels  of  parasitemia  which  conformed  to  the  previously  described  bi- 
phasic  pattern  over  the  first  weeks  with  all  animals  become  subpatent 
approximately  1 week  later.  No  recurrence  of  patency  was  observed 
thereafter. 

Table  III  summarizes  the  survival  of  mice  whose  parasitemias  were 
described  above.  Those  animals  immunized  with  109  7RAP  cells  all 
survived  challenge  whereas  groups  which  were  initially  treated  with  doses 
of  10®,  107  or  10®  7 RAP  antigen  each  showed  a final  cumulative  mortality 
of  50$.  As  before,  there  were  no  survivors  among  normal  mice  challenged 
with  the  parasite. 

Figure  4 shows  the  parasitemias  of  mice  initially  given  the  same 
single  dose  regimens  of  antigen  as  above  but  with  a 2 week  interval  prior 
to  challenge.  The  unimmunized, 'RAP-challenged  mice  followed  a predictable 
course.  Those  animals  treated  with  109  7RAP  antigen  before  RAP  challenge 
showed  parasitemias  essentially  identical  to  the  earlier  dose-response 
experiment.  Mice  treated  with  10®,  107  or  1C ® irradiated  infected  red 
cells  were  able  to  suppress  their  infections  in  proportion  to  the  dose 
of  antigen  initially  administered. 

As  indicated  in  Table  IV,  the  survival  of  these  animals  was  reduced 
with  the  extended  period  until  challenge  in  all  treated  groups  except 
those  given  109  7RAP  antigen.  In  this  group  all  but  one  of  the  immunized 
mice  were  alive  at  the  end  of  the  experiment.  An  intermediate  degree  of 
protection  resulted  where  10®  or  107  irradiated  infected  red  cells  had 
been  given.  There  was  little  evidence  of  protection  where  10®  7RAP 
antigen  had  been  administered. 

As  indicated  in  Table  IV,  the  survival  of  these  animals  was  reduced 
with  the  extended  pre-challenge  period  until  challenge  in  all  treated 
groups  except  those  given  109  7RAP  antigen.  In  this  group  all  but  one  of 
the  immunized  mice  were  alive  at  the  end  of  the  experiment.  An  inter- 
mediate degree  of  protection  resulted  where  10®  or  107  irradiated  infected 
red  cells  had  been  given.  There  was  little  evidence  of  protection  where 
10®  7RAP  antigen  had  been  administered. 

These  studies  demonstrate  the  efficacy  of  the  RAP  line  of  Plasmodium 
yoelii  as  an  immunogen  when  administered  after  inactivation  of  its  pro- 
liferative capacity  by  gamma  irradiation.  Immunization  with  7RAP  provider 
resistance  both  against  challenge  with  the  RAP  line  and  with  the  SL0  line 
of  the  parasite  to  an  extent  which  allowed  survival  of  the  majority  of  the 
animals  under  appropriate  conditions.  In  contrast  7SLO  was  much  less 
effective  as  an  immunogen.  Whereas  it  converted  the  course  of  infection 
after  challenge  with  RAP  to  a somewhat  slower  course  indistinguishable 
from  that  exhibited  by  SL0,  it  had  no  discernible  effect  on  the  course  of 
parasitemia  after  SL0  challenge  (Figure  1 and  Table  i).  The  reasons 


1106 


behind  the  behavior  of  these  two  lines  of  parasites  can  only  be 
speculated  upon.  Within  the  limits  of  the  counting  techniques  employed, 
the  same  dose  of  parasites,  and  presumably  of  parasite  antigen  was 
given  in  both  cases.  However,  it  is  possible  that  the  stages  of  para- 
sites in  the  two  preparations  were  different,  due  to  a differential 
predilection  of  the  different  blood  forms  for  peripheral  blood.  This 
possibility  was  not  examined.  In  addition  the  possibility  that  the 
RAP  line  does  in  fact  contain  a more  immunogenic  antigen  must  be 
considered.  This  being  the  case,  the  speculation  that  a connection 
between  immunogenic ity  and  virulence  cannot  be  avoided.  No  information 
relevant  to  these  possibilities  is,  however,  presently  available. 

These  experiments  were  made  possible  by  the  observation  (Figure  1, 
Table  I)  that  in  our  hands,  in  RALB/c  mice,  both  the  RAP  and  SLO  lines  of 
P.  yoelii  are  fatal  to  all  recipients  in  the  absence  of  immunological  or 
chemotherapeutic  intervention.  This  observation  suggests  that  BALB/c  mice 
are  relatively  immunologically  incompetent  with  respect  to  their  ability 
to  resist  P.  yoelii,  since  the  SLO  line  is  not  lethal  in  other  animals 
studied,  to  our  knowledge,  the  SLO  line  is  similar  to  the  original  17X 
strain  of  the  parasite.  Because  of  the  behavior  of  the  RAP  line  in  BALB/ 
c's,  a model  is  available  in  where  there  is  100  per  cent  mortality  in 
unimmunized  animals,  and  the  ability  to  protect  virtually  all  of  the 
animals  with  a single  dose  of  artificial  immunogen.  This  model  is  very 
convenient  for  many  types  of  immunological  experiments. 

Resistance  to  challenge  appears  to  be  influenced  only  slightly  by 
changes  in  the  dose  of  7RAP  over  a relatively  wide  range  of  doses. 

Thus,  most  of  the  protection  was  obtained  at  IXICr  7RAP  in  one  experiment 
whereas  little  additional  protection  is  obtained  even  with  1X10^  7RAP; 

1X1o9  7 RAP  are  required  for  full  induction  of  resistance  (Figure  3>  4 
and  Tables  III,  IV ).  The  requirement  for  such  a large  dose  of  cells 
suggests  that  the  active  fraction  may  be  a very  small  fraction  of  the  total 
material  injected.  It  will  be  important  to  attempt  to  identify  the  frac- 
tions of  the  immunizing  inoculum  which  do,  in  fact,  contain  the  activity. 

The  kinetic  studies  of  the  induction  of  immunity  to  7 RAP  indicate 
that  at  least  a few  days  are  required  for  induction  of  the  response  since 
simultaneous  injection  of  the  immunizing  and  the  challenge  dose  resulted 
in  suboptimal,  although  measurable,  protection.  Similarly,  it  would 
appear  that  once  induced  the  protection  lasts  for  at  least  three  weeks 
(Figure  2 and  Table  II ).  It  will  be  of  interest  to  determine  the  longevity 
of  the  protection  to  see  if  it  is  similar  to  that  observed  in  the  P. 
berghei  model.  The  model  described  in  this  report  provides  the  most 
complete  protectio  of  mice  against  a le%hal  challenge  with  malaria  para- 
site in  the  absence  of  previous  active  infection  which  has,  to  our  knowl- 
edge, been  thus  far  reported.  We  anticipate  that  it  will  be  useful  for 
further  studies  on  the  mechanism  of  immunity  to  rodent  malaria  parasites. 


1110 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 

Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  324  Host  Responses  to  Malaria 


Literature  Cited. 


Publications : 


1.  Diggs,  C.  L. , Joseph  K.,  Flemmings,  B.,  Snodgrass,  R.,  and 
Hines,  F.:  Protein  synthesis  in  vitro  by  cryopreserved  Plasmodium 

falciparum.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  & Hyg.  2k:  760-763,  1975* 


1111 


I 


RESEARCH  AMO  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


■OMl^BCUWT^ 

u 


1 AMSNCV  *LCI 

DA  OB  6^71 


76  07  01 


mmroar  cmtmi  ar««u 

DD-DR*E(AR)tJ* 


I DATE  RRIV  »U#RY 

75  07  01 


« KINO  OR  SUMMARY 


D.  Change 


U 


> . o.»a" 

NA 


•r»  MSTM*M 

NL 


MA  SNBCI RIC  OAT  A - 
COM T MAC TOM  ACCISS 
E T*I  G MO 


. LCVfL  OR  SUM 

A.  OOMMOT 


10  MO  COOCS* 


FROQMAM  CLCMCNT 


RROJCCT  NUHBCR 

3A762759AB29 


TASK  AMCA  MUMOtM 


VO«H  UNIT  MUM  SCR 


1W 


62759A 


00 


fe.  CONTRIMUTIMO 


CARDS  114F 


I TITLE  »'*  S*W4fr  ClAa*«n*Ail«t  C«M*J* 

(U)  Field  Studies  on  Drug  Resistant  Malaria 

II  SCIEHT1RIC  AMO  ▼CCNNOLOOICAL  ANSAE* 

003500  Clinical  Medicine  010100  Microbiology 

— * — ...i-i-i'n.  ■ 1 - . .11.  m'u  1 -r-' -j  r.t'  — . . i' 


it  STAAT  bate 

69  07 


1.  iituMto  co— 

COMT 


" rwm Dime  aoimct 

DA  I 


ts  o4mrIohmamc«  met  MOO 

C.  In-House 


IT  CONTRACT/  OMAN  ▼ 

A OATES/IR RECTI VI;  M A 

A NUMBER  * 

C.  TVM1 


expiration 


4 AMOUNT: 
r.  CUM.  AMT. 


n 


IS  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A FMOREESAOMAl.  MAH  YRB 

4 RUN  BE  trm  AMMO) 

RISCAL 

TSAR 

76 

b.7 

16 

77 

6 

' ■ 1 

it.  acieoatiaic  000  oa«Aaiz*T>oa 


ami  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INOIVIOUAL 

amtJOY,  R.  J.  T.,  COL 
202-576-3551 


II.  aaataai.  utc 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

IMBTH  TFESti B PHI  -« IBM  TIBHIBWg  A— j 


■ US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
“*  Bangkok,  Thailand 

PRINCIPAL  IN  VEST  IS  A TON  fR«MM  M AM  « V S.  <HA Mil  f*R<M»N«B 

■«'  BEACH,  D.  J.  , COL 

TtLiaaaai  2817776 
social  llcuairv  account  nunmn 

ASSOCIATE  IN  VEIT'  S A TOMS 

DOBERSTYN,  E.  B. , LTC 
PEARLMAN,  E.  J.,  LTC 


(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Drug  Resistance;  (U)  Chemotherapy; 

n;  CU)  Mnnkey:  liUVer torsi  lUKhlopoauinai  ( LU Human  Ut 


(111  Chemnprnpliy laXdA;  (UlHnman;  111)  monkey, 

It  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE^  IS  APPROACH,  IS  PROSRESS  (RuMM  IMNAnI  *i 


l.L.) Vectors:  <U-)Chlopoouio«t  (UlHuman  Volunt» 

23.  (U)  To  determine  the  efficacy  of  conventional  and  experimental  antimalarial  drugs 
in  the  treatment  and  prophylaxis  of  drug  resistant  falciparum  malaria.  To  define  vector 
bionomics  which  influence  the  transmission  of  drug  resistant  malaria  and  to  develop 
rationale  for  vector  control.  To  evaluate  the  activity  of  candidate  antimalarial  drugs 
against  simian  malaria.  To  characterize  the  clinical  features  of  malaria  in  Thailand, 
and  to  develop  improved  methods  of  hospital  management  of  diseases  of  military  importanci 

24.  (U)  U.S.  Army  investigational  antimalarial  drugs  were  compared  with  standard  drugs 
for  treatment  of  drug  resistant  falciparum  malaria  in  hospitalized  human  volunteers  in 
Thailand.  Chemoprophy lactic  studies  were  conducted  in  rural  populations  in  central 
Thailand.  Chemotherapeutic  drugs  were  studied  in  rhesus  monkeys  with  P.  cynomolgi. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  WR  142490  (Mefloquine)  in  a single  oral  dose  was  more  effective 
than  Fansidar  in  the  treatment  of  mildly  and  moderately  ill  patients  with  falciparum 
malaria.  In  combination  with  quinine  it  was  100%  curative  in  patients  of  all  degrees 
of  clinical  and  parasitological  severity.  Seventy-one  percent  of  patients  treated 
with  Fansidar  developed  gametocytes  infective  to  vector  mosquitoes.  In  studies  of 
chemosuppressive  agents  in  patients  with  falciparum  malaria,  a combination  of  sulfadoxin 
pyrimethamine  caused  an  eight  fold  reduction  in  the  number  of  people  with  a parasitemia. 
A similar  study  of  Mefloquine  (WF.  142490)  is  underway.  The  malaria  drug  testing  program 
has  used  the  rhesus  monkey  - Plasmodium  cynomolgi  system  to  test  20  drugs  for 
schizonticidal  and/or  radical  curative  effects.  Tor  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $10, 00  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul- 
30  Sep  76. 

'ARS<>aMr  lo  cwiiMtlNi  n— w 


DD,:r.‘M1498 


PRCVlOUl  COITIONS  or  This  ROMM  ARC  OSIOLCTC  DO  FORMS  (ASIA 
AND  I ASS-  1 I MAM  SS  <FOM  ARM  V USC>  ARC  OSIOLCTC 

1112 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00,  Malaria  Investigations 


Work  Unit  336 

Investigators 

Principals: 


Associate: 


Field  studies  on  drug  resistant  malaria 


COL  Douglas  J.  Beach,  MSC;  COL  Anthony  P.  Hail; 

MC:  LTC  Edward  B.  Doberstyn,  MC;  LTC  Eliot  J. 
Pearlman,  MC;  MAJ  Richard  M.  Lampe,  MC;  MAJ  John 
L.  Brown,  VC;  MAJ  William  T.  Watson,  VC;  MAJ 
Charles  F.  Miller,  MC;  CPT  Richard  G.  Andre,  MSC; 
CPT  Gary  D.  Phillips,  MSC;  MG  Pung  Phintuyothin, 

MC,  RTA  (Ret);  Chul  Karnchanachetanee , M.D.; 
Katchrinnee  Pavanand,  M.D.  ; Prayot  Tanticharoenyos , 
DVM,  Samran  Samransamruajkit , M.D. ; 

Douglas  J.  Gould,  Ph.D.;  LTC  David  E.  Davidson, 

Jr.,  VC;  MAJ  Garrett  S.  Dill,  VC;  MAJ  Stephen  C. 
Hembree,  MSC;  SFC  Robert  S.  Kennedy;  Visit 
Benjapongse,  M.D.;  Niphon  Chuanak ; Barnyen 
Permpanich;  Prasit  Sookto;  Withoon  Thiemanun 


1. 


The  Suppression  of  P.  falciparum  and  P.  vivax 
Parasitemias  by  a Sulfadoxine-Pyrimethamine 
Combination 


OBJECTIVE:  To  study  the  effectiveness  of  the  combination  of 

sulfadoxine(s)  500  mg  and  pyrimethamine  (Py)  25  mg  given  in  two 
dose  regimens  in  suppressing  parasitemias  in  an  area  with  known 
chloroquine  resistant  falciparum  malaria. 

BACKGROUND : The  combination  of  a sulfone  or  sulfonamide  with 

pyrimethamine  in  the  chemosuppression  of  chloroquine  resistant 
falciparum  malaria  has  been  previously  shown  to  be  efficacious. 
The  longer  half  life  of  a long  acting  sulfonamide,  such  as  sul- 
fadoxine  (t  . -150-200  hrs.),  should  render  this,  in  combination 
with  a matched  (in  terms  of  t . ) dihydrofolic  acid  reductase, 
a better  chemosuppressive  agent . 

DESCRIPTION:  Seven  hundred  and  fifty  six  semi-immune  study 

subjects  from  four  villages  in  Prachinburi  Province,  Northeast 
Thailand  were  assigned  to  one  of  five  drug  study  groups.  Subjects 
received,  under  a double  blind  design,  one  of  the  following 
medications : 

a.  Sulfadoxine  1000  mg  - pyrimethamine  50  mg  biweekly 

b.  Sulfadoxine  500  mg  - pyrimethamine  25  mg  biweekly 

c.  Diformyldapsone  200  mg  - pyrimethamine  12.5  weekly 

d.  Diformyldapsone  400  mg  - pyrimethamine  25  mg  weekly 

e . Placebo  weekly 

Each  study  subject  was  visited  weekly,  at  which  time  the  medica- 
tion was  given  and  swallowed  under  supervision,  a capillary 
blood  drawn  for  a thick-thin  malaria  smear,  and  a history  of 
illness  since  the  prior  visit  noted.  For  those  subjects 
receiving  a biweekly  medication  regimen,  placebo  tablets  were 
given  on  the  alternate  weeks;  thus  study  subjects  received  two 
tablets  weekly. 

PROGRESS : Six  hundred  eighty-eight  study  subjects  completed 

the  26  week  trial  (92%).  Figure  1 shows  that  the  weekly  fal- 
ciparum attack  rates  (based  on  a new  asexual  parasitemia)  were 
lower  during  the  medication  phase  of  the  trial  in  the  four 
treatment  groups  compared  with  the  placebo  group.  It  can  be 
further  seen  that  an  increased  number  of  falciparum  parasitemias 
was  detected  in  the  low  dose  DFD-Py  group  (weeks  7,  9 and  19); 
in  the  high  dose  DFD-Py  group  (week  10);  and  in  the  low  dose 
S-Py  group  (week  10).  Figure  2 shows  the  cumulative  infection 


1114 


FIGURE  Z 

ATIVE  PROPORTION  OF  SUBJECTS  INFECTED  WITH  P.  FALCIPARUM 


WEEK  NUMBER 


rates  of  individual  study  subjects  in  the  course  of  the  26  week 
trial  and  in  the  subsequent  follow-ups.  The  data  indicate  an 
8-fold  reduction  in  the  cumulative  parasitemic  rate  for  ]?. 
falciparum  in  the  high  dose  S-Py  group,  while  a 4.4  fold 
reduction  was  noted  in  the  high  dose  DFD-Py  group  when  compared 
to  the  placebo  group. 


Statistical  evaluation  comparing  the  various  drug  regimens  was 
undertaken.  Highly  significant  results  were  obtained  which 
showed  that  S(1000  mg)-Py(50  mg)  given  biweekly;  S(500  mg)-Py 
(25  mg)  given  biweekly;  DFD(400  mg)-Py(25  mg)  given  weekly; 
and  DFD(200  mg)-Py(12.5  mg)  given  weekly  were  effective  chemosup- 
pressive  agents  against  P_.  falciparum  when  compared  to  placebo 
alone  (p  <0.0005).  Furthermore,  the  higher  dose  S-Py  regimen 
was  more  efficacious  than  the  lower  dose  S-Py  group,  and  more 
efficacious  than  either  of  the  DFD-Py  regimens  in  suppressing 
falciparum  parasitemias.  A direct  comparison  between  the  low 
dose  S-Py  group  and  the  two  DFD-Py  groups  failed  to  reveal 
any  significant  differences  in  efficacy.  Table  1 summarizes 
these  statistics. 


Table  1.  Statistical  Evaluation  Significance  of  Difference 
Between  Two  Sample  Proportions  (p  value)  for  £. 
falciparum  Suppression 


S-Py  (1) 

DFD-Py  (h) 

DFD - ?y  (1) 

Placebo 

S-Py(h)  2.9445 

3.7240 

3.8595 

18.2165 

(p<0 .002) 

(p  <0.0002) 

(p  <0.00015) 

(p  <0.0001) 

S-Py(l) 

0.6038 

1.1713 

15.9411 

(0.25< p<  0.30) 

(0 ,10<  p<  0.15) 

(p<0.0001) 

(h)  high  dose 


(1)  low  dose 


We  were  able  to  identify  one  hundred  seventy  study  subjects 
who  participated  in  all  three  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory 
chemosuppressive  studies.  Of  these  170,  sixty  seven  individuals 
were  known  to  have  received  DDS-Py  in  1973;  DFD-Py,  DFD,  or 
Dapsone-pyrimethamine  (DDS-Py)  in  1974;  and  to  have  received 
either  S-Py  or  DFD-Py  this  year.  Thus  they  received  a sulfone 
preparation  for  a period  of  six  months  each  year  of  the  past 
two  years,  and  subsequently  received  a sulfone  or  sulfonamide 
preparation  for  six  months  the  next  year.  Analysis  of  this 
data  was  undertaken  to  discern  any  indication  of  increased 
susceptibility  to  a falciparum  parasitemia  among  these  individuals. 
When  each  of  the  current  treatment  groups  was  divided  into 
two  parts:  those  that  received  the  prior  sulfone  drugs  for  two 
years  and  those  that  did  not;  it  was  found  that  there  was  no 
significant  difference  of  chemosuppression  between  the  groups. 
Further  detailed  analysis  failed  to  discern  any  significant 
differences  when  the  groups  were  compared  as  to  which  specific 
drug  they  received  in  the  past  (DDS-Py,  DFD-Py,  DFD)  and 
which  active  medication  this  year. 

Individuals  (20)  who  received  chloroquine  in  1973,  Py  or  Placebo 
in  1974,  and  DFD-Py  or  S-Py  for  the  first  time  this  year  did 
not  differ  at  all  in  suppression  against  falciparum  parasitemias 
from  those  67  study  subjects  described  above. 

With  the  cessation  of  chemosuppression  the  following  number  of 
new  falciparum  parasitemias  were  seen  in  the  course  of  the  two 
follow-up  visits  (weeks  29  and  40):  6 (at  week  40)  in  the  high 
dose  S-Py  group,  6 in  the  low  dose  S-Py  group,  18  in  the  high 
dose  DFD-Py  group,  12  in  low  dose  DFD-Py  group,  and  15  in  the 
placebo  group.  Of  these  post-suppression  falciparum  para- 
sitemias most  (37  or  59)  occurred  at  week  40.  This  would 
correspond  to  May,  1975  and  the  start  of  a new  malaria  trans- 
mission season. 

This  year  we  again  had  a large  number  of  P.  vivax  parasitemias 
as  shown  in  Table  2.  The  placebo  grodp  had  a 55%  cumulative 
vivax  infection  rate  while  the  high  dose  S-Py  and  high  dose 
DFD-Py  had  19%.  Both  low  dose  groups  were  approximately  equal 
with  respect  to  numbers  of  study  subjects  infected.  Statistical 
evaluation  showed  that  all  four  major  treatment  groups  wern 
efficacious  vis  a vis  placebo.  However,  the  high  dose  S-Py  and 
DFD-Py  were  both  equally  effective  in  preventing  vivax  para- 
sitemias, and  were  superior  to  the  lower  dose  S-Py  and  DFD-Py 
regimens.  There  was  no  difference  in  efficacy  between  the 
lower  dose  regimens.  Table  3 summarizes  this  information. 


1118 


Table  2.  P_.  vivax  Parasitemia  Experienced  by  Study 

Subjects  During  Chemosuppression 


Group 

No. 

Subj  ects 

No . ( prop . ) 
Infected 

S(1000mg)-Py( 50mg ) 

155 

29(0.19) 

S( 500mg)-Py(25mg) 

156 

41(0.26) 

DFD(400mg)-Py(25mg) 

162 

31(0.19) 

DFD(200mg)-Py(12. 5mg) 

153 

45(0.29) 

Placebo 

62 

34(0.55) 

Table  3.  Statistical  Evaluation  Significance  of 

Difference  Between  Two  Sample  Proportions 
(p  value)  for  P_.  vivax  Suppression 


S-Py  (1) 


DFD-Py  (h) 
0.4763 


S-Py  (h)  2.9445  0.4763 

(0.0016<p< .002)  (0.30<p<0.35) 
S-Py  (1)  - 2.5383* 

( 0 . 005<p^9. 01 ) 


DFD-Py  (1)  I Placebo 


4.6588 

(p<0.0005) 

1.5935 


13.1462 

(p<0.0005) 

10.3316 


(0.05<p<0.10)  (p<0.0005) 


* In  favor  of  DFD-Py  (h). 

(h)  high  dose 


(1)  low  dose 


.ti  '•  v-.t'sw-'  warn* 


Following  completion  of  the  chemosuppressive  phase  of  the  study 
there  was  an  increase  in  the  number  of  primary  vivax  parasitemias. 
These  numbered  as  follows:  S-Py  (high  dose)  group  - 27;  S-Py  (low 
dose)  group  - 19;  DFD-Py  (high  dose)  group  - 34;  DFD-Py  (low  dose) 
group  - 18;  and  placebo  group  - none.  Thus  the  increase  in  the 
cumulative  values  for  vivax  parasitemias  are  for  the  S-Py  (high 
dose)  group  from  0.19  to  0.36;  for  the  S-Py  (low  dose)  group 
from  0.26  to  0.38;  for  the  DFD-Py  (high  dose)  group  from  0.19 
to  0.40;  for  the  DFD-Py  (low  dose)  group  from  0.29  to  0.41; 
and  there  was  no  change  in  the  placebo  group. 

There  were  no  reported  episodes  of  drug  related  disease  from  the 
747  study  participants  who  started  the  study.  All  study  subjects 
who  finished  the  study  were  also  seen  during  the  follow-up  period. 
Those  with  parasitemias  were  treated.  Study  subjects  with  a 
falciparum  parasitemia  were  given  a therapeutic  dose  of  sulfa- 
doxine-pyrimethamine , while  those  with  a vivax  parasitemia  were 
treated  with  the  standard  regimen  using  chloroquine.  Primaquine 
was  given  only  to  those  study  subjects  known  to  be  G-6-PD  normal. 

Hematocrits  were  monitored  biweekly  for  evidence  of  hemolysis 
secondary  to  a G-6-PD  deficiency.  Of  major  concern  were  the 
two  DFD-Py  groups.  There  were  26  instances  where  individuals 
experienced  falling  hematocrits.  These  episodes  were  evenly 
distributed  among  the  five  treatment  groups.  In  most  instances 
repeat  hematocrits  a week  later  pointed  to  a probable  laboratory 
error.  Paired  information  using  hematocrits  at  week  0 and  week 
26  were  statistically  analyzed.  The  study  subjects  as  a whole 
in  each  of  the  four  major  treatment  groups  showed  a significant 
increase  in  the  value  of  their  hematocrit  over  the  twenty-six 
week  trial  period.  For  the  DFD-Py  high  and  low  dose  groups  the 
rises  (0.7%  and  1.0%)  were  significant  at  the  5%  level,  while 
for  the  S-Py  high  and  low  dose  groups  the  rises  (1.46%  and 
2.98%)  were  significant  at  the  1%  level.  The  result  for  the 
placebo  group  showed  a slight  increase  in  the  average  hematocrit 
value. (0.52%),  which  was  not  significant.  Evaluation  of  hematocrits 
of  males  with  G-6-PD  deficiency  in  the  high  dose  DFD-Py  regimen 
(18  out  of  133  males)  showed  that  they  too  experienced  an  increase 
in  their  hematocrits  (2.2%)  which  was  significant  at  the  2%  level. 

Likewise  all  study  subjects  were  monitored  for  leucopenia.  At  the 
start  and  during  the  trial  there  were  240  instances  of  a leucopenia 
(defined  as  < 4000  cells/ml).  These  episodes  of  leucopenia  were 
distributed  evenly  among  all  five  treatment  groups , and  there  was 
no  bias  detected  (yf;=3.5103;  0.40<p<0. 50).  Statistical  evaluation 


_ * **  . 
fc-  -.-4 j.4  - 


was  undertaken  to  detect  any  significant  differences  in  WBC 
determinations  following  a six  month  ingestion  of  sulfonamides 
or  sulfones  using  paired  data  from  weeks  0 and  26.  While  all 
groups  experienced  a decrease  in  WBC  counts,  only  the  S-Py 
(high  dose)  group  showed  a significant  decrease  (See  Figure  3). 
This  amounted  to  an  average  decrease  of  from  7645  WBC/ml  at  the 
start  to  6850  WBC/ml  at  the  end  of  the  trial  (p£0.05). 

Follow-up  visits  to  the  local  health  center  revealed  only  four 
study  subjects  who  received  antimalarial  therapy  (3  received 
sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine , one  received  oxytetracycline ) from 
other  sources.  Weekly  smears  taken  from  these  four  study 
subjects  while  under  outside  therapy  were  not  included  in  the 
results . 

From  the  point  of  view  of  drug  tolerance  there  seemed  to  be  no 
instances  of  untoward  reactions,  and  this  agrees  with  the 
experience  of  others.  There  was  no  evidence  of  marked  leucopenia 
except  for  a lowering  of  the  WBC  in  the  high  dose  S-Py  group. 
Values  for  hematocrits  in  all  major  treatment  groups  were 
increased  possibly  due  to  supplementary  hematinics  given 
(FeSO^ , vitamins)  to  all  study  subjects  at  the  time  of  tablet 
ingestion  and  blood  smearing. 

SUMMARY ; Sulfadoxine  (1000  mg )-pyrimethamine  (50  mg)  given  bi- 
weekly was  shown  to  be  an  effective  chemosuppressive  against 
both  falciparum  and  vivax  parasitemias,  causing  an  eight  fold 
reduction  in  falciparum  parasitemias,  and  an  approximately 
three  fold  reduction  in  vivax  parasitemias.  While  tne  low 
dose  S-Py  group  and  the  two  DFD-Py  groups  were  less  effective 
than  the  high  dose  S-Py  group  in  suppressing  falciparum 
parasitemias,  the  high  dose  DFD-Py  combination  was  as  effective 
as  the  high  dose  S-Py  combination  in  suppressing  vivax 
parasitemias , 

2 . Evaluation  of  the  Sporonticidal  Effect  of  Pyrimethamine- 
Sul'fado'xl'ne , Quinine,  and  Quinine-Pyrimethamine  against 
| P.  falciparum 

OBJECTIVE : To  determine  the  effect  of  three  therapeutic  regimens 

< for  malaria  upon  the  subsequent  development  of  sporogonic  forms 

j of  P_.  falciparum  in  mosquitoes  fed  on  infected  patients. 

i 

\ BACKGROUND : Fansidar,  the  fixed  combination  of  pyrimethamine  and 

i sulfadoxine , has  been  shown  to  be  effective  against  the  asexual 

\ 


forms  of  chloroquine  resistant  and  chloroquine  sensitive  strains 
of  P.  falciparum  as  well  as  P_.  vivax  malaria  in  many  parts  of 
the  world . It  is  currently  used  in  Thailand  as  an  alternative 
regimen  by  the  clinics  of  the  National  Malaria  Eradication 
Project  and  is  widely  used  in  hospitals  and  clinics  throughout 
the  country.  A number  of  studies  have  proven  its  effectiveness 
as  a schizonticide,  but  it  has  not  been  thoroughly  evaluated  as 
a garnet ocytocide  and  sporonticide.  Chin  and  Rattanarithikul  (1) 
reported  that  47%  of  A.  balabacensis  fed  on  garnet ocytemic 
patients  following  single-dose  therapy  developed  sporozoites. 
Serum  levels  of  the  drug  in  the  donor  patients  at  the  time  of 
the  mosquito  feedings  were  not  reported  by  these  authors. 

Quinine  has  always  been  considered  to  have  no  effect  on  gameto- 
cytes  or  upon  the  development  of  P_.  falciparum  in  the  mosquito 
host.  In  the  past,  pyrimethamine  was  thought  to  effectively 
interrupt  the  sporogonic  cycle,  however,  since  resistance  of 
asexual  forms  of  the  parasite  to  pyrimethamine  is  common  in 
the  region,  it  is  reasonable  to  expect  that  the  drug's  effect 
as  a sporonticide  has  diminished. 

In  view  of  the  widespread  use  of  Fansidar  in  the  therapy  of 
malaria  in  Southeast  Asia  and  its  emergence  as  a drug  of 
choice  for  chloroquine-resistant  malaria  in  many  parts  of  the 
world,  the  effect  of  this  drug  upon  the  infectivity  of  gameto- 
cytes  needs  clarification.  Epidemiologically , it  is  essential 
to  be  aware  of  the  need  for  the  additional  use  of  a sporonti- 
cidal  drug  such  as  primaquine  in  combination  therapy. 

DESCRIPTION:  Patients  presenting  to  the  outpatient  clinics  of 

the  National  Malaria  Eradication  Project  and  the  district 
hospital  in  Phra  Phutthabat,  who  were  at  least  15  years  of  age 
and  had  blood  smears  positive  for  P_.  falciparum , were  considered 
eligible  for  the  study.  Eligible  patients  who  volunteered  were 
assigned  to  one  of  three  treatment  groups;  Group  A:  Patients 

were  treated  with  a single  dose  of  Fansidar,  two  tablets  (total 
50  mg.  pyrimethamine  and  1.0  mg.  sulfadoxine) ; Group  B:  Patients 
were  treated  with  quinine,  650  mg.  every  eight  hours  for  six 
days;  Group  C:  Patients  received  quinine  as  in  Group  B,  above, 

but  in  addition,  were  given  pyrimethamine  50  mg.  daily  for  the 
first  three  days.  Fansidar,  either  alone  or  in  combination 
with  quinine,  is  a standard  therapy  for  £.  falciparum  used  in 
the  outpatient  clinic  and  on  the  wards  in  Phra  Phutthabat 
hospital  and  in  the  clinic  operated  by  the  National  Malaria 
Eradication  Project. 


1123 


» p mii.u..  I.n»p»  I . . ,.M.  ~ T-^^<S5aMrTTr^aa5g 


Medications  were  administered  by  the  nursing  staff  under  the 
supervision  of  the  study  physicians.  At  the  conclusion  of  the 
21-day  study  period  patients  from  Group  B and  C were  given  two 
tablets  of  Fansidar. 

Parasite  counts  were  performed  and  blood  drawn  for  pyrimethamine 
and  sulfadoxine  levels  before  treatment  was  begun  on  day  0,  daily 
in  hospital.  and  on  days  5,  10,  15  and  20  after  treatment. 
Mosquito  feeds  were  performed  on  days  0,  5,  10,  15  and  20,  using 
previously  unfed  A.  balabacensis  from  the  colony  of  the  SEATO 
Medical  Research  Laboratory  Phra  Phuttabat  insectary.  Patients 
were  asked  to  return  to  the  laboratory  for  follow-up.  If 
necessary,  they  were  followed  at  home.  Ten  percent  of  the 
mosquitoes  fed  on  the  patients  were  dissected  six  to  ten  days 
after  feeding,  and  all  surviving  mosquitoes  were  dissected  on 
day  15,  regardless  of  the  results  of  the  previous  dissection. 

Serum  levels  of  the  antimalarial  drugs  are  being  determined  at 
the  biochemistry  laboratory  of  the  SEATO  Medical  Research 
Laboratory . 

PROGRESS : One  hundred  and  three  patients  were  initially  admitted 

to  the  study,  but  2d  of  these  were  not  included  in  the  final 
tabulation  of  the  data.  Patients  were  eliminated  for  the 
following  reasons : 

1.  No  gametocytes  at  any  time  during  their  course  (11 
patients) 

2.  No  gametocytes  after  day  0 (3  patients) 

3.  Change  in  therapeutic  regimen  (1  patient) 

4.  No  follow-up  after  day  0 (13  patients) 

A total  of  seventy-five  patients  was  included  in  analysis  of  the 
data.  The  Fansidar  treatment  group  comprised  35  patients,  the 
quinine  group  28,  and  the  quinine-pyrimethamine  group  12.  Choice 
of  therapy  was  not  random,  but  was  often  dictated  by  the  clinical 
condition  of  the  patient.  Patients  with  severe  infections  were 
not  considered  eligible  for  single -dose  oral  therapy,  and  were 
treated  with  quinine  instead.  This  fact  is  reflected  in  the 
higher  average  asexual  parasite  count  in  the  quinine  and  quinine- 
pyrimethamine  groups  (See  Table  1). 

Gametocytemia  on  admission  was  similar  for  the  three  groups, 
however,  the  Fansidar-treated  group  subsequently  developed 
much  higher  levels.  Whether  this  phenomenon  was  due  to  stimu- 
lation by  Fansidar  or  was  the  result  of  suppression  by  quinine 
is  not  clear.  (Figure  1). 


1124 


f 

Drug 

Day 

0 

5 

FANSIDAR 

10 

15 

20 

0 

5 

QUININE 

10 

15 

20 

0 

5 

QUININB-PYRIMETHAMINE 

10 

15 

20 

Parasite 
Mean  (i 

Counts 

>.D.) 

Asexual 

Sexual 

12622(17562) 

234  (365) 
644(1067) 
802  (981) 
326  (387) 
120  (156) 

78387(125932) 

225  (451) 
211  (252) 
72  (117) 
24  (100) 
6 (8) 

58426(104365) 

440  (663) 
526  (896) 
227  (385) 
52  (100) 
13  (23) 

6 


Table  3.  Fansidar  Sporonticidal  Study  Mean  Oocyst  Diameters 
Seven  Days  Post-Feeding 


Drug 

Day 

Post -Treatment 

Mean  Diameter 
Minimum  (S.D. 

in  Microns 
Maximum  (S.' 

None 

0 

26 

(5.1) 

37 

(4.6) 

Fansidar 

5 

29 

(10.0) 

39 

(11.6) 

Fansidar 

10 

26 

( 2.7) 

37 

( 6.4) 

Fansidar 

15 

27 

(0) 

35 

( 2.3) 

Quinine 

5 

18 

(0) 

29 

( 2.7) 

Quinine 

10 

- 

38 

(0) 

001 


FIGURE  2.  MOSQUITOES  INFECTED  AFTER  FEEDING  ON  TREATED  PATIENTS 


Positivity  of  mosquito  dissections  seems  to  have  been  related 
to  gametocyte  levels  , and  when  the  average  gametocyte  counts 
were  compared  with  percentages  of  mosquitoes  showing  development 
of  parasites,  the  relationships  were  similar  for  all  three 
groups  (Figure  1). 

Over  12,800  mosquitoes  were  allowed  to  feed  upon  the  75  study 
patients.  Of  the  60%  of  A.  balabacensis  that  engorged  on  these 
patients,  4,880  survived  and  were  dissected  and  examined  for 
malaria  parasites  (Table  2).  Fourteen  percent  of  the  dissected 
mosquitoes  were  found  to  be  positive.  Measurements  of  oocyst 
diameters  were  made  to  determine  if  normal  parasite  development 
took  place.  Guts  of  mosquitoes  fed  on  patients  before  treatment 
or  on  days  5,  10,  15  or  20  following  treatment  were  examined. 
Mosquitoes  that  fed  on  Day  5 on  Fansidar-treated  patients  had 
oocysts  that  were  larger  than  those  seen  in  mosquitoes  that  fed 
on  quinine -treated  patients  on  the  same  day  (Table  3).  Also  of 
interest  is  the  fact  that  these  oocyst  diameters  are  larger  than 
those  reported  by  Coatney  et  al.  (1971)  in  A.  freeborni  and 
A_.  quadrimaculatus  mosquitoes.  More  measurements  are  required 
to  determine  if  this  apparent  difference  of  growth  rate  is 
significant  or  the  result  of  inadequate  sampling.  Sporozoites 
were  not  found  in  all  lots  of  mosquitoes  positive  for  oocysts. 
Thus,  development  to  the  sporozoite  stage  occurred  in  21/25 
lots  fed  on  Fansidar-treated  patients  as  compared  with  9/10 
lots  fed  on  quinine- treated  patients  and  4/5  lots  fed  on 
quinine-pyrimethamine  treated  patients  (Figure  2).  Sporozoites, 
when  seen,  appeared  to  be  normal  in  morphology;  however,  it  is 
not  known  whether  they  were  infective. 

Determinations  of  serum  levels  of  quinine , pyrimethamine , and 
sulfadoxine  are  not  complete,  but  correlation  of  these  data 
will  be  included  in  the  final  analysis  of  these  results. 

3 . Mefloquine  and  Fansidar  Alone  and  in  Combination  with 
Quinine  for  the  Treatment  of  Falciparum  Malaria 

OBJECTIVE:  To  determine  the  efficacy  of  mefloquine  in  naturally- 

acquired  falciparum  malaria. 

BACKGROUND : Mefloquine  hydrochloride  is  an  analogue  of  quinine 

and  of  WR  30090,  an  antimalarial  which  was  developed  during  the 
Viet  Nam  war  and  was  used  effectively  in  the  treatment  of 
military  personnel  with  falciparum  malaria  unresponsive  tc 
other  drugs.  It  is  a 4-quinolinemethanol  containing  a 2- 
trifluoromethyl  group  which  blocks  ring  oxidation  at  that  point, 
a major  site  of  enzymatic  inactivation  of  quinine. 


1130 


Fansidar,  a 20:1  combination  of  sulfadoxine  and  pyrimethamine 
has  been  used  widely  for  the  single-dose  therapy  of  falciparum 
malaria,  and  has  been  shown  to  be  85%  and  82%  successful  in 
SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  studies  in  Trat  and  Prachinburi 
provinces  respectively. 

Recent  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  studies  have  shown  the 
most  effective  therapeutic  regimen  for  drug  resistant  malaria  in 
Thailand  to  consist  of  a short  course  of  quinine  followed  by  a 
single  oral  dose  of  Fansidar.  Four  doses  of  quinine,  10  grains 
every  eight  hours,  followed  by  a single  dose  of  Fansidar  produced 
a cure  rate  of  96%  (2). 

DESCRIPTION:  The  study  was  opened  at  the  Chao  Phya  Abhai  Phu 

Bejr  Hospital  (Prachinburi  Provincial  Hospital).  In  the  early 
phase  of  the  study,  only  patients  with  clinically  mild  and 
moderate  infections  were  considered  eligible.  Male  volunteers 
over  15  years  of  age  with  P..  falciparum  asexual  parasitemias  of 
more  than  1,000/cu.mm.,  were  admitted  to  the  study  and  assigned 
randomly  to  single  dose  oral  therapy  with  either  Fansidar,  three 
tablets  (total  75  mg.  pyrimethamine  and  1.5  gm.  sulfadoxine)  or 
mefloquine,  six  tablets  (1.5  gm). 

Parasite  counts  were  performed  twice  daily  in  the  hospital  and  on 
days  14,  21  and  28  following  therapy,  at  follow-up  visits.  Hemato- 
crit, WBC  count,  urinalysis  and  liver  function  studies  were  also 
performed . 

In  the  later  phase  of  the  study,  patients  of  all  degrees  of 
severity  were  admitted  to  the  study;  they  were  treated  with 
quinine,  administered  either  orally  or  intravenously,  10  grains 
every  eight  or  twelve  hours,  followed  by  a single  dose  of  either 
mefloquine  or  Fansidar  when  their  clinical  condition  had  improved. 

Therapeutic  response  was  judged  by  a modification  of  the  WHO 
criteria  (3).  An  RIII  response  was  diagnosed  if  the  patient's 
clinical  condition  and/or  parasitemia  failed  to  improve  or 
worsened  within  a few  hours  after  administration  of  the  test 
medication.  An  RII  response  indicated  reduction  but  not  elimination 
of  asexual  parasites  following  therapy,  and  an  RI  response  was 
arbitrarily  diagnosed  if  asexual  parasites  reappeared  on  or  before 
the  28th  day  following  the  initiation  of  therapy,  whether  or  not 
the  patient  had  returned  to  an  endemic  area. 

In  some  patients,  it  was  later  decided  that  an  RIII  response  was 
diagnosed  prematurely,  and  that  the  test  regimen  may  have  proven 


1131 


Table  1.  Therapy  of  P.  falciparum  Malaria,  Prachinburi  1975 


/■> 

/—N 

/—V 

rs 

LO 

o 

cn 

O 

! <l> 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

■H 

\ 

\ 

\ 

\ 

05 

lf> 

CD 

LO 

4" 

c2 

CO 

CN 

CO 

CN 

1 

'w' 

w 

v-r 

CD 

p 

<*p 

dP 

dP 

o\° 

0 

o 

e'- 

CN 

O 

CJ 

o 

en 

CD 

CO 

H 

a, 

3 

CO  1 

P XI 

<— I C <D 
mm? 

LO 

o 

CD 

o 

P -P  O 
O P <H 
H rO  rp 

CO 

CO 

CO 

CO 

Oh  O 

[m 

LO 

a> 

CD 

4- 

W 

CO 

CN 

CO 

CN 

M 

o 

rH 

CO 

CN 

cn 

j# 

esponse' 

RII 

o 

o 

O 

CO 

Pi 

M 

M 

o 

O 

O 

rH 

M 

Pi 

/-S 

/— N 

/— N 

rs 

r-\ 

•P  <D 

o 

o 

o 

O 

a w) 

o 

o 

o 

O 

g g 

o 

o 

o 

o 

85 

* 

o o 

+ 

o r- 

* 

O lO 

A 

o 4“ 

H \ 

O LO 

o r- 

O LO 

O CO 

rd  <u  a> 

o r* 

o H 

O LO 

o H 

•PPM 

* 1 

l>  1 

* 1 

* 1 

P'H  (I) 

00  o 

r»  o 

LO  O 

CN  O 

•P  Cfl  P 

LO  O 

4-  4- 

LO  O 

4-  O ! 

c m a) 

4- 

rH 

CN 

M P > 

•* 

* 

cd  < 

I— 1 

rH 

rH 

| 

CU  w 

'w' 

N-/ 

CO  X) 
H P CD 

m c *p 
p <u  xi 

o 

CN 

4* 

LO 

O -P  3 
H P P 

4* 

CO 

4" 

CO 

3 w 

cp 

<u 

<D 

G 

c 

••  •H 

•rH 

••  U 

u 

c 

a)  4 

G 

a)  aj 

03 

CD 

c a< 

cr 

G T3 

od 

e 

•H  o 

0 

•p  *p 

•r| 

p 

G H 

rH 

C CO 

w 

M 

•H  p 

Mh 

•P  G 

c 

D 

« 

0) 

s 

3 3 
<5  Pi 

03 

Im 

W M M * 

Pi  Pi  Pi  CO 


mop  ~ 


Table 


effective  on  its  own.  These  cases  were  classified  as  undeter- 
mined results. 

An  S response  (radical  cure)  was  diagnosed  in  patients  in  whom 
asexual  parasitemia  cleared  promptly  and  did  not  reappear  during 
the  28-day  follow-up  period. 

PROGRESS : Fans id ar  - Thirty-six  patients  were  treated  with 

Fansidar  (Table  1).  All  patients  received  three  tablets  except 
one  boy  weighing  31  kg.,  who  received  two.  In  four  patients, 

RII  or  RIII  early  failures  were  diagnosed,  and  quinine  was 
added.  In  two  additional  patients,  increases  in  parasitemia 
occurred,  but  by  the  time  quinine  was  added,  improvement  in 
the  clinical  picture  and  fever  had  already  occurred.  It  was 
considered  that  quinine  was  given  prematurely,  and  treatment 
failures  were  therefore  not  diagnosed.  Two  patients  responded 
in  hospital,  but  recrudesced  before  the  end  of  the  28-day 
follow-up  period,  and  were  considered  RI  failures.  Six  patients 
did  not  complete  follow-up.  The  overall  cure  rate  was  80%. 

Parasite  and  fever  clearances  were  76  and  61  hours  respectively 
(Table  2). 

Mefloquine  - Thirty-two  patients  received  a single  oral  dose  of 
mefloquine.  Four  patients  weighing  between  30  and  40  kg.  received 
1.25  gm.;  the  others  were  treated  with  1.5  gm.  One  patient  did 
not  complete  follow-up ; one  patient  had  a recrudescence  on  the 
24th  day  following  treatment , after  having  returned  to  an  endemic 
area;  and  one  patient  was  given  quinine  seven  hours  after  the 
oral  dose  of  mefloquine  because  of  an  increasing  asexual  parasite 
count.  In  retrospect,  this  last  patient  probably  should  not  have 
been  a candidate  for  oral  therapy  on  admission  because  of  the 
symptom  combination  of  borderline  hypotension,  lack  of  fever, 
and  prostration,  the  complex  known  as  "algid  malaria."  Drug 
absorption  in  such  a patient  would  be  expected  to  be  slow,  and 
effective  blood  levels  of  the  drug  difficult  to  obtain.  It  is 
likely  that  the  drug  VuS  eventually  absorbed  since  the  patient 
went  on  to  complete  recoverv  following  only  three  doses  of 
quinine.  Eliminating  this  last  patient  from  consideration, 
mefloquine  produced  a 97%  cure  rate.  Parasite  and  fever  clearance 
timei  were  66  and  48  hours  respectively. 

Quinine-Fansidar  - Forty-four  patients  were  treated  with  from  one 
to  eleven  doses  of  quinine  followed  by  a single  dose  of  Fansidar 
(average  4.7  d^ses  of  quinine).  Three  patients  developed  RI 
recrudescences,  making  the  overall  cure  rate  92%  (36  of  39  patients 
followed  up ) . 


1134 


Quinine-Mefloquine  - Forty  patients  were  treated  with  quinine, 
one  to  eleven  doses  (average  4.3)  followed  by  a single  oral  dose 
of  mefloquine.  Complete  follow-up  was  achieved  in  35  patients, 
all  of  whom  were  radically  cured. 

Gastrointestinal  side-effects  were  most  often  seen  in  patients 
receiving  the  quinine-mefloquine  regimen.  This  is  not  surprising, 
since  the  drugs  are  similar  and  would  be  expected  to  produce 
additive  toxicity.  Mefloquine  alone  was  occasionally  responsible 
for  protracted  vomiting  and  diarrhea.  These  side-effects  were 
controlled  with  symptomatic  medication  and  none  considered 
severe.  Fansidar  alone  was  not  associated  with  any  drug-related 
side  effects.  Quinine-Fansidar  patients  showed  only  side  effects 
related  to  quinine  therapy;  tinnitus,  dizziness  and  nausea. 

(There  were  no  side  effects  attributable  to  Fansidar). 

A method  of  determination  of  serum  levels  of  mefloquine  has 
recently  been  developed  and  specimens  from  this  study  are 
currently  being  analyzed.  In  view  of  the  relatively  small 
numbers  of  patients  who  received  single  oral  doses  of  mefloquine 
and  Fansidar,  the  study  is  being  continued  at  the  Phra  Phuttabat 
Hospital,  Saraburi  Province. 

4 . Evaluation  of  Experimental  Antimalaria  Drugs  in  Rhesus 
donkeys  Infected  with  P.  cynomolgi 

OBJECTIVE:  To  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  selected  experimental 

drugs  against  P_.  cynomolgi  malaria  in  rhesus  monkeys.  These 
studies  are  coordinated  by  the  Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry, 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  and  the  results  are  used 
to  aid  in  selection  of  more  effective  antimalarial  drugs  for 
human  use. 

BACKGROUND : This  is  a continuation  of  studies  initiated  in  1971. 

A chronological  report  of  methodology  and  results  are  available 
in  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Reports  for  1971 
through  1975.  During  1975-76  work  was  oriented  toward  perfection 
of  a sporozoite  induced  test  system  for  evaluation  of  radical 
curative  drugs. 

DESCRIPTION : Blood  Schizonticidal  Tests:  Experimental  drugs 

are  evaluated  in  rhesus  monkeys  (Macaca  mulatta)^  which  are 
infected  by  intravenous  administration  of  5 x 10  parasitized 
erythrocytes  obtained  from  donor  monkeys  infected  with  £. 
cynomolgi  strain  B.  Post -inoculation  day  4,  test  drugs  were 
administered  orally  (by  gastric  intubation)  for  seven  days. 


1135 


Table  1.  Summary  of  Blood  Schizonticidal  Tests  in 
Rhesus  Monkeys 


T_  pe  of  Compound 


WRAIR  Drug 
Number 


Minimum  Curative  Dose 
(mg/kg/day) 


Pyridine  methanol 


180409  AC 
180409  AD 
180117 


Phenanthrene 

methanol 


33063 


* NC  (13.6) 


2 ,4 -Diamino 
quinazoline 


150012 


Quinoline 

methanols 


142490 


199426 


Miscellaneous 


151136 

38839 

194905 

99210 


* NC  (100.0) 

3.16 

* NC  (31.6) 

31.6 


* Not  curative.  The  compound  had  suppressive  activity  but 
did  not  cure  at  the  maximum  dose  tested.  The  maximum 
tested  dose  is  indicated  in  parentheses. 


r~!*.  ,*^1. fc*'’.1  — AM**-- 


Table  2.  Blood  Induced  Schizonl  i.cidu  1 Tests  in  Rhesus  Monkeys 
Summary  of  Combination  Studies 


WRAIR  Drug 
Number 


Combination  Minimum 
Ratio  Curative 
Dose 

(mg/kg/day) 


Number  of  Monkeys 
(total  cured/ 
total  treated) 


159122+180872 


1:3.2 


0.33:1.05 


2978+6798 


0.005:0.08 


4629+5949 


1:1.5 


10:15 


2978+448 


0.u4:0.32 


Table  3.  Summary  of  Radical  Curative  Tests  in  Rhesus  Monkeys 
Sporozoite  Induced  Tests 


Type  of  Compound 


WRAIR  Drug  Number  Minimum  Curative  Dose** 

(with  4.0  mg/kg/day  of 
chloroquine  phosphate 
(mg/kg/day) 


8-Aminoquinoline 


4234 

106147 

182232 

183489 

211820 


* NC  (10.0) 
3.16 
3.16 
3.16 
10.0 


Miscellaneous 


14262 

222249 

223660 


* NC  (10.0) 

* NC  (10.0) 

* NC  (10.0) 


* Not  curative.  The  compound  did  not  cure  at  the  maximum 
dose  tested.  The  maximum  tested  dose  is  indicated  in 
parentheses. 


**  Administered  with  4.0  mg/kg/day  of  chloroquine  phosphate 


z 


i.  J.,m  iu|,iuji*wiii.«iuiji)pa|.-||IB|«i.M> 


" 


Suppression  of  parasitemia  was  indicative  of  blood  schizonticidal 
activity,  and  post- treatment  day  20,  splenectomy  was  performed 
on  monkeys  in  which  there  was  no  evidence  of  parasitemia. 
Splenectomized  monkeys  which  were  continuously  negative  for 
malarial  parasites  through  post- treatment  day  50  were  considered 
cured . 

Sporozoite  Induced  Radical  Curative  Tests:  A.  balabacensis 

mosquitoes  were  used  for  production  of  sporozoites.  A rhesus 
monkey,  inoculated  with  P_.  cynomolgi  strain  B.  approximately 
one  month  prior  to  the  anticipated  mosquito  feed,  was  used  as 
a donor.  Splenectomy  was  performed  to  assure  a rising  parasitemia 
at  the  time  of  mosquito  feed.  Once  the  parasitemia  reached  10*4 
parasitized  erythrocytes  per  cmm,  but  prior  to  the  period  of 
descending  parasitemia,  three  separate  batches  of  mosquitoes 
were  fed  on  consecutive  days. 

Post-feed  day  6,  mosquitoes  were  examined  for  gut  oocysts. 

Twenty  to  80  oocysts  per  gut  was  considered  optimum  for 
sporozoite  development.  Absence  of  oocysts  was  indicative  of 
an  unsuccessful  mosquito  feed.  Post- feed  day  14,  sporozoites 
were  harvested  and  diluted  to  contain  5-20  x 10^  sporozoites 
per  ml,  (approximately  15  mosquito  salivary  gland  pairs  per  ml). 
Each  test  monkey  was  inoculated  intravenously  with  one  ml  of  the 
sporozoite  suspension. 

Parasitemia  normally  developed  in  eight  days,  and  once  there 
were  5-25  x 10^  parasites  per  cmm,  drugs  were  administered  orally 
for  seven  days.  Chloroquine  phosphate  (WR1544)  at  4.0  mg/kg/day 
was  given  simultaneously  with  all  test  drugs  by  the  same  route. 
Blood  was  examined  for  malarial  parasites  daily  for  12  days, 
then  every  two  days  thereafter.  Monkeys  which  remained  negative 
through  post -treatment  day  20  were  splenectomized  and  observed 
for  an  additional  33  days.  If  parasites  were  absent  through 
post-treatment  day  53  the  drug  was  considered  curative. 

RESULTS : Blood  Schizonticidal  Tests:  A total  of  12  experimental 

drugs  were  evaluated  for  blood  schizonticidal  activity.  Minimum 
curative  doses  are  indicated  in  Table  1.  Combination  studies 
were  conducted  to  meet  special  drug  development  requirements. 

Four  sets  of  drug  combinations  were  tested  and  the  initial, 
results  shown  in  Table  2 suggest  that  there  is  synergistic 
action. 


1138 


I Pf  Ifl 1 I 


Sporozoite  Induced  Radical  Curative  Tests : Development  of 
sporozoites  following  engorgement  of  mosquitoes  on  splenectomized 
donor  monkeys  was  not  consistent . In  order  to  obtain  a more 
reliable  system  for  mass  sporozoite  production,  plans  were 
initiated  to  utilize  intact  donor  monkeys  for  future  experiments. 
A total  of  eight  experimental  drugs  were  evaluated  for  radical 
curative  properties.  A minimum  curative  dose  for  each  is 
indicated  in  Table  3. 

SUMMARY ; Rhesus  monkeys  infected  with  trophozoite  induced 
£.  cynomolgi  strain  B.  were  used  to  evaluated  twelve  single 
drugs  and  four  drug  combinations  for  blood  schizonticidal 
activity.  A sporozoite  induced  test  system  was  used  to 
evaluate  eight  drugs  for  radical  curative  activity. 

5.  In  vitro  Gametogony  of  P.  falciparum 


OBJECTIVE : To  establish  an  in  vitro  technique  for  the  production 

and  maintenance  of  sexual  erythrocytic  forms  of  P_.  falicparum. 

BACKGROUND : Despite  extensive  studies  of  gametocytes  the 

gametogony  of  plasmodial  species  is  still  not  fully  known.  To 
date  no  conclusion  has  been  made  on  the  origin  of  gametocytes 
regarding  whether  they  arise  from  special  merozoites  or  if  a 
particular  stimuli  is  required  to  trigger  their  development. 

In  human  infections  mature  gametocytes  appear  in  peripheral 
circulation,  with  the  developing  stages  being  confined  to  the 
bone  marrow.  Only  during  severe  infections  dc  immature  forms 
appear  in  peripheral  smears.  Although  these  sexual  parasites 
do  not  cause  clinical  symptoms,  their  existence  could  prevent 
the  eradication  of  malaria  in  a particular  area.  Some  anti- 
malarials  utilized  in  treatment  affect  the  cresent  wave,  where 
gametocyte  numbers  are  not  suppressed  during  treatment  but  are 
increased  (4).  Gametocidal  effects  of  various  drugs  therefore 
need  to  be  tested.  An  in  vitro  test  system  would  greatly 
facilitate  determination  of  these  effects. 


PROGRESS : In  previous  studies  a technique  for  the  in  vitro 

culture  of  erythrocytic  asexual  £.  falciparum  parasites  was 
developed  (5).  The  culture  technique  proved  to  be  well  suited 
for  studies  of  plasmodial  response  to  different  antimalarials 
both  morphologically  and  radiochemically  (6).  Studies  of 
sexual  parasites  in  vitro  are  now  being  performed  utilizing  a 
modification  of  this  technique.  During  the  culture  period, 


c 7 iwi*1 


nutrients  for  the  growing  parasites  are  replenished  and  their 
metabolites  are  removed  at  various  intervals.  Parasites  have 
been  maintained  in  culture  up  to  228  hours  using  this  procedure. 
Bacterial  contamination  has  prevented  a longer  culture  period. 
Infected  blood  specimens  for  culture  were  obtained  from  patients 
attending  the  Somdej  Sri  Racha  Hospital,  Cholburi,  Thailand. 
Pretreatment  samples  were  collected  randomly.  In  all  cases, 
a control  culture  was  initiated  within  a few  hours  and  aliquots 
of  blood  were  frozen  for  subsequent  studies  (7). 

The  development  of  gametocytes  ill  vitro  was  successful  in 
cultures  of  blood  from  four  different  patients.  None  of  these 
infected  blood  specimens  exhibited  the  sexual  form  of  the 
parasites  upon  initial  examination.  Gametocytes  were  detected 
after  48  hours  incubation  in  one  patient,  while  the  remainder 
were  observed  at  65,  132  and  138  hours  incubation  respectively. 
The  gametocytes  progressed  to  more  mature  stages  during  the 
culture  period.  The  development  of  gametocytes  in  vitro  was 
confirmed  by  the  observation  of  two  immature  gametocytes  in 
one  erythrocyte.  This  form  of  parasitized  red  cell  normally 
occurs  in  the  bone  marrow  or  spleen.  In  the  same  smear,  a 
number  of  erythrocytes  with  multiple  infection  of  trophozoites 
were  seen  indicating  an  active  production  of  new  broods  in  the 
culture . 

Intact  gametocytes  varied  from  1.4%  to  5.4%  of  asexual  parasites 
(counted  against  10,000  r.b.e.).  A small  number  of  mature 
gametocytes  were  detected  after  204  hours  incubation.  Mature 
female  gametocytes  were  long  and  thin,  but  not  typically  curved. 
The  nuclear  chromatin  appeared  as  a dense,  deeply  stained  mass 
located  in  the  center,  but  not  obscured  by  the  pigment  rodlets. 
Mature  males  were  short  with  round  ends,  and  pink  cytoplasm. 

The  chromatin  was  diffused,  pale  staining  and  somewhat  obscured 
by  the  pigment  granules. 

Late  gametocytes  were  numerous  with  the  females  appearing  in 
various  shapes.  Those  most  often  seen  were  spindle  shaped  and 
pointed  while  a small  number  were  elliptical.  The  chromatin 
appeared  as  a deeply  stained  mass , centrally  located  or  displaced 
to  one  side.  The  pigment  was  rod  shaped  and  was  seen  clumped 
near  the  chromatin  mass. 

The  number  of  late  male  gametocytes  was  very  small  when  compared 
to  the  female  population.  The  morphology  was  similar  to  that 
described  in  the  fully  matured  males  except  that  they  were  more 
rounded  than  spindle  shaped.  In  both  populations  the  female/male 
gametocyte  ratio  was  approximately  3:1. 


1140 


! 


The  morphology  of  both  mature  gametocytes  varied  from  the 
typical  cresent  shapes  found  in  peripheral  blood  smears.  These 
alterations  may  be  the  result  of  the  unnatural  conditions 
produced  in  the  in_  vitro  culture  system.  On  only  one  occasion 
did  it  appear  that  the  gametocytes  were  in  the  exflagellation 
stage.  The  appearance  of  these  gametocytes  were  similar  in 
that  there  was  only  one  long  flagellum  extending  from  a single 
pole  of  the  gametocyte.  It  has  been  confirmed  that  under 
unnatural  conditions  the  exflagellation  process  results  in  such 
appearance  (8). 

In  addition,  a number  of  gametocytes  with  a pink  staining  mass 
extruding  from  the  body  of  the  gametocytes  were  seen.  A similar 
observation  of  this  form  of  gametocyte  was  first  described  in 
1960.  It  was  continued  that  this  appearance  was  confined  to 
P . falciparum  only  ( 9 ) . 

These  observations  prompted  efforts  to  study  the  infectivity  of 
these  gametocytes.  A number  of  clean  Anopheles  balabacensis 
mosquitoes  were  fed  on  cultures  of  P_.  falciparum  at  varying 
intervals.  Satisfactory  numbers  of  mosquitoes  were  fully 
engorged  after  each  feeding , but  no  oocyst  development  was 
detected  seven  days  later. 

Gametocytes  also  developed  in  subsequent  cultures  made  utilizing 
frozen  blood  specimens  from  two  patients.  This  compared  favorably 
with  cultures  of  freshly  drawn  blood  from  the  same  patients. 

No  oocysts  developed  in  mosquitoes  fed  cn  these  cultures. 


It  is  significant  that  the  sexual  cycle  can  be  initiated  in 
vitro  with  blood  containing  asexual  parasites.  The  observation 
of  gametocyte  production  and  exflagellation  indicates  that  this 
culture  system  possibly  provides  the  proper  conditions  for  the 
generation,  growth,  and  maintenance  through  maturity,  of  the 
sexual  forms  of  the  parasite.  Failure  to  produce  oocysts  in 
mosquitoes  may  be  due  to  various  factors.  Gametocyte  population 
may  be  too  low,  or  they  may  not  be  infective  at  the  time  of 
feeding.  The  in  vitro  environment  may  not  provide  the  conditions 
necessary  to  produce  gametocytes  which  are  infective.  Efforts 
to  improve  the  existing  culture  technique  are  currently  being 
pursued  in  this  laboratory. 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00,  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  336  Field  studies  on  drug  resistant  malaria 


Literature  cited: 

References : 

1.  Chin,  W.  , and  Rattanarithikul , M. : The  Evaluation  of  the 
Presumptive  and  Radical  Treatments  Against  Falciparum  Malaria 
in  Thailand.  Southeast  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  4_:400, 

1973. 

2.  Hall,  A.P.,  Doberstyn,  E.B.,  and  Mettaprakong , V.,  Sonkom, 

P.:  Falciparum  Malaria  Cured  by  Quinine  Followed  by  Sulfadoxine- 
pyrimethamine.  Brit.  Med.  J.,  2:15-17,  1975. 

3.  Doberstyn,  E.B.,  and  Hall,  A.P.,  Vetvutanapibul , K.  , and 
Sonkom,  P.:  Single  Dose  Therapy  of  Falciparum  Malaria  Using 
Pyrimethamine.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  £5^14-19,  1976. 

4.  Field,  J.W.,  Shute,  P.G.,  and  Fong,  Y.L.:  The  Microscopic 
Diagnosis  of  Human  Malaria  part  II.  Institute  for  Medical 
Research,  Federation  of  Malaya  No.  24:  36,  1956. 

5.  Diggs,  C.,  Pavanand,  K.,  et  al:  Penetration  of  Human  Fetal 

Erythrocytes  by  Plasmodium  falciparum  In  vitro.  J.  Parasit. 
57:187-188,  1971. 

6.  Iber,  P.  , Pavanand,  K.,  et  al : Evaluation  of  In  vitro  Drug 

Sensitivity  of  Human  Plasmodium  falciparum  by  Incorporation  of 
Radioactive  Isoleucine.  J.  Med.  Asso.  Thailand.  58:559-566, 

1975. 

7.  Pavanand,  K. , Permpanich,  B.,  et  al:  Preservation  of 

Plasmodium  falciparum  Infected  Erythrocytes  for  In  vitro  Culture. 

J.  Parasit.  60:537-539,  1974. 

8.  Garnham,  P.C.C.:  Malaria  Parasites  and  Other  Haemosporidia . 
Blackwell  Scientific  Pulbications . p.  21,  1966. 

9.  Field,  J.W.,  Sandosham,  A. A.,  and  Fong,  Y.L.:  The  Microscopical 
Diagnosis  of  Human  Malaria  part  I.  Institute  for  Medical  Research 
Federation  of  Malaya  No.  30:136,  158,  1963. 


1142 


Publications : 


1.  Davidson,  D.E.,  Johnsen,  D.O.,  Tanticharoenyos , P.,  Hickman, 

R.L.,  and  Kinnamon,  D.E.:  Evaluating  New  Antimalarial  Drugs 

Against  Trophosoite  Induced  Plasmodium  cynomolgi  Malaria  in 
Rhesus  Monkeys.  Amer.  J.  Trop.  Med.  £ Hyg . 25:26-33,  1976. 

2.  Doberstyn,  E.B.,  Hall,  A.P.,  Vetvutanapibul , K. , Sonkom,  P.: 
Single-Dose  Therapy  of  Falciparum  Malaria  Using  Pyrimethamine 

in  Combination  with  Diformyldapsone  or  Sulfadoxine.  Amer.  J. 

Trop.  Med. 6 Hyg.  25:14-19,  1976. 

3.  Hall,  A.P.,  Segal,  H.E.,  Pearlman,  E.J.,  Phintuyothin,  P., 

Kosakal,  S.:  Comparison  of  a 9-Phenanthrene  Methanol  (WR  33063) 

a 4-Quinoline  Methanol  (WR  30090),  and  Quinine  for  Treatment  of 
Falciparum  Malaria  in  Thailand.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Trop.  Med.  d 
Hyg.  69:342-349,  1975. 

4.  Hall,  A.P.,  Doberstyn,  E.B.,  Nanakorn,  A.,  Sonkom,  P. : 
Falciparum  Malaria  Semi-Resistant  to  Clindamycin.  Brit.  Med.  J. 

2.:  12-14,  1975. 

5.  Hall,  A.P.,  Segal,  H.E.,  Pearlman,  E.J.,  Phintuyothin,  P., 

Kosakal,  S.:  Amodiaquine  Resistant  Falciparum  Malaria  in 

Thailand.  Amer.  J.  Trop.  Med.  6 Hyg.  24:575-580,  1975. 

6.  Hall,  A.P.,  Doberstyn,  E.B.,  Mettaprakong,  V.,  Sonkom,  P.: 
Falciparum  Malaria  Cured  by  Quinine  Followed  by  Sulfadoxine- 
Pyrimethamine.  Brit.  Med.  J.  £:  15-17,  1975. 

7.  Hall,  A.P.;  The  Treatment  of  Chloroquine-Resistant 
Falciparum  Malaria.  Ninth  International  Congress  on  Chemotherapy, 
London,  July  1975. 

8.  Hall,  A.P.:  The  Treatment  of  Malaria.  Brit.  Med.  J.  1_: 

323-328,  1976. 

9.  Pearlman,  E.J.,  Thiemanun,  W.  and  Castaneda,  B.F.:  The 

Suppression  of  P_.  falciparum  and  P_.  vivax  Parasitemias  by  a 
Diformyldapsone-Pyrimethamine  Combination.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med. 

6 Hyg.  24:901-999,  1975. 

10.  Pearlman,  E.J.,  Hall,  A.P.;  Prevention  of  Chloroquine- 
Resistant  Falciparum  Malaria.  Ann.  Intern.  Med.  82:590-591, 

1975. 


1143 


\ 


■ J 


Ift  START  DATE 

72  07 

14  EITIMATEO  COMPLETION  OATC 

C0NT 

IS  TUNDINO  AGENCY 

DA  | 

IB  PERFORMANCE  MEtHOO 

2.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT  ORANT 

A OATES/E  F Ft  CTIVf:  EXPIRATION: 

ft  NUMBER:* 

C.  TYPE:  4 AMOUNT: 

ft  KINO  Of  ABARO:  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

*4  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

ft  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VMS 

ft  FUNDS  ff»  BmmmNJ 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

trFcEoinb 

75 

7.2 

3'  1 

76 

7.0 

19^ 

1».  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORGANISATION  j | 

tO.  PERFORMING  ORGANISATION  j J 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AMO  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

^^UNMAR^^^f 

U 


ft.  OATC  PRtV  SUM*RY 

75  07  01 


« KIND  or  tUMHART 


10  NO  'CODES:* 


D.  Change 


RROORAM ELEMENT 


ft.  CONTRIBUTING 


C.  COMTRHUT.ro  CARDS  114F 


62759A 


u 


PROJECT  NUMBER 


3A7S2759A829 


I.  title  fpMCMMM  <HR  IHWtlr  ClMilHMUlii  CmUmj* 

(U)  Synthesis  of  Antlmalarial  Drugs 


1 AGENCY  ACCCI 

DA  OB  6495 


RlfRAMNO^ 

NA 


76  07  01 


i onn  Mirr* 

NL 


TASK  AREA  NUMBER 


00 


** PORT  CORTBOL  IfBEM 

DD-DRkE(AR)036 


0k  SPECIFIC  OAT  A * 
CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 
T»»  Pup 


*.  LEVEL  OP  SUN 
A.  BOOS  MMT 


MORN  UNIT  NUMB 


ML 


ta  SCICHTIFIC  AMO  tlCMMOt  OOlC  A L AAKAI 

012100  Organic  Chemistry 


aooacu :*  Washington,  DC  20012 


[ INDIVIDUAL 


"*■“  Joy,  COL  R.J.T. 

T«L»M.oMa:  202-576~3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


"“•'Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  Medicinal  Chemistry 
Washington,  DC  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  fFwnUaA  MAN  II  V ft  4N«Nil(  riMlltwtMwj 

NAME:*  Sweeney,  T.R.,  PhD 
TELEPHONE:  202-576-3731 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOATORS 

Canfield,  C.J.,  COL 

NAME; 


I^H^BrS7^**«*^'Tacn  «*ir  i cTan7I*S7JSTcIX5“ 

(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Drug  Development;  (U)  Antimalarials;  (U)  Chemical  Syntheses 


IS.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  Ift  APPROACH.  Ift  PROGRESS  fFvmleA  ln+nA*i  H'MMpi  I Pe*.  I life*  Sr  PNt(N  Mai  •!  Mrt  •!»  Securlfr  CIMMIMcmUmi  CpPm.J 

23.  (U)  The  objective  is  to  manage,  integrate,  and  provide  technical  direction  for 
both  a contract  and  in-house  program  to  obtain  potentially  active  antlmalarial  compounds 
for  military  use  through  rational  organic  syntheses. 

24.  (U)  Necessary  research  areas  are  defined,  proposed  research  evaluated,  ongoing 
research  guided,  evaluated,  and  Integrated  with  the  other  program  elements.  Technical 
advice  is  obtained  through  an  Ad  Hoc  Study  Group  on  Medicinal  Chemistry.  Contract 
exchange  by  contractors  through  technical  meetings. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  The  area  of  potential  curative  and  prophylactic  agents  has  re- 

ceived the  greatest  attention  with  the  8-aminoquinolines  receiving  the  most  attention 
synthetically.  Structural  requirements  for  greatest  activity  in  the  P.  cynomolgl/Rhesus 
system,  have  been  'istablished  but  these  may  be  modified  as  the  result  of  testing  yet  to 
be  conducted  on  a number  of  compounds  still  in  the  pipeline.  The  toxicity  inherent  in 
this  class  of  compounds  necessitates  a cautious  development.  Other  active  synthesis 
areas  are  of  a probing  nature.  Two  compounds  that  emerged  from  the  large  scale  synthesii 
program  this  year,  viz.  WR-177  602  and  WR-194  965  are  targeted  for  INDs  in  FY-77  as  is 
one  earlier  compound,  WR-172  435.  An  IND  on  WR-180  409  was  also  prepared  this  year. 
During  the  year  498  compounds  were  received  from  the  rational  synthesis  program  of  which 
about  250  were  target  compounds.  An  additional  5155  were  submitted  under  the  no-dollar 
agreement,  216  as  gifts  and  168  from  purchases.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $99,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul- 
30  Sep  76. 


IyNNMi  to  contract  or*  u 


i •rlimsfr'i  iNinNl 


DD,’””J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OP  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DD  FORMS  14BSA  1 NOV  68 
AND  I4BS-1  1 MAR  BE  (FOR  ARMY  USEl  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1144 


.T?X"77  irWRKNRW.'' 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 

Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  337  Synthesis  of  Antimalarial  Drugs 

Investigators: 

1 

Principal:  Thomas  R.  Sweeney,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  COL  Craig  J.  Canfield,  MC;  Richard  E.  Strube,  Ph.D.; 

Edgar  A.  Steck,  Ph.D.;  Bing  T.  Poon,  Ph.D.;  June  A.  Page; 

Daniel  L.  Klayman,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Peter  S.  Loizeaux,  VC; 

CPT  John  P.  Scovill,  Ph.D.;  Ruby  N.  Boyd;  SP5  Joseph  F. 

Bartosevich;  SP5  Carl  J.  Mason;  SP4  Larry  J.  Hooks. 

The  Research  Contract  Chemical  Synthesis  Program 

During  FY-76  there  were  13  contracts  active  in  the  rational  synthe- 
sis program;  8 of  these  will  be  carried  over  into  FY-7T.  Three  pro- 
posals in  new  areas,  approved  by  the  Medicinal  Chemistry  Study  Group, 
are  awaiting  funding.  During  the  year  five  papers  were  published,  two 
patents  issued  and  one  applied  for  as  the  result  of  work  done  on  the 
contract  synthesis  program. 

Research  areas  that  will  be  discontinued  at  the  end  of  FY-76  be- 
cause of  contract  terminations  include  the  oxazlnediones,  distamycin 
and  its  analogs,  and  the  3'-alkyl  cordycepin  analogs.  No  activity  was 
observed  with  the  oxazlnediones  or  the  Cordycepin  analogs.  Distamycin 
and  analogs  have  not  yet  been  submitted;  they  will  be  tested  as  soon  as 
possible. 

The  largest  concerted  synthetic  effort  during  FY-76  was  in  the 
synthesis  of  8-aminoqulnolines  as  potential  prophylactic  and  curative 
agents.  Several  compounds  more  active  than  primaquin  were  obtained 
but  the  toxicity  associated  with  them  will  necessitate  a cautious 
development.  The  difficulties  associated  with  the  termination  of  the 
£.  cynomolgi/rhesus  curative  test  system  at  the  Southern  Research 
Institute  and  its  reinstitution  at  SEATO  have  resulted  in  the  accumula- 
tion of  a number  of  untested  8-aminoquinolines.  The  synthesis  of 
additional  compounds  in  this  class  will  be  curtailed  until  the  biologi- 
cal feedback  can  be  brought  up  to  date. 

Because  of  the  consistent,  but  moderate,  activity  uncovered  in  the 
3-amino-6-aryl-l,2,4,5-tetrazines,  a new  class  of  compounds  to  show 
antimalarial  activity,  a number  of  these  were  synthesized  in  order  to 
investigate  the  structure-activity  relationships.  One  of  the  better 
ones,  WR-216  693,  was  selected  for  monkey  studies. 

Probing  synthetic  work  has  been  carried  on  in  a number  of  areas. 

These  include  analogs  of  the  above  mentioned  tetrazines;  basically 


1145 


substituted  (trichloromethyl) heterocycles  and  certain  of  their  N-oxides; 
amodiaquin  analogs;  l,3-bis-[ [4-(aminoalkylamino)benzylidene]amino]- 
quinadines;  acridones;  carboxylic  acid  derivatives  of  known  structural 
types;  3,5-diamino-l,6-dihydro-l,2,4-triazines.  Should  any  of  these 
classes  prove  to  have  significant  and  interesting  activity,  the  class 
would  be  expanded. 

Work  on  the  synthesis  of  potential  hypoxanthine-guaninephosphori- 
bosyl  transferase  inhibitors  was  continued  because  of  the  compelling 
biochemical  rationale.  Emphasis  was  directed  to  the  8-substituted 
hypoxanthines  and  guanines  when  no  activity  was  uncovered  in  the  7- 
substituted  series.  Some  encouragement  was  received  from  the  former 
groups  when  enzyme  inhibitory  activity  was  demonstrated  in  an  in  vitro 
system;  this  activity  notwithstanding,  the  same  compounds  were  inactive 
as  antimalarials . In  addition  to  the  8-substituted  compounds  some 
ring-modified  compounds  analogs  of  hypoxanthine  are  being  synthesized 
as  potential  enzyme  inhibitors. 

The  Preparations  Laboratories 

The  preparations  laboratories,  used  chiefly  to  resynthesize  on  a 
larger  scale,  selected  compounds  that  are  needed  for  testing  in  large 
animals,  or  for  toxicological  or  clinical  studies,  have  continued  to 
support  the  program.  Only  two  of  the  three  contracts  active  in  FY-76 
will  be  carried  into  FY-7T. 

The  work  of  the  preparations  laboratories  is  summarized  in  the 
following  table.  It  should  be  realized  that  some  of  the  compounds 
received  in  FY-76  were  requested  in  FY-75. 


Target  Compounds 


FY-76 

>1000  g 

100-1000  g 

<100  g 

Intermediates 

Total 

Requested 

1 

15 

20 

36 

Received 

6 

12 

23 

61 

102 

The  compounds  that  were  received  in  quantitites  of  greater  than  1 kg 
include  the  following  IND  compounds : WR-142  490  (2  batches) , WR-142  490/ 

WR-177  602  mixture  in  the  ratio  43/57,  WR-177  602,  and  WR-194  965. 

The  one  contract  dedicated  to  the  synthesis  of  radioactively 
tagged  compounds  for  use  in  pharmacological  studies  was  also  active 
during  the  year. 


1146 


The  Analytical  Laboratory 


The  analytical  laboratory  is  used  to  check  the  identity  and  purity 
of  bulk  and  formulated  drugs  and  to  determine  the  stability  of  formula- 
tions. The  following  table  summarizes  the  reports  received  from  this 
laboratory. 

Analyses 


Bulk 

Formulations 

Stability  Determinations 

Requested 

9 

9 

9 

Received 

12 

5 

4 

Acquisition  of  Compounds 

The  following  table  summarizes  the  number  of  various  classes  of 

compounds  received  during  FY-76. 

Original 

Not  Original 

Purchased 

168 

8 

Gifts 

216 

114 

Synthesized 

498 

67 

Discreet 

5155 

662 

Total 

6037 

851 

The  following  table  shows  the  evolution  in  the  preparations  labora- 
tory cost  of  Mefloquine.  The  reduced  costs  are  the  result  of  experience 
and  improved  s thetic  approaches.  Because  of  the  growing  importance 
of  Mefloquine  these  figures  may  have  important  commercial  significance. 


Date 

Sept.  71 
Oct.  74 
Sept.  75 
June  76 


Amount  Made  (g) 

2,541 

4,064 

8»414* 

19,000 


Cost  ($/kg) 

20,000-25,000 

8,351 

7,563 

2,604 


erythro-threo  mixture 


1147 


Organic  Synthesis  Section 


An  investigation  of  the  synthesis  of  a new  class  of  potential  causal 
prophylactic  agents,  the  4-amino-2-methoxyacridines  was  started  with  a 
series  of  model  experiments  using  8-amino-4-methyl-6-methoxyquinoline  to 
evaluate  various  methods  for  the  introduction  of  sidechains  onto  the 
amino  group.  Upon  arrival  of  the  4-amino-2-methoxy  acridine  from  the 
prep  laboratory  in  modest  quantity,  the  compound  has  been  successfully 
alkylated  with  6-bromohexylphthalimide  and  4-bromopentylphthaiimide. 

The  resultant  products  have  been  converted  by  hydrazinolysis  to  the 
desired  primary  amino  compounds. 

Alkylations  of  4-amino-2-methoxyacridine  with  other  secondary  alkyl 
halides,  however,  have  proceeded  poorly  yielding  either  unchanged  start- 
ing materials  under  mild  conditions  or  complex  mixtures  under  drastic 
conditions.  These  difficulties  can  probably  be  ascribed  to  the  fact 
that  the  least  basic  amino  group  located  on  the  acridine  nucleus  is  the 
one  located  in  the  4-position. 

Since  October  1,  1975,  a total  of  64  new  thiosemicarbazones  have 
been  submitted  for  screening.  Most  of  these  have  been  synthesized  via 
the  novel  route  developed  by  us,  namely  the  reaction  of  an  amine  with  an 
arylidene  derivative  of  S-methyl-dithiocarbazate. 

The  following  structure/activity  relationships  have  been  observed 
for  the  thiosemicarbazones:  (1)  the  aldehyde  or  ketone  precursor  lead- 

ing to  the  most  active  thiosemicarbazone  is  2-acetylpyridine;  2-pro- 
pionylpyridine  imparts  diminished  activity.  The  placement  of  the  acetyl 
group  elsewhere  on  the  pyridine  ring  or  on  another  nucleus  tends  to 
eliminate  activity;  (2)  substitution  in  the  4-position  of  the  thiosemi- 
carbazone with  antimalarial  sidechain  diamines  such  as  novoldiamine,  as 
well  as  other  aliphatic  groups,  destroys  activity.  Activity  is  impart- 
ed, however,  by  aromatic  and  benzyl-type  substitution.  What  is  unknown, 
as  yet,  is  what  substituent  on  the  aromatic  or  benzyl  ring  systems 
optimizes  antimalarial  activity. 

Data  Processing 

During  the  past  year  activity  has  continued  to  center  around  efforts 
to  bring  all  data  systems  in-house  and  up  grade  existing  capabilities. 

1 . Inventory 

Work  on  the  new  inventory  system  was  temporarily  suspended  pending 
decisions  on  the  direction  of  the  chemical  system.  Work  has  resumed 
and  the  system  is  scheduled  to  begin  parallel  processing  in  January  77. 
Certain  improvements  planned  for  the  new  system,  such  as  special  codes 
for  open  and  discreet  return  samples,  combination  studies,  and  blind 
samples,  extension  of  30-day  edit  criteria  to  60  days  and  the  retention 
of  the  original  bottle  number  in  the  return  sample  record,  were 


1148 


implemented  in  the  existing  system  to  facilitate  operations  during  the 
delay.  The  computer  file  was  verified  by  checking  against  the  physical 
inventory . 

2.  Chemistry 

Personnel  aid  administrative  changes  necessitated  a review  of  the 
status  of  the  proposed  chemical  system  conversion.  Final  plans  have 
been  submitted  and  approved.  The  initial  conversion  of  the  data  base 
was  accomplished  and  correction  of  structures  is  currently  being  con- 
ducted on  line  through  the  IMLAC  terminal.  Work  is  proceeding  according 
to  schedule  with  the  first  series  of  programs  due  to  be  operational 
early  in  1977. 

3.  Biology 

The  biology  computer  system  continues  to  expand  as  new  testing  pro- 
grams are  developed  to  cover  a broader  spectrum  of  parasitic  diseases. 
Programming  of  the  biology  system  for  the  CDC  3500  and  conversion  of 
current  master  files  was  completed.  System  and  program  documentation  is 
80Z  completed.  Parallel  processing  has  been  delayed  until  the  chemistry 
indexing  method  for  interfacing  biology,  inventory,  and  chemistry  files 
is  completed. 

An  additional  52,000  records  have  been  added  to  the  biology  data 
base  during  FY-76.  Two  new  test  systems  were  incorporated  into  both  old 
(IBM  7090/7094)  and  new  (CDC  3500)  biology  systems  and  several  programs 
were  modified  to  accept  additional  test  information.  In  order  to  inter- 
face biology  with  chemistry,  the  old  system  must  be  kept  operational. 
Completion  of  the  chemistry  system  conversion  to  the  CDC  3500  will 
eliminate  the  necessity  of  maintaining  the  old  biology  system.  Addi- 
tional modifications  will  be  necessary  to  accommodate  files  generated 
under  Data  Management  Routines,  a new  software  package  obtained  by  the 
Division  of  Biometrics  and  Medical  Information  Processing. 


1149 


A DATE  AMIV  »UN*«V 

75  07  01 

A NINO  OP  IUMNART 

D.  Change 

• tuNMARt  tCTV* 

u 

A NORN  MCURITV® 
11 

» RIORAOINC^ 

— NA 

1 a OR 

• **N  MSTR*N 

1L 

•I  SFtCIPIC  OAT  A • 
CONTRACTOR  ACC  III 

O tt»  Dm 

S LIVCL  OP  turn 
A.  SMS  IRST 

IO  NO  COOCS*  PROQRAN  (LCMCMT 

PROJECT  NUMRCR 

TASK  AR(A  NUNSIR 

HORN  UNIT  NUNKR 

T 


3 RllFONilSLI  DOO  ORSANIlATION 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
‘Washington,  DC  20012 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECH  MOL  OCT  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


wnrctsrjr  ryroToT 


| mmfoi tr  comntot  irwmoL 

DD-DRhE(AR>bJ * 


b.  COM T MRU  T INC 


62Z52A 


3A762759AB29 


-oa. 


fAROS  1 1 4F  1 

II  TITL*  (P»*c*A»  •<*  ClMMlflMItai  C*M|' 

(U)  Protective  Immunity  in  Malaria 


a ICItNTIPIC  AMO  TSCNNOLOOICA 


ii  itANf  BA? 


Biology  010100 


l»  COMT 


l«  IlYMtATCO  COM^Lf  TIOM  OATf 

£QNI 


» OAT 1 4/1  P *IC  TlVIi 
kk  HUIIMR  * 

C TVN( 


NA 


(■MIRATION 


4 AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


KtMOMtl  RL  I INDIVIDUAL 

"*•*  Robert  J.T.  Joy,  COL 
2Q2.b7^a.m 


TtLKRWONI: 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


nranarerKxr 


(U)  Immunity;  (U)  Antigens;  (U)  Protozoa; 
(U)  Tropical  Medicinei  Oil  Antibodies 

T ■ CM  MIC  AL  ONJRCTIVt  * It  Al 


14  P unoim  R Aimer 


_DA_ 


M AOOUNCII  IITiHATt 

mmiBi 


PIOC  AL 
VC  AN 


76 

rwr- 

77 


1.  Ft RPORIRNR  ORRANHa  ION 


M HI  A #6  RM  AMCC  MCtMOD 

C.  In-House 


R FROPtSS IOMAL  HAN  VRS 


1.0 


2.0 


.'17 


218 


■••Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  CD&I 


•MNCIPAl  IN VCCTIRA TOR  fRwMa*  MAR  M V B.  , 

"*“**  Carter  L.  Diggs 
........  202-576-3544 

SOCIAL  OCCURS T V ACCOUNT  NUMMr  I 


AMOCIATI  IN  VllTIAA  TORO 


10  TICNNICAL  OBJtCTIVt,  f«  ANNROACN.  It  PRO  OR  CM  (PnUA  MIWMN  M*MH (AM  M »»■»*»  WAN  Mtl  •*  MA  MO  (•«*<(*  ClAMMlRf  •>«••  CM.) 

23  (U)  The  objective  of  this  work  unit  is  to  elucidate  the  protective  mechanisms 
involved  in  immunity  to  malaria,  a disease  which  has  repeatedly  Impeded  military 
operations,  and  to  investigate  the  feasibility  of  immunoprophylaxis  against  this 
disease. 

24  (u)  The  approach  used  in  these  studies  is  to  study  both  in  animal  models  and 
through  the  use  of  in  vitro  techniques  the  response  elicidated  by  the  malaria  parasite 
on  the  immune  system,  and  to  determine  the  relative  roles  of  cellular  and  molecular 
mediators  in  these  processes. 

25  (U)  75  07-7606  Marked  improvement  in  culture  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  has  been 

achieved  with  maintenance  of  cultures  for  three  weeks,  starting  with  cryopreserved 
inocula.  Insight  into  the  characteristics  of  the  receptors  on  the  erythrocyte  for 

falciparum  has  been  gained  through  use  of  this  technique.  Studies  in  murine  models 
have  confirmed  and  extended  previous  work  indicating  the  efficacy  of  irradiated  blood 
forms  as  experimental  immunogen  and  of  antibody  as  effector  of  inmuni ty.  For  technical 
report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 July  1 975  - 
30  June  76. 

Support  in  the  amount  of  $38,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul- 
30  Sep  76. 


pMIrMr  in  tNiimiM  1 


'.Zr.1498 


PRIV  lOUl  COITIONS  or  THIS  F OHM  AMI  OSIOLITI  OD  FORMS  I ASS  A 
AND  1 4SS*  I . t MAM  SS  (FOR  ARMY  UBII.Ajyt  OMOLlTI 


•W0°“ 


■Mahi.ilrn— mi  1 1 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 

Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  338  Protective  immunity  in  malaria 

Investigators:  COL  Carter  L.  Diggs,  M.D.,  MAJ  David  Haynes,  M.D. 

Assistants  : Barbara  Flemmings,  B.S.;  Andre  Toussaint,  B.S.,  M.S.; 

James  Dillon,  B.S.;  SP5  Karen  Czarnecky,  B.S. 

I.  Inhibition  of  Plasmodium  berghei  parasitemia  by  Purified  IgG  from 
Immune  Rat  Serum. 


Description.  The  protective  efficacy  of  immune  serum  against  P. 
berghei  is  well  established.  Recent  studies  involving  experimental 
immunization  against  murine  malaria  with  BCG  have  raised  the  possibility 
that  protection  may  not  be  mediated  through  immunoglobulin,  but  by  other 
serum  factors  in  immunized  animals.  The  present  studies  were  designed 
to  test  the  activity  of  highly  purified  IgG  from  rats  immunized  against 
P.  berghei  by  repeated  infection  and  spontaneous  cure.  Immunoglobulin  G 
was  isolated  by  protein  A sepharose  affinity  chromatography.  It  was 
assayed  by  intravenous  administration  into  young  syngeneic  rats  (CDF, 
of  the  Charles  River  Breeding  Laboratory)  at  the  same  time  the  animals 
were  challenged  with  viable  parasites. 

Progress.  The  results  are  shown  in  Table  I in  which  it  can  be  seen 
that  immunoglobulin  G from  immune  animals  was  comparable  in  its  antiparasi- 
tic  efficacy  with  the  serum  from  which  it  was  derived.  In  contrast,  con- 
trol animals  which  received  normal  serum  or  the  IgG  fraction  of  normal 
serum  exhibited  parasitemia  which  was  indistinguishable  from  animals 
receiving  saline.  Immunoelectrophoretic  analysis  of  the  IgG  prepara- 
tions revealed  no  non- IgG  contaminants. 

Discussion.  This  study  demonstrates  that  highly  immunochemical ly 
purified  IgG  antibody  is  active  against  Plasmodium  berghei . The  studies 
do  not  rule  out,  of  course,  the  presence  of  other  active  serum  factors 
in  this  serum  or  in  serum  from  other  sources. 

II.  Cryopreserved  Plasmodium  falciparum:  Long  term  in  vitro  culture 

and  host  erythrocyte  specificity. 

Description.  The  objectives  of  this  research  are  to  develop  a 
reliable  method  of  culturing  P_.  falciparum  in  vitro  which  allows  (1)  the 
use  of  a cryopreserved  inoculum  which  may  be  thawed  at  the  convenience  of 
the  experimenter,  (2)  continuous  growth  and  production  of  merozoites  in 
large  batches  for  biochemical  and  immunological  studies,  (3)  the  bio- 
chemical and  genetic  analysis  of  the  human  erythrocyte  - malaria  mero- 
zoite  surface  interaction,  and  (4)  the  eventual  production  of  an  effective 
malaria  merozoite  component  vaccine. 

This  project  has  utilized  the  cryopreservation  method  of  Diggs,  et.  al . 


»*  --  i.TVJ  - ' 


TABLE  I 


Effect  of  Normal  and  Immune  Serum  and  Staphylococcal  Protein  A Purified 
IgG  on  Parasitemia  Due  to  Plasmodium  berghei 


Treatment 


Median  % Erythrocytes  Parasitized  on  Day 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

9 

12 

14 

16 

19 

21 

Immune  Serum 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0.5 

3 

2.5 

0.5 

1 

0.5 

0 

Normal  Serum 

0 

0 

2 

2 

3 

7 

10 

10 

11 

1 

0 

Immune  IgG 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1 

5.5 

4 

0.5 

0 

0 

0 

Normal  IgG 

0 

0 

2 

3.5 

3 

5 

9 

6 

13 

1 

0.5 

Buffer  Control 

0 

0 

0.5 

2.5 

6.5 

4 

6 

11 

20 

2 

0 

(1975  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  & Hyg.  24:760)  combined  with  a tissue  culture 
technique.  Briefly,  the  parasitized  inoculum  is  mixed  with  test  erythro- 
cytes and  incubated  at  37°  C in  Medium  199  (containing  1.25  g/1  of  NaHC03) 
with  added  glucose,  glutamine,  gentamycin,  TES  buffer,  vitamin  E,  2- 
mercaptoethanol , and  heat  inactivated  fetal  bovine  serum.  All  leucocytes 
have  been  removed  from  the  culture  by  passing  the  blood  cells  through  a 
powdered  cellulose  column.  The  culture  is  incubated  in  equilibrium  with 
3%  C02,  6.6%  O2,  and  90.  4%  N2.  The  medium  and  erythrocytes  were  changed 
every  2 days  in  the  long  term  culture  by  centrifuging  out  the  schizont 
layer  and  resuspending  with  fresh  erythrocytes  and  medium.  The  short  term 
cultures  were  incubated  for  three  days  and  sampled  at  24,  48,  and  72  hours. 
Erythrocytes  were  obtained  from  various  species,  from  humans  with  rare 
blood  types,  and  in  some  cases  human  erythrocyte  were  treated  with  various 
enzymes  before  culture.  Merozoites  were  obtained  by  differential  centri- 
fugation of  48  hour  cultures. 

Progress.  Cryopreserved  blood  has  been  cultured  successfully  for  as 
long  as  22  days  (11  generations)  of  continuous  culture,  and  on  numerous 
instances  for  three  day  periods.  Parasite  forms  seen  after  22  days  of 
culture  include  schizonts,  trophozoites,  ring  forms,  invading  merozoites, 
and  a few  immature  gametocytes.  In  the  three  day  culture  erythrocytes 
from  humans  (including  Duffy  negative  individuals  and  others  with  rare 
blood  tyoes),  chimpanzee,  and  Aotus  monkeys  were  invaded  and  supported 
parasite  growth.  Erythrocytes  from  rhesus  monkeys  and  guinea  pigs  were 
not  invaded  (see  tables  II  and  III).  Analysis  the  invasion  of  enzyme 
treated  erythrocytes  is  in  progress  in  collaboration  with  Dr.  Lou  Miller 
of  the  NIH.  The  yields  of  merozoites  have  been  small,  and  we  hope  to 


increase  production  by  using  a continuous  flow  culture  system. 


Discussion.  This  culture  system  is  being  used  to  study  the  nature 
of  JP.  falciparum  interactions  with  erythrocytes  (Miller,  et.  al.,  manu- 
script in  preparation),  as  has  already  been  done  for  P..  knowlesi  using 
enzyme  treated  and  rare  blood  type  human  erythrocytes.  We  expect  that 
the  culture  of  P_.  falciparum  will  allow  further  biochemical  and  immuno- 
logical studies,  which,  if  accompanied  by  the  production  of  large  numbers 
of  merozoites,  may  lead  to  the  development  of  an  effective  vaccine  for 
malaria. 


TABLE  II 

Malaria  Grown  in  Four  Species  of  Erythrocytes 


Test  Erythrocytes 

Trophozoites* 
at  24  hours 

Trophozoites* 
at  72  hours 

Ratio 
72  to 

Human 

3.7  +1.5 

23.0  +3.1 

6.2 

Chimpanzee 

5.3  +0.9 

33.3  +1.7 

6.3 

Rhesus 

3.0  +1.2 

1.3  +0.3 

0.4 

Guinea  pig 

5.5  +2.5 

1.8  +0.5 

0.3 

♦Numbers  of  trophozoite  forms  per  1 .000  erythrocytes  (mean  + S.E. 
of  triplicate  samples). 


1153 


TABLE  III 


Erythrocytes  i and  R 


Human 

Rhesus 


Human 

Rhesus 


Human 

Rhesus 


T S 
?4  hours 


Ab 


11  0 
12  0 

48  hours 
5 1 

5 z 

/£  hours 
39  o 

1 0 


6 

10 

11 

8 

6 

7 


Numbers  of  parasite  forms  per  1,000  human  or  rhesus  erythrocytes  at  24, 
48,  and  72  hours  after  the  beginning  of  culture.  I and  R = invadinq 
merozoites  and  ring  forms,  T = trophozoites,  S = schizonts,  and  Ab  = 
abnormal  degenerating  forms. 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 

Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  338  Protective  immunity  in  malaria 

Publications: 

1.  Protein  Synthesis  Jjn  vitro  by  Cryopreserved  Plasmodium  falciparum 
Carter  Diggs,  Kenneth  Joseph,  Barbara  Flemmings,  Ralph  Snodgrass,  and 
Fred  Hines.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  24  760-763,  1975. 


mm 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AMO  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

^Tummam^^^ 

u 


t DATE  AMEV  SUWRT 

75  07  01 


« nino  or  i 


l).  Change 


10  NO  cooct  .* 


RROORAI^  (LIMN  T 


fc.  CONTRIBUTING 


mam 


02759A 


CARDS  1 1 4F 


u 


» A IBM  A DING* 

NA 


I* WO IIC  T NUMOCR 


3A762759A829 


AHMCY  ACCIMIOT 

t)A  OC  6437 


76  07  01 


>*  nor*  imitr'n 

NL 


TAftK  ARIA  MUMWC* 


00 


MMPOKT  COM  TWO L IIVK 

DP DK4E  AK,tJ6 


• RICIRlC  DATA  • 
COM  TRACT OA  ACC (It 

Qm  D ho 


».  L t VI  L OR  SUM 

A.  MMI  UNIT 


WON  A UNIT  nuHNR 


339 


I TITLE  |Rif(i*  Ml*  IMAW  CImaINuiImi  CN»J* 

(IJ)  Studies  of  Malaria  Parasitic  Metabolism  and  Drug  Action 


l|  ICIlN  Tl  RIC  AMO  TCCNMOLOOICAL  A ME  At* 

002600  Biology 


It  »T A AT  6 A T E 

75  0? 


11  CONTRACT  4AAMT 

OA r Ct/I  R ESC  71  vE  \\ 


IT  tl  TIMA  TED  CORRELATION  0AT« 

CONT 


SlAlMATlON 


4 AMOUNT 
I.  CUM.  AMT. 


It  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OMBANlIATION 


NAME*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
AOOMSSB  * Washington,  (1C  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

name.  JOY,  R.  J.  T.  , COL 


m,:  202-576-3551 


IE  RUNOlNO  AECMCV 

DA  | 


N MEtOUMCBt  ESTIMATE 


RISCAL 

TEAM 


IE  PSMEONMANCS  HEThOO 

C.  Jn-House 


I MMOREEEAONAi 


MS  4 RUNOE  a*  • 


WlfFIBlUl 

76 

2 

66 

77 

i 

115 

EE  MEAROMMtMO  OAEAMIIATIDN 


ie -Walter  Reed  Army  Institute 
Div  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 
AOOREU*  Washington,  DC  20012 


=3 


esearch 


MIMCIMAL  INYBITItATOR  fRNNM  MAR  U(/  i AMlMill  (MHNIMRl 

DAVIDSON,  David  E . , ETC 
tnm».  202- S 70- 2292 


SOCIAL  SBCuniTV  ACCOUNT  NUMtIR 
ASSOCIATE  IN  VEITIEA  TOMt 

....McCORMICK,  C,.  .1.,  Ph.D. 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

!X  NkylbAOt  fP*****  EmCH  miw> 

(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Ant i ma lari  a 1 s ; (U)  Parasite;  (U)  Red  Blood  Cells 


I TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE*  IS  an  AMO  ACH,  It  ANOONIU  YR«*wl«A  p~«*r^A.  IBmmHHwA  Mr  »»—*•»  RfWlf*  N.l  •!  m*A  MS  ImnIN  ClNAlltAIlM  CtM  ) 

23.  (U)  Document  metabolic  alterations  of  human  and  animal  red  blood  cells  when  in- 
fected with  malaria  parasites  u..d  to  assess  the  effect  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  these 
alterations  in  order  to  guide  the  development  of  new  drugs  effective  against  resistant 
falciparum  malaria,  a disease  of  continuing  military  importance. 

24.  (U)  Measure  the  effects  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  morphologic  growth  and  radio- 
labeled precursor  incorporation  into  protein  and  nucleic  acids  during  in  vitro  schiz- 
ogony. Establish  presence  of  metabolic  pathways  in  the  malaria  parasite.  Assess  anti- 
malarial activity  in  vivo  of  selected  drug  preparations. 

25.  (II)  75  07  - 76  06  In  vitro  culture  of  P.  know  lesi  - infected  rhesus  blood  lias  con- 
tinued for  screening  for  antimalarial  activity,  and  for  study  of  metabolic  activities. 

A number  of  candidate  compounds  demonstrated  antimalarial  activity  in  this  system.  En- 
hancement of  growth  was  observed  when  certain  fatty  acids  were  added  to  the  culture. 
Using  inhibition  of  incorporation  of  1 4 -C  orotic  acid  into  DNA  as  the  parameter  in 
vitro  culture  of  P.  falciparum  in  aotus  monkey  blood  and  of  P.  berghei  in  mouse  blood 
demonstrated  differences  in  effective  dose  levels  of  pyrimethamine  between  pyrimetha- 
mine sensitive  and  resistant  strains.  Sustained  release  preparations  containing  WR 
158122  or  sulfadiazine  were  implanted  in  mice  and  tested  for  efficacy  against  repeti- 
tive weekly  challenges  with  P.  berghei.  In  some  experiments,  protection  was  observed 
for  many  weeks  (5-15).  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Annual  Progress  Report,  1 .lul  75  - 30  dun  76.  Support  in  the  amount  of  $25,000  from 

FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 dul  - 30  Sep  76. 


COfUrB ClERB 


DD,”*„\.1498 


PREVIOUI  EDITIONS  OR  THlB  FORM  ARC  OBSOLETE  DO  RORMt  I EBB  A 
and  IEEE  I 1 MAR  EE  IRON  ARMY  Ut(),^OBtOL  ITI 


m° 


..TV* 


■ " 5***1  ••V’TWTp’ 

I ~ 'lltlf' -i-'  . 


Project  3A762759A829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 


Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  339  Studies  of  malaria  parasitic  metabolism  and  drug  action 
Investigators. 

Principal;  Gerald  J.  McCormick,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  COL  Craig  J.  Canfield,  MC;  Gloria  P.  Willet 

1.  Description 

The  objectives  of  these  studies  are  to  define  metabolic  altera- 
tions of  human  and  animal  red  blood  cells  when  infected  with 
malaria  parasites,  to  elucidate  the  metabolism  of  the  parasite,  and 
to  assess  the  effect  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  the  erythrocytic 
alterations,  parasite  metabolic  activity,  and  the  course  of  infection, 
in  order  to  guide  the  development  of  new  drugs  and  preparations 
effective  against  resistant  falciparum  malaria,  a disease  of  con- 
tinuing military  importance.  Studies  are  conducted  both  In  vivo  and 
in  vitro. 

2.  Progress 

In  vitro  cultivation  studies  with  P.  knowle si-infected  rhesus 
monkey  red  blood  cells  were  continued.  Screening  studies  were  com- 
pleted on  90  candidate  drugs,  using  as  the  parameter  the  inhibition 
of  incorporation  of  radioactivity  from  ^C-orotic  acid  into  DNA 
and  R1TA.  Of  these  drugs,  34  were  considered  to  be  effective 
(greater  than  80%  inhibition) ; nine  were  less  effective  (50-80% 
inhibition);  and  47  were  ineffective  at  a concentration  of  10  mg/L. 

The  results  for  the  effective  compounds  are  summarized  in  Table  1. 

3.  A previously  completed  study  which  described  the  presence  of  a 
new  metabolic  pathway  in  knowlesi  was  accepted  for  publication 
(1).  This  study  showed  that  the  parasite  biosynthesized  methionine, 
a capability  previously  considered  to  be  lacking. 

Serine  was  a source  of  the  methyl  groups  of  methionine  and 
thymidylic  acid. 

4.  Iii  vivo  studies  of  implanted  drug  preparations  have  continued 
In  collaboration  with  Dynatech  R/D  Company,  under  the  protocol  en- 
titled "Development  of  an  implantable  sustained  release  system  for 
the  prevention  of  malaria."  Several  studies  were  completed  and' one 
is  underway.  Two  preparations  with  WR  158122  as  the  antimalarial 
drug  were  received.  One  was  protective  in  mice  against  repetitive 
challenges  with  P_.  berghei  for  more  than  three  weeks  at  20  to  160  mg /kg. 


1157 


Evaluation  of  the  second  preparation  is  in  progress.  Three 
preparations  with  sulfadiazine  were  evaluated.  One,  in  bead  form, 
was  protective  for  three  weeks  with  eight  beads  implanted 
(equivalent  to  132  mg/kg),  A second  preparation  in  bead  form  was 
protective  at  one  to  eight  beads  per  mouse  (equivalent  to  57-456 
mg/kg)  through  a 15-week  period  of  repetitive  challenges.  With 
the  third  preparation,  in  powder  form,  protection  was  observed  for 
two  weeks  at  160  mg/kg. 

5.  Studies  of  drug  resistant  malaria  have  continued.  Through  the 
courtesy  of  Dr.  I, eon  H.  Schmidt  of  Southern  Research  Institute 
several  Aotus  trlvirgatus  monkeys  infected  with  pyrimethamine- 
sensitive  or  resistant  falciparum  strains  were  provided,  and 

in  vitro  studies  were  done  using  samples  of  their  blood.  A differ- 
ence of  effective  level  of  pyrimethamine  in  vitro  was  found  between 
the  strains.  Due  to  the  shortage  of  Aotus  monkeys,  these  studies 
with  ]?.  falciparum  have  been  suspended.  Pyrimethamine  resistance 
in  P.  berghei  in  mice  has  been  induced  and  a change  in  effective 
level  of  pyrimethamine  iji  vitro  was  observed  during  the  in  vivo 
induction. 

6.  A previously  completed  study  of  levels  of  phospholipids  in  normal 
and  parasitized  (£.  knowlesi)  blood  of  rhesus  monkeys,  done  in 
collaboration  with  the  University  of  Maryland,  was  published  (1). 


Table  1.  Antimalarial  Activity  of  Candidate  Compounds  at  10  mg/L 
vs.  P.  knowlesi  in  vitro. 


2 

Incorporation 
Compound DNA RNA 


"Effective" 

WR  2712 

3 

6 

4931 

1 

4 

124949 

0 

4 

139008 

3 

4 

159412 

2 

6 

180872 

13 

61 

182067 

2 

37 

182713 

7 

85 

182329 

4 

80 

183345 

2 

4 

184 3 * 3 

8 

29 

186937 

2 

92 

191031 

2 

2 

193575 

6 

11 

197629 

12 

105 

198279 

13 

83 

199387 

10 

108 

"Less  Effective" 

106911 

43 

85 

109018 

39 

102 

199071 

38 

94 

209363 

50 

89 

209847 

33 

51 

Incorporation 
Compound DNA RNA 


199881 

11 

38 

202147 

1 

0 

202148 

1 

1 

202930 

'} 

87 

202931 

2 

66 

206274 

5 

1 

206275 

11 

155 

206276 

5 

14 

206290 

2 

89 

208465 

8 

109 

212217 

0 

133 

212829 

19 

135 

214090 

15 

55 

217277 

1 

3 

217384 

0 

4 

219070 

2 

6 

219381 

2 

126 

214081 

49 

94 

214740 

38 

78 

219255 

33 

154 

219391 

32 

120 

^Incorporation  of  radioactivity  from  (6-^C)-orotic  acid 
percentage  of  that  incorporated  in  absence  of  any  drug. 


as 


f 


Project  3A762759A829  MAtAKlA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  UO  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  339  Studies  of  malaria  parasitic  metabolism  and  drug  action 
Literature  Cited. 

References; 

1.  Smith,  D.  C.,  McCormick,  G.  J.,  and  Canfield,  C.  J.: 

Plasmodium  knowlesi:  In  vitro  Biosynthesis  of  Methionine.  Experi- 
mental Parasitology,  in  press. 

Publications; 

1.  McLean,  S.,  Purdy,  W.  C.,  Rabat,  A.,  Sampugna,  S.,  DeZeeua,  R., 
and  McCormick,  G. ; Analysis  of  the  phospholipid  composition  of 
Plasmodium  knowlesi  and  rhesus  erythrocyte  membranes.  Analytics 
Chimica  Acta,  82,  175-185,  (1976). 


■J 


1160 


LL 


: — ■’TTT  — ? 


Project  3A762759A831 
TROPICAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00 

Tropical  Medicine 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOG f WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


mmromT  cmtrm  ipwkm. 

DD  DRkE 


TASK  ARCA  NUHSIR 

WORK  UNIT  MUM  MM 

00 

070 

•HxntKXxyn 


I T l T L « (pff+t  rnim  fmritr 

(U)  Anti-schistosomal  Drug  Development 


t»  SC ■ CM  Tl  R 1C  AMO  TtCNMOLOOIC  AL  ARIA 

012600  Pharmacology  002600  Biology  010100  Microbiology 


A AMOUNT 

I.  CUM.  AMT 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


IS  FfARONRNMA  OMNANIl AVION  j | 

•«>••  US  Army  Medical  Research  Unit 
Brasilia 

•mmm*  Brasilia,  Brazil 

FMNCIFAL  IMVtSTISATOM  rgMMM  AMR  U V I.  IM«M 

■*"'*  Radke,  M.G.  , LTC 

TCLCFMONC 

SOCIAL  CCCUNITT  ACCOUNT  NUOMA 
AMOCIATC  IN  VI t Tt • A TONS 

Prata,  Aluizio,  MD 


(U)  Brazil;  (U)  Drug  Development;  (U)  Schistosomiasis;  (U)  Chemotherapy 


II  TtCMMICAI.  OUICTIVI.  14  444404CN.  II  H4HIH  4— I — M4M  I' ■ MIIW  I «M*W  Hilil  W4I  *i  Ml  Ml  l4M.ll.  CIm.I4i.Mm  C*M  j 

23.  (U)  Find  new  prophylactic  and  therapeutic  drugs  that  can  be  used  to  minimize  the 
health  risk  of  acquiring  schistosomiasis  in  the  event  U.S.  military  and  DOD  civilians 
are  deployed  in  endemic  areas  such  as  South  America,  Caribbean,  Africa,  Middle  East, 
and  Far  East. 

2h.  (U)  The  WRAIR  US  Army's  Anti-Schistosomal  Drug  Development  Program  submits  selected 
compounds  for  prophylactic  and  therapeutic  testing  against  schistosomiasis  mansoni  in 
mice.  The  prophylactic  mortality  test  uses  mice  exposed  to  a lethal  dose  of  3,000  or 
more  S.  mansoni  cercariae,  and  drugs  are  given  subcutaneously  at  1280  mgs/kg.  The 
curative  test  uses  mice  exposed  to  200  cercariae,  and  30  to  35  days  later  drugs  are  ad- 
ministered orally  in  5 equal  daily  dosages.  Prophylactic  drug  activity  is  measured  by 
mouse  survival  and  curative  drug  activity  is  measured  by  increased  numbers  of  live  and 
dead  worms  in  the  liver. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  This  research  is  complementary  to  studies  being  conducted  under 
DAOB  729**,  Work  Unit  086,  entitled  Chemotherapeutic  Studies  on  Schistosomiasis.  The 
laboratory  Biomphalaria  glabrata  snail  colony  (Paulista  Strain)  maintains  a daily 
average  number  of  1,000  S.  mansoni  cercarial  shedding  snails.  The  positive  snails 
yield  weekly  collections  of  two  million  cercariae  which  are  used  to  infect  animals  for 
each  test  group  of  50  compounds.  During  FY  76,  1,1*78  selected  WRAIR  bottle  number  drugs 
were  tested  for  prophylactic  activity.  The  results  were  as  follows  — 1)  1091  drugs 
were  negative,  2)  377  drugs  were  toxic,  and  3)  10  drugs  were  active.  The  10  active 
drugs  are  commercially  discreet.  The  l6  drugs  tested  in  the  curative  test  system  v 're 
all  negative.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual 
“rogress  Report  1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76.  Support  in  the  amount  of  $6,000  from  FY  7T  funds 
is  programmed  for  the  period  1 Jul-30  Sep  76. 

RMffkll  to  CMIrMlMI  MW  Ml 


PRIVIOUl  COITIONS  OF  THIS  FOAM  ARC  OSSOLCTC-  DO  FORMS  1 ASS  A I NOV  Sf 
ANO  IASS*  I MAR  (FOR  A RM  V USCl  ARC  OSSOLCTC 

1 161 


* WINJ.V  W***- 


Project  3A  762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  070  Anti -schistosomal  Drug  Development 
Investigators. 

Principal:  Aluizio  Prata,  M.D.  (University  of  Brasilia) 

Associate:  LTC  Myron  G.  Radke,  MSC 

Description. 

Drug  testing  for  the  schistosomiasis  drug  development  program  is 
performed  at  the  U.  S.  Army  Medical  Research  Unit/Brasilia.  Se- 
lected compounds  are  submitted  by  the  Division  of  Medic  'ial  Chem- 
istry, WRAIR  to  our  drug  testing  facility.  Fifty  drugs  are  tes- 
ted weekly  for  prophylactic  activity  against  schistosomiasis  man- 
soni  by  the  mouse  mortality  test  system  (Radke,  et.  al.,  1971). 

In  May  1976,  the  routine  prophylactic  drug  testing  was  augmented 
with  a curative  test.  Presently,  there  are  no  known  drugs  to  pre- 
vent schistosomiasis  and  the  few  therapeutic  drugs  being  used  are 
expensive  and  toxic.  Thus,  any  new  prophylactic  and  therapeutic 
drugs  found  by  the  U.  S.  Army's  anti -schistosomal  drug  development 
program  would  minimize  the  risk  of  disease  in  the  event  that  it 
would  be  necessary  to  deploy  U.  S.  Military  and  DOD  Civilians  In 
endemic  areas.  Drug  advances  in  the  treatment  of  schistosomiasis 
would  result  In  reducing  government  expenditures  of  men  and  monies 
for  schistosomiasis  control  which  Is  endemic  to  the  following  geo- 
graphic areas:  South  America,  Caribbean,  Africa,  Middle  East  and 

Far  East.  The  expertise  of  the  U.  S.  Army  Research  schistosomiasis 
drug  development  program  Is  directed  towards  finding  drugs  which 
will  prevent  and  cure  the  disease.  The  USARMU/Brasilia  test  faci- 
lity ( having  animals,  snail  and  disease  life  cycle,  and  test 
system  capabilities  ) In  support  of  the  WRAIR,  Medicinal  Chemistry 
(source  of  drugs,  synthesized  drugs,  and  automatic  data  processing) 
affords  unique  opportunities  for  developing  and/or  finding  new  drugs 
to  control  schistosomiasis. 

Progress. 

a.  Laboratory  Facility.  The  final  equipment  installation  was  com- 
pleted with  tne  80  gallon  air  compressor  which  delivers  oll/water 
free  air  to  the  Biomphalaria  glabrata  snail  colony.  The  delay  in 
installing  the  sped  a)  air  compressor  was  a result  of  the  220  volt 
3 phase  electric  requirement.  A special  transformer  was  purchased 
to  adapt  the  normal  line  voltage  of  390  volts  3 phase  to  220  volts 
3 phase. 


b.  Animal  Facility.  Four  air  conditioners  were  installed  in  the 
Bioterio's  mouse  breeding  facility  to  provide  a uniform  day/night 
temperature.  Establishing  a uniform  ambient  temperature,  the 
mouse  colony  production  should  be  stabilized.  Our  drug  testing 
unit  receives  from  the  University  of  Brasilia's  Bioterio  400,  18- 
23  gram  mice  weekly.  Beginning  FY  77,  the  mouse  deliveries  reques- 
ted are  500/600  weekly* 

c.  Snail  Colony.  The  weekly  laboratory  Biomphalaria  glabrata 
snail  colony  production  is  500,  5 - 8 mm  snails  of  whicTi  350/400 
are  Individually  exposed  to  8 - 12  S.  mansoni  miracidia.  Eighty- 
two  percent  of  the  miracidia  exposecT  snails  are  surviving  at  42 
days  ( monthly  snail  survival  was  67  to  88  percent  ) with  a snail 
infection  rate  of  56  percent  ( monthly  snail  infection  rate  was 

40  to  77  percent  ).  The  daily  number  of  S.  mansoni  cercariae  shed- 
ding snails  maintained  was  1,239  ( the  daTTy  average  number  of 
infected  snails  maintained  per  30  days  was  992  to  1,499  ).  These 
infected  snails  provided  weekly  cercarial  collections  of  3 to  5 
million.  Our  weekly  cercarial  usage  is  two  (2)  million. 

d.  Drug  Testing.  The  drug  testing  rate  was  30  drugs  weekly  at 
two  dosages,  64o  and  1920  mgs/kg.  However,  many  compounds  were 
found  to  be  toxic  when  drugs  were  administered  subcutaneously  at 
1920  mgs/ kg  and  the  limited  500  milligram  samples  forced  us  to 
lower  the  test  dosage.  In  December  1975,  the  drug  test  facility 
began  testing  fifty  compounds  weekly  at  1280  mgs/kg. 

Test  Procedure. 

All  experimental  drugs  are  screened  for  prophylactic  activity  by 
the  mouse  mortality  test  system.  Mice  weighing  18  - 23  grams  ( 39 
- 43  days  old  ) are  exposed  45  minutes  by  tall  immersion  to  3,000 
or  more  S^.  mansoni  cercaHae.  Drugs  are  formulated  In  peanut  oil 
at  either  640  and  1920  mgs/kg  or  1280  mgs/kg.  Five  mice  are  used 
per  test  dosage  and  drugs  are  administered  subcutaneously  two  days 
a >er  cercarial  exposure.  Any  toxic  drugs,  that  Is  Infected  trea- 
ted mice  dying  within  the  first  10  days  of  infection,  are  retested 
at  40  and  160  mgs/kg.  The  number  of  compounds  tested  weekly  was 
increased  from  30  to  50.  A routine  test  group  for  50  selected 
compounds  consisted  of  325  mice;  ten  mice  are  normal,  and  315  mice 
are  exposed  to  3,000  or  more  cercariae.  The  two  hundred  fifty 
(250)  Infected  mice  are  used  to  screen  50  candidate  drugs  with  five 
mice  per  drug  for  anti -schistosomal  activity,  five  mice  are  given 
Nlrldazole  ( reference  drug  ),  and  fifty  mice  are  untreated  infec- 
ted controls.  An  active  drug  is  one  in  which  treated  mice  survive 
49  days  after  cercarial  exposure.  The  infected  control  mice  start 
dying  on  the  20th  day  and  by  the  30th  day  all  are  dead.  Drug  ac- 
tivity is  based  upon  the  number  of  surviving  mice  and  worm  burden 
data  as  obtained  by  perfusing  all  living  49  day  treated  mice.  In 
May  1976,  a curative  test  system  was  added  to  the  anti -schistosome 


1163 


drug  testing  program.  Some  selected  drugs  and  all  prophylactic 
active  drugs  are  tested  for  therapeutic  activity  against  mice 
exposed  to  200  _S.  mansoni  cercariae.  Treatment  of  the  infected 
mice  begins,  when  adult  worms  are  present,  30  to  35  days  after 
cercarial  exposure  by  administering  the  drug  orally  in  five 
equal  daily  dosages.  Drugs  are  prepared  In  peanut  oil  for  oral 
administration  at  either  50,  100,  160,  or  320  mgs/kg.  Five  mice 
are  used  for  each  drug  level.  Mice  are  sacrificed  10  days  after 
completing  drug  treatment.  The  liver  is  removed,  squashed  be- 
tween two  glass  plates,  and  the  number  of  live  and  dead  worms 
are  counted.  Worms  are  considered  dead  when  the  addition  of 
Serotonin  fails  to  induce  motility.  A Cur  tive  test  group  con- 
sists of  several  test  drugs  ( five  mice  per  drug  ),  15  infected 
non-treated  control  mice,  and  10  reference  drug  (Nlridazole  ) 
treated  mice.  Drug  activity  Is  demonstrated  by  an  increase  in 
the  number  of  live  worms  In  the  liver  ( "liver  shift"  ) and 
the  presences  of  dead  worms  in  the  liver. 

Results. 

During  FY  1976,  a total  of  1,290  selected  WRAIR  bottle  numbered 
drugs  were  tested  at  dosages  1)  640  and  1920  mgs/kg  or  2)  1280 
mgs/kg  against  schistosomiasis  mansoni  by  the  mouse  mortality 
test.  An  additional  188  drugs  were  retested  at  other  dosages 
because  of  either  drug  toxicity  or  drug  activity.  The  test  re- 
sults were:  1)  1091  negative  drugs,  2)  377  toxic  drugs,  and  3) 
10  active  drugs.  A total  of  16  drugs  were  evaluated  in  the 
curative  test.  The  liver  squashes  from  four  drugs  had  an  In- 
crease In  the  number  of  live  worm  per  mouse  was  greater  than 
10  ( control  animals  have  around  five  worms  ).  However,  dead 
worms  found  in  the  liver  squash  preparation  from  drug  treated 
mice  Indicates  therapeutic  activity. 


s*  ^ c%i  t 7r*X. 


Project  3A  762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  070  Anti -schistosomal  Drug  Development 
Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Radke,  M.  G.,  Broome,  P.  B.,  and  Belanger,  G.  S.  : Schis- 
tosoma mansoni : Mouse  Mortality  Test  System  for  Mass  Screening 
for  Prophyl acti c Drugs.  Exp.  Parasit.  30:  1-10,  1971. 


1165 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


175  07  01  1».  Change 

10  *«0  COO««*  PWOHW  ILIKNT 


PMOitCT  NOMBCM 

3A7627S94831 


A COMTMfOUTIM« 

‘XX******  1 CARDS  1 1 4 F t 1 I 

nTirL^J»rZl  MU  MM*  COnMMM)  C(*r  — 

(U)  Field  Studies  of  Ricket tsioses  and  Other  Tropical  Diseases 

ii  ichmtipic  amo  riCMMOiootCAi  «m*7 


1 AM  ACT  ACCKMMM* 

DA  OB  6526 

76  07  01  DDDP*E<AR*M 

> MMAHM*  II  MrnHUrd  tfc  IHIClTlC  OATA-  • iimoiM  I 

COM T MAC TOM  ACC***  1 

NA  NL  Q,„  □„  | 

▼ AftK  AM* A NUttMCM 

MOM  UNIT  NUMNI 

00 

07l 

| 010100  Microbiology  002600  Biology 


ir  iviirnn — 

73  07 

ITIlf iM ATftTeoMM c i Viom  5aT2 

C0NT 

IT  COM  T 5 ACT  ANANT 
4 OATIt/tAACCTIW*.  flA 

4 mUMOCH  * 

C TVHI 

■ IM1MATIOM 

A AMOUHT 
1.  CUM.  AMT. 

It  MflMOMIIML*  DOO  OMt  AMI  1 AT  KIM 

1 1 

• Walter  Reed  Army 

Institute  of  Research 

»Do«tH:a  Washington,  DC 

20012 

ACIPOHtlOlt  IMOIVIOWAt 

JOY,  R.  J.  T.  , COL,  MC 
202-576-3551 

Foreign  intelligence 

not  considered 

* pumOin*  *o««cv 

DA  I 


to  Mor6N»A»cc  mcYhoi 

C.  In-House 


1*  HWUKII  I*  TIMA  T*  I A MOMMIOOAL  MAH  VM*  I A tOMO*  fl 


86 

5 

43 

77 

5 

100 

[hamo  *US  Army  Medical  Rose  drill  V 
aoohim*  kijala  Lumpur,  Malaysia 

PWMClHAL  IHVttTIAATOH  (AMA  MAH  If*/  I «m*M  fM 

HUXSOLL,  D.  L.,  LTC,  VC 

T*L«»NOM* 

SOCIAL  ItCUMi  t T ACCOWHT  HUM OO  A 
AUOCIATI  IHVttTIOATOM 
HAH« 


.. r.  tsutsugamushi;  (U)  Human  infections;  (U) Laboratory 
diagnosis;  (U)  Epidemiology;  (U)  Ecology;  (U)  Immunity;  (U)  Leptot rombidium  spp 

II  TCCHHICAL  OO/f  CTIVt.*  14  AMMHQACH.  I*  MHOQHCM  f r-MM  IkAIAM  Mm» IlflAO  It  »■>  •>  mM  *•■«<*  CImiMiWIm  C«tf*  ) j 

23.  (U)  To  investigate  the  incidence  of  scrub  typhus  infection  in  selected  local  and 
foreign  populations,  to  relate  this  to  the  prevalence  of  vector  chiggors  and  their  com- 
mon rodent  hosts,  to  determine  the  strains  of  R.  tsutsugamushi  causing  human  infections 
and  relate  to  clinical  disease,  to  develop  improved  serological  methods,  to  study  the 
basis  for  immunity,  to  define  vector-rickettsia  relationships,  to  develop  a laboratory 
animal  model  for  the  disease,  and  to  produce  laboratory  animals  in  support  of  the  mis- 
sion. Scrub  typhus  is  an  incapacitating  disease  of  military  importance. 

24.  (U)  Provides  scientific  reagents  and  equipment  which  can  be  best  procured  in  the  US 
for  shipment  to  and  use  by  WRAIR  personnel  in  Malaysia  functioning  col laborat ively  with 
Malaysian  scientists  supported  under  USAMRDC  grant  reported  on  DA  0A  7413. 

25.  (II)  75  07  - 76  06  Studies  of  febrile  patients  in  indigenous  populations  showed  that 
scrub  typhus  is  a common,  but  frequently  undiagnosed,  cause  of  febrile  illness.  The 
clinical  syndrome  was  difficult  to  distinguish  clinically  from  that  due  to  other  infec- 
tions. The  antigenic  properties  of  human  isolates  and  the  antibody  response  to  infec- 
tion have  shown  that  the  Karp  strain  group  produces  the  preponderance  of  symptomatic  in- 
fections in  the  study  area.  The  strain  activity  in  humans,  rodents,  and  chiggers  in  se- 
lected study  sites  was  compared.  In  a study  of  mammals  and  chiggers  from  a primary 
forest  or.ly  a single  specimen  of  a known  vector  of  R.  tsutsugamushi  was  collected.  L.L. 
fletchcri  and  L.L.  arenicola  colonies  infected  with  R.  tsutsugamushi  were  employed  to 
study  the  effects  of  temperature  on  chigger  development  and  transmission  of  the  infec- 
tion. For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress 
Report,  1 .Tul  75  - 30  Jun  76.  Support  in  the  amount  of  $21,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is 
programmed  for  the  period  1 ,!ul  - 30  Sep  76. 


Us 

0D.STJ498 


U,W 


,£  ,«•  TV* 


Project  3A762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  071  Field  Studies  of  Rickettsioses  and  Other  Tropical 
Diseases 

Investigators: 

Principal:  LTC  David  L.  Huxsoll,  VC 

Associate:  LTC  David  M.  Robinson,  VC;  MAJ  Grahaem  W.  Brown, 

RAMC;  MAJ  Richard  D.  Montrey , VC;  MAJ  Alexander  L. 
Dohany,  MSC;  Miss  Elsie  Gan,  B.S. 


CLINICAL  AND  EPIDEMIOLOGI  AL  STUDIES  OF  SCRUB  TYPHUS 

The  studies  on  'normal''  populations,  described  in  the  Progress 
Report  for  1975,  yielded  good  evidence  for  a high  incidence  of  scrub 
typhus  transmission  in  the  areas  studied.  Due  to  the  success  of 
other  studies,  the  surveys  at  Pos  Iskandar,  Bukit  Lanjan  and  Elmina 
Estate  have  been  discontinued  for  the  present.  Likewise,  the  study 
of  indigenous  soldiers  has  been  suspended,  useful  data  having  been 
obtained.  The  investigation  of  febrile  patients  in  rural  Malaysia, 
described  in  the  Progress  Report  for  1975,  has  been  continued  this 
year.  Over  120  human  isolates  of  R.  tsutsugamushi  have  been  made, 
and  a wealth  of  clinical  and  serological  data  collected. 


Normal 


Prang  As li  (Aborigines):  Pos  Iskandar  is  situated  in  an  area 

“condary 'jungle,  35'  miles  N.E.  of  Kuala  Pilah  and  67  miles  East 


of  secondary  jungle,  35" miles  N.E.  of  Kuala  Pilah  and  67  miles  East 
of  Kuala  Lumpur.  It  is  the  focal  point  for  several  Orang  Asli 
kampongs  scattered  around  a marshy  lake,  Tasek  Bera,  and  has  a 
school,  and  a clinic  staffed  by  a medical  orderly.  About  1000 
people  live  in  the  area,  subsisting  largely  on  shifting  cultivation 
of  hill  rice,  tapioca,  etc.,  in  the  surrounding  jungle.  Rubber  has 
recently  been  planted  in  a few  areas  close  to  the  villages. 

Sera  were  collected  from  208  volunteers  of  all  ages  during  the 
first  visit  in  January  1975.  The  system  of  agriculture  necessitated 
families  moving  out  of  their  village  houses  to  guard  the  crops  in 
the  jungle  ladangs  for  periods  of  several  weeks  at  a time.  Thus  it 
was  difficult  to  find  all  of  the  same  individuals  regularly. 
Sequential  specimens  of  serum  were  collected  from  127  individuals  (71 
twice,  44  three  times,  11  four  times  and  1 five  times),  over  a period 
of  8 months  (January-August  1975).  A total  of  462  man-months  of 
exposure  was  studied. 


The  age  specific  prevalence  rates  of  scrub  typhus  antibody  at 
Pos  Iskandar  are  shown  in  Table  1,  using  data  from  the  largest 
group  bled  simultaneously,  in  January  1975. 

During  the  following  8 months  of  observation,  46  individuals 
showed  a rise  in  titer  (see  Table  2).  In  18  individuals,  there  was 
a 4-fold  or  greater  rise  in  antibody  to  a titer  of  at  least  1/200, 
and  in  none  of  these  were  malaria  parasites  or  leptospiral  antibody 
found.  In  8 of  the  18,  the  maximum  titer  was  1/200,  including  one 
person  who  showed  a rise  in  OXX  titer  from  1/40  to  1/320.  In  5 the 
titer  rose  to  1/400,  and  in  a further  5,  to  1/800  or  more.  Only  5 
(281,)  of  these  18  people  admitted  having  had  a febrile  illness 
during  the  intervals  between  collection  of  the  sera.  Of  the 
remaining  28  whose  antibody  titer  rose  from  <1/25  to  1/50,  or  from 
11/25  to  1/100,  6 (211,)  had  malaria  parasites.  None  showed  a rise 
in  leptospiral  antibody.  Two  (71)  showed  a rise  in  OXK  titer  from 
1/40  to  1/160.  Only  3 (11%)  admitted  having  had  a relevant  illness. 

Only  the  18  subjects  showing  a 4-fold  rise  in  FA  titer  to  at 
least  1/200  were  regarded  as  confirmed  infections.  This  is 
equivalent  to  an  incidence  of  468/thousand/annum.  However,  the 
study  was  carried  out  during  only  part  of  a year,  and  most  of  the 
sera  were  collected  from  January  to  April. 

Bukit  Lanian;  Bukit  Lanjan  is  a small  forested  hill  5 miles 
West  of  Kuala  Lumpur.  Approximately  250  Orang  Asli  live  in  a 
kampong  on  the  jungle  fringe,  and  pursue  a variety  of  urban  and 
rural  occupations,  including  much  travel  through  the  jungle.  The 
preliminary  survey  of  the  population,  using  filter  paper  blood  spots, 
was  carried  out  in  1974,  and  reported  in  last  year's  Progress 
Report.  Sequential  sera  and  clinical  data  were  collected  from 
October  1974  to  May  1975,  by  which  time  the  numbers  of  volunteers 
had  fallen  to  an  unproductive  level. 

Of  61  individuals  from  whom  sequential  sera  were  obtained 
over  a total  of  234  man  months,  8 showed  a rise  in  FA  titer  (see 
Table  3)  and  2 a concurrent  rise  in  OXK.  Of  the  8,  4 recalled  an 
illness  during  the  relevant  period,  and  one  (H48)  had  been 
admitted  to  Gombak  hospital  for  fever  and  chills;  an  isolate  of 
R.  tsutsugamushi  was  obtained  from  her  by  mouse  inoculation.  Five 
of  the  8 nad  significant  antibody  rises,  an  incidence  of  5/234  man 
months,  or  256/thousand/annum. 

Elmina  Estate:  A pilot  survey  using  filter  paper  blood  spots 

showed  that  54/135  (40%)  of  oil-palm  workers  and  14/93  (15%)  of 
rubber  workers  had  demonstrable  antibody  to  R.  tsutsugamushi. 

In  a longitudinal  study  of  oil-palm  laborers,  sera  were  obtained 
on  one  occasion  only  from  73  workers,  on  2 occasions  from  26,  3 
times  from  12,  4 times  from  11  and  5 times  from  2.  Thus  multiple 
observations  were  made  on  51  individuals  over  varying  periods 
from  1 to  10  months,  and  a total  of  273  man  months  of  exposure 
were  studied. 

1168 


Table  1 


Prevalence  of  Scrub  Typhus  Antibody  at  Pos  Iskandar 


1. 


2. 


Age  Group 

Prevalence  of  Antibody 

<5 

1/3 

(33) 2 

5-9 

2/28 

(7) 

10-14 

11/44 

(25) 

15  24 

16/37 

(43) 

25-34 

20/34 

(59) 

35-44 

29/38 

(76) 

>44 

20/24 

(83) 

A titer  of  1/50  or  greater. 
Positives/total  (percent) 


1169 


m 


Table  2 


Seroconversions  to  Scrub  Typhus  at  Pos  Iskandar 

Age  Group  Numbers  Showing  Antibody  Rise 

Possible*  Definite^ 

Significance  Significance 


10-14 

15-24 

25-34 

35-44 


1.  Includes  rises  in  titer  from  <1/25  to  1/50 
and  from  <1/25  to  1/100. 

2.  Includes  4-fold  or  greater  rises  in  titer 
to  1/200  or  more. 


Table  3 


Seroconversions 

to  Scrub  Typhus  at  Bukit 

Lanjan 

Patient 

Age 

Sex 

FA 

OXK 

Illness 

M.P's 

H 48 

15 

F 

1/25 

1/800 

1/80 

1/5120 

+ 

- 

H 130 

8 

F 

1/50 

1/800 

1/40 

1/40 

- 

P.  vivax 

H 1014 

14 

F 

<1/25 

1/50 

1/40 

1/40 

+ 

- 

H 1003 

6 

M 

1/50 

1/200 

1/80 

1/80 

- 

- 

H 146 

6 

F 

<1/25 

1/80 

+ 

P. falciparum 

Two  workers  showed  a significant  rise  in  titer  of  antibody  to 
R.  tsutsugamushi  during  this  time  (see  Table  4),  and  two  more 
lesser  rises,  one  from  1/25  to  1/100,  the  other  from  <1/25  to  1/50. 
Three  of  the  4,  including  the  2 showing  definite  rises  (1254  and 
1225) , admitted  having  had  a febrile  illness  between  the  dates  of 
bleeding.  None  of  the  illnesses  had  been  prolonged  or  serious  and 
none,  as  far  as  is  known,  required  antibiotic  therapy.  The  subject 
showing  a rise  to  1/50  did  not  recall  any  illness  during  the 
relevant  period.  From  this  data,  the  incidence  of  definite 
infections  was  calculated  as  2 per  273  man  months,  or  88/thousand/ 
annum. 


Rodent  trapping  from  a grid  system  consisting  of  200  traps  was 
accomplished  at  Elmina  throughout  the  entire  year.  The  trapping 
was  conducted  for  1 week  per  month  with  marking  and  releasing  of  the 
trapped  rodents.  A total  of  696  rats  were  trapped  from  which  623 
blood  samples  were  taken  for  isolation  studies.  R.  tsutsugamushi 
was  isolated  from  only  2 (0.32%)  of  the  specimens.  Chiggers  were 
collected  from  all  trapped  rodents.  In  addition  to  collection  of 
chiggers  from  rodents,  a black  plate  grid  of  22  sites  within  the 
trapping  grid  was  established,  with  10  plates  per  site  for  a total 
of  220  black  plates. 


The  primary  vector  found  within  this  mature  oil-palm  estate 
was  Leptotrombidium  (L.)  deliense  (61. II).  Other  leptotrombidium 
collected  were  L.  (L.)  fl etcher i (0.1%) , L.  (L.)  bodense  (0.2°) and 
(L.)  near-arenicola  (6.03%) . Other  than  L.  (L.) 


L.  (L.)  near-arenicola  (0.031) . Other  than  L.  (L.)  deliense, 
Ascoschoengastia  CL.) indica  was  the  only  other  chigger  collected  in 
large  numbers  (30.0%).  The  remaining  species  were  Gahrliepia  (W.) 

1 . 1 • » • /-»  /t.r  \ ^ \ \ I 1 1 1 *"  * / s’  n ~ 


lewthwaitei  (3.7V) , G.  (W.)  enode  (0.021),  G.  (G.)  fletcheri~ (0.6%) 


Walchiella  impar  (0.06%),  an3"  A.  (L.)  lorius  (0.4%). 


In  comparing  the  chiggers  collected  from  rodents  with  a black 
plate  chigger  index  (number  of  chiggers  collected  each  month  divided 
by  the  total  number  of  plates)  the  data  tends  to  follow  a parallel 
line  and  may  prove  to  be  a valuable  tool  for  comparing  chigger 
populations  in  the  field  (Fig.  1). 


FA 


Military  Populations  (Malaysian  Soldiers) : Two  hundred  and 
seventy  five  recruits  were  bled  before  and  after  6 months  basic 
training  at  Port  Dickson.  Forty  seven  (17%)  of  the  patients  had 
titers  of  1/25  or  more.  Of  these,  6 (2.2%)  showed  a significant 
rise  in  titer  between  the  two  specimens,  indicating  infection  in 
the  interval.  Three  of  the  6 admitted  having  had  a febrile  illness 
during  training,  and  one  man  had  been  ill  for  2 weeks.  The 
remaining  3 men  denied  any  illness  during  the  study  period.  Four 
hundred  and  seventy  six  soldiers  from  two  infantry  battalions  (2 
Ranger  and  11  MTA)  were  bled  before  and  after  a period  of 
operational  duty  near  the  Thai  border,  in  June  and  October  1975. 

On  the  second  occasion  information  was  obtained,  by  means  of  a 
questionnaire,  on  any  illnesses  experienced.  Both  specimens  were 


1172 


a 


A.T  - rv  ; 

an 


Table  4 


Seroconversions  at  Flmina  Estate 


Patient 

Age 

Sex 

Date 

FA  Titer 

OXK  Titer 

1254 

22 

F 

20  January 

1/50 

1/40 

20  March 

1/50 

1/40 

19  June 

1/400 

1/320 

20  August 

1/100 

1/320 

1225 

23 

M 

20  January 

<1/25 

1/40 

20  March 

1/200 

1/40 

19  November 

1/200 

1/80 

1173 


Figure  1.  Comparison  of  black  plate  collections  of  chiggers  with  the  number  of 
Leptotrombidium  (L.)  deliense  collected  from  trapped  Rattus  tiomanicus 
jalorensis  within  an  oil -palm  estate,  Elmina  Estate,  Selangor"! 


negative  in  235  (49°&).  In  210  (44%)  one  or  both  sera  were 

positive  at  low  levels,  though  no  rise  was  detected.  Eight  of  262 

(3.1°a)  of  the  11  MTA  group  had  a titer  of  >1/400  in  the  first  serum, 
indicating  infection  during  the  few  months  prior  to  our  study.  This 
evidence  was  re-inforced  by  OXK  titers  of  >1/160  (1/2560  in  one)  in 

6 of  the  8.  Small  rises  in  EA,  from  <1/25  to  1/50  or  <1/25  to  1/100 

occurred  in  11  (2.3a)  of  the  whole  group,  but  in  only  one  was  this 
accompanied  by  a rise  in  OXK  titer  (1/40  to  1/160).  Of  the  11,  5 
(45°a)  admitted  a febrile  illness,  though  no  details  were  available. 
Significant  rises  in  FA  were  seen  in  2 (0.41)  of  the  group:  1/100 

to  1/400  in  one  case  (no  rise  in  OXK)  and  1/50  to  1/400  in  the  other 
(OXK  1/80  to  1/160).  Neither  subject  admitted  any  illness  during 
the  period. 

Military  Populations  (British  Soldiers):  In  last  year's 

progress  report,  the  occurrence  of  low  level  seroconversions  amongst 
visiting  soldiers,  often  without  illness,  was  reported.  This  was 
examined  further  in  98  additional  men,  of  whom  13  (13%)  developed 
antibody  to  a titer  of  1/50,  after  a 6-8  week  period  of  jungle 
training.  Sera  collected  prior  to  the  training  exercise  had  no 
demonstrable  antibody  (<l/25).  None  had  clinical  malaria  nor 
serological  evidence  of  leptospirosis.  The  majority  denied  any 
illness  whatsoever.  Blood  was  collected  from  each  of  the  98  men  and 
inoculated  into  mice.  No  isolates  were  made  from  the  mice  and  the 
significance  of  these  small  rises  remains  uncertain,  as  in  the 
indigenous  soldiers. 

Febrile  Patients 

Studies  were  carried  out  at  the  district  hospitals  of  Mentakab 
and  Kuala  Pilah,  the  Orang  Asli  hospital  at  Gombak,  the  General 
Hospital  and  Kinrara  Military  Hospital  in  Kuala  Lumpur,  and  the 
health  sub-center  at  Bukit  Mendi. 

Bukit  Mendi  health  center  is  located  on  a Federal  Land 
Development  Authority  (FELDA)  oil  -palm  plantation  in  southern  Pahang. 
An  area  of  disturbed  primary  jungle,  approximately  eight  miles  by 
ten  has  been  partially  cleared,  burned  and  planted  over  the  past 
nine  years.  Most  of  the  plantation  is  now  in  production,  and 
approximately  lO.OCO  people  have  settled,  in  four  villages,  on  the 
scheme.  Adults  of  both  sexes  work  in  the  fields,  and  children 
sometimes  accompany  them.  A health  sub-center,  visited  weekly  by  a 
doctor,  provides  medical  services  for  the  inhabitants,  and  was  the 
location  for  the  study. 

Mentakab  District  Hospital  serves  an  area  of  central  Pahang 
containing  many  similar  FELDA  schemes,  and  also  a large  population 
of  rural  villagers.  Kuala  Pilah  Hospital,  in  Negri  Sembilan,  serves 
a rather  different,  semi-urban  population,  and  rubber  estate  and 
rice  field  workers  predominate  over  relatively  few  oil  palm 
laborers.  Gombak  Hospital  admits  Orang  Asli  patients  irom  all  over 


1175 


peninsular  Malaysia  though  many  patients,  including  those  with 
fever,  find  the  long  journey  too  difficult  to  make.  At  the  General 
Hospital,  Kuala  Lumpur,  the  study  was  attempted  on  one  of  the  3rd 
class  male  medical  wards  and  at  Kinrara  on  febrile  soldiers. 

However,  sera  were  obtained  from  only  a small  number  of  febrile 
patients,  and  these  two  studies  had  to  be  abandoned  after  several 
months . 

At  each  location,  clinical  and  epidemiological  data,  and 
paired  sera  were  collected  from  unselected  febrile  patients.  In 
many  instances,  blood  was  also  inoculated  into  mice  for  isolation  of 
R.  tsutsugamushi.  Patients  complaining  of  headaches,  cough  or 
general  malaise  were  also  included,  even  if  not  febrile  at 
presentation.  Young  children,  from  whom  venous  blood  could  not 
easily  be  obtained,  were  largely  excluded  from  the  study. 
Convalescent  sera  were  collected  two  weeks  after  the  acute  specimens 
wherever  possible,  though  early  discharge  from  hospital 
necessitated  a 'shorter  interval  in  many  instances.  All  clinical 
data  was  gathered  by  the  clinic  and  hospital  staffs.  With  the 
exception  of  Kuala  Pilah,  most  of  the  specimens  were  collected  by 
our  technicians. 

The  paired  sera  from  all  study  sites  were  examined  for  R. 
tsutsugamushi  antibody  by  indirect  immunofluorescence,  and  for 
Proteus  OXK  agglutinins  by  the  Weil-Felix  test.  0X2  and  0X19 
agglutinins  were  not  sought.  All  sera  were  stored  at  -20°C  from  the 
time  of  separation.  Results  were  notified  to  the  responsible 
doctor  as  soon  as  possible  after  collection  of  specimens. 

Isolation  and  identification  of  the  organism  was  performed 
using  the  standard  technique,  in  which  fresh  whole  blood  is 
inoculated  intraperitoneally  into  mice.  Isolates  were  confirmed  by 
direct  inmunofluorescent  examination  of  peritoneal  monoclear  cells 
from  the  infected  mice. 

A compatible  clinical  history,  plus  any  of  the  following 
• criteria  was  regarded  as  confirming  the  diagnosis: 

1.  isolation  of  the  organism 

2.  a four-fold  rise  in  FA  titer  to  1/200  or  more 

3.  a four-fold  rise  in  OXK  titer  to  1/160  or  more 

Either  of  the  following  findings  was  regarded  as  indicating 

< concurrent  or  rec  it  infection: 

j 

i 

^ 1.  an  FA  titer  of  at  least  1/400,  with  no  demonstrable  rise 

2.  an  OXK  titer  of  at  least  1/160, with  no  demonstrable  rise 


! A sumnary  of  the  results  from  the  six  studies  is  given  in 

( Table  5. 


Table  5 


Incidence  of  Scrub  Typhus  in  Febrile  Patients 


Definite 

Probable 

Total 

Mentakab 

47  (19. 2)1 

11  (4.5) 

245 

Kuala  Pilah 

33  (5.3) 

20  (3.2) 

621 

Bt.  Mendi 

49  (13.1) 

17  (4.5) 

374 

Gombak 

8 (7.4) 

12  (11.1) 

108 

G.H.K.L. 

0 

0 

15 

Kinrara 

0 

0 

15 

1.  Number  of  patients  as  a percentage  of  the  total  studied 
at  each  location. 


1177 


The  low  number  of  cases  documented  at  Gombak  was  probably  the 
result  of  self-selection  by  febrile  Orang  Asli,  who  appeared  to  stay 
at  home  rather  than  go  to  hospital.  The  large  number  of  Orang  Asli 
with  high  titers, but  no  rise, may  well  represent  recent  but  not 
current  infections.  Some  cases  may  have  been  treated  with  tetracycline 
at  the  jungle  medical  posts.  The  much  higher  incidence  at 
Mentakab  hospital  as  compared  with  Kuala  Pilah  probably  reflects  the 
difference  in  habitats  - a lot  of  the  area  surrounding  Mentakab  is 
now  planted  with  oil-palm,  or  is  'scrub'  vegetation,  whereas  the 
padi  fields  and  rubber  estates  so  common  around  Kuala  Pilah  offer 
less  favorable  ecological  conditions  for  the  vectors. 

From  the  results  obtained,  it  is  evident  that  scrub  typhus  is 
a much  more  common  cause  of  illness  than  was  previously  suspected, 
and  that  the  clinical  syndrome,  whether  mild  or  severe,  is  difficult 
to  distinguish  from  that  due  to  other  infections.  Eschars,  rashes 
and  adenopathy  were  not  usually  observed.  The  infection  was 
particularly  prevalent  in  oil  oaim  workers,  causing  an  estimated  400 
cases  annually  in  the  population  of  10,000  people  living  on  the 
Bukit  Mendi  scheme  alone. 


Rodent  and  chigger  collections  were  begun  in  Bukit  Mendi  in  July 
1975,  with  initial  collections  being  made  as  a general  survey  of  the 
various  habitats  of  the  entire  scheme.  When  it  was  determined  that 
a specific  area  (Phase  III)  was  producing  a high  incidence  of  scrub 
typhus  cases,  study  sites  within  this  Phase  were  established.  Grid 
trapping  systems  were  established  allowing  for  trapping,  marking  and 
releasing,  and  retrapping  of  the  rodents,  with  collection  of  chiggers 
and  blood  specimens  from  each  rodent  trapped.  Two  such  grids 
consisting  of  100  traps  each  were  set  up  in  Phase  III  oil -palm. 

More  recently,  similar  grids  have  been  established  in  a Phase  I oil- 
palm  site  which  has  yielded  only  a few  positive  cases  of  scrub 
typhus . 

From  the  general  survey  prior  to  the  establishment  of  the  grids, 
a total  of  10  species  of  small  mamnals  were  trapped,  with  R. 
tiomanicus  being  the  dominant  species  within  the  entire  area,  and  R. 
argent iventer  and  R.  exulans  being  sub-predominant.  The  rest  of  the 
trapped  animals  included:  Tupaia  glis,  R.  muelleri,  R.  cremoriventer , 
Cal lose iurus  nigrovittatus , C.  notatus,  C.  caniceps,'  ancT 
Sundasciurus  tenuis. 

During  the  general  survey,  R.  tiomanicus  had  an  infection  rate 
of  41.61  (32/77)  from  Phase  I oil -palm,  37.51  (3/8)  from  Phase  III, 
37.51  (20/56)  from  lalang  and  27.01  (10/37)  from  fringe  habitat.  In 
R.  argent iventer  only  16.71  (1/6)  from  lalang  was  positive,  and  none 
Trcrn  Phase  I oil  palm  (2)  and  fringe  (4)  was  positive,  thus  giving 
an  overall  rate  of  8.31  (1/12).  R.  exulans  from  lalang  had  23.81 
(5/21)  positive.  Two  R.  exulans  From  Phase  I oil-palm  and  1 from 
the  fringe  were  negative.  Tupaia  glis  22.21  (4/18)  from  Phase  I 
oil-palm  and  fringe  habitat  were  found  to  be  infected  with  R. 
tsutsugamushi.  T.  glis  within  lalang  (1)  and  Phase  III  (10)  were 


1178 


all  negative.  None  of  the  other  species  was  found  to  be  positive 
for  R.  tsutsugamushi. 

L.  (L.)  deliense  was  the  predominant  vector  chigger  species 
collected  from  the  four  types  of  habitat  during  the  general  survey 
of  Bukit  Mendi,  with  76.81  from  lalang,  49.81  from  forest  fringe, 
70.51  from  Phase  I and  72.61  from  Phase  III.  L.  (L.)  fletcheri 
was  also  collected  from  the  lalang  habitat  (14.01).  The  collection 
of  large  numbers  of  L.  (L.)  deliense  from  the  lalang  demonstrates 
the  active  movement  of  the  chigger  hosts  between  the  lalang  and 
adjacent  scrub,  as  L.  (L.)  fletcheri  is  the  predominant  species 
collected  from  black  plates  within  West  Malaysia. 

Within  the  grid  systems  of  Phase  III  the  first  area  (FF)  is  a 
mixed  habitat  of  oil-palm  and  adjacent  swamp  forest.  Results  of 
the  prevalence  rate  of  FL  tsutsugamushi  isolation  from  small 
mammals  trapped  in  this  area  are  shown  in  Table  6.  The  trapping 
and  recapture  rates  were  so  low  that  it  is  not  possible  at  this 
stage  to  assess  any  population  fluctuation  of  any  species  of  the 
small  mamnals  obtained.  Altogether  eight  species  of  small  mammals 
were  trapped,  of  which  only  twD  species,  R.  tiomanicus  and  R. 
argent iventer  were  found  in  the  oil-palm  habitat . The  remaining 
six  species  were  all  from  the  swamp  forest.  R.  tsutsugamushi  was 
isolated  from  R.  tiomanicus  and  R.  argent iventerT  The  rest  of  the 
species  from  the  swamp  forests  were  negative.  Of  60  blood  samples 
from  R.  tiomanicus  8 (13.31)  were  found  infected  and  from  R. 
argentiventer  33. 'll  (3/9)  were  infected. 

The  second  area  (YY)  is  exclusively  planted  with  3-4  year  old 
oil-palm  trees.  Only  two  species  of  rats,  R.  tiomanicus  and  R. 
argentiventer  were  trapped  in  this  area.  (Table  6)  Like  the  Tirst 
area  the  trapping  and  recapture  rates  were  very  low.  However, 

26.31  (10/38)  blood  specimens  collected  from  R.  tiomanicus  were 
positive  for  R.  tsutsugamushi  as  compared  to  43.481  (10/23)  from 
R.  argentiventer. 

In  both  these  study  areas,  R.  argentiventer  was  shown  to  have 
a higher  rate  of  isolation  than  that  of  R.  tiomanicus,  although 
the  numbers  caught  were  lower  than  R.  tiomanicus. 

The  trees  of  the  FELDA  scheme  are  planted  in  rows  approximately 
6 meters  apart.  The  litter  from  pruning  the  trees  is  placed  in  a 
straight  line  between  every  other  row  of  trees.  The  alternate  rows 
are  left  clear.  This  is  the  case  in  both  Phase  I and  Phase  III  of 
Bukit  Mendi.  These  piles  of  litter  provide  good  harborage  for  the 
rodent  hosts  of  the  vectors. 

The  most  noticeable  difference  between  the  study  areas  of 
Phase  I and  those  of  Phase  III,  is  the  lack  of  grass  covering  within 
Phase  I sites.  The  covering  within  Phase  I is  primarily  ferns,  while 
that  of  Phase  III  is  grass  and  vines. 


1179 


Table  6 


Prevalence  of  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi  Isolation  (Blood)  from  Snail  Animals 

in  Phase  III.  Bukit  Mendi. 


Species  of  Manmals 

R. 

tiomanicus 

R. 

argent iventer 

R. 

whitehead i 

Tupaia  glis 
R.  muelleri 

S. 

tenuis 

C. 

notatus 

E. 

I 

R. 

tiomanicus 

R. 

argent iventer 

Oil-palm 

Oil -palm 

Forest 

Forest 

Forest 

Forest 

Forest 

Forest 

Oil -palm 

Oil -palm 


Total 

Mammals 

Tested 


Number 

Positive 


Percent 

Positive 


Table  7 presents  a comparison  of  the  vector  L.  CL.)  deliense 
collected  from  R.  jalorensis  from  both  the  Phase  I and  Phase  III 
study  sites.  During  the  three  months  from  which  data  is  available, 
the  number  of  L.  (L.)  deliense  per  rodent  collected  from  Phase  I 
has  remained  fairly  constant,  ranging  from  7.4  to  10.7,  whereas  the 
L.  (L.)  deliense  per  rodent  from  Phase  III  has  fluctuated 
considerably,  ranging  from  3.6  to  27.7.  During  much  of  this  time 
the  area  was  experiencing  extreme  drought.  However,  just  prior  to 
the  high  number  (27.7),  showers  were  occurring  daily  for 
approximately  10  days.  As  the  rodents  within  Phase  I can  only 
acquire  the  chiggers  from  the  litter  piles,  and  as  these  would 
probably  retain  a more  suitable  environment  for  the  chiggers  even 
during  a dry  period,  one  might  expect  the  number  of  chiggers  per 
rodent  to  remain  more  constant.  Whereas  within  the  Phase  III  area, 
where  the  rodents  would  not  only  acquire  the  chiggers  from  the 
litter,  but  also  from  the  open  grassy  areas,  which  would  be  highly 
affected  by  changes  in  moisture,  a greater  fluctuation  of  numbers 
of  chiggers  per  rodent  might  be  expected. 

Weil-Felix  Test 

A comparison  was  made  of  three  methods  for  the  Weil-Felix  test, 
using  paired  sera  from  50  scrub  typhus  patients.  The  methods  were: 

1.  the  tube  agglutination  technique,  with  a 4 hour  incubation 
period,  reconmended  by  the  manufacturer  of  the  antigen  (Wellcome 
Reagents,  Beckenham,  England). 

2.  the  standard  tube  agglutination  technique  of  Shaffer  and 
Goldin2  with  overnight  incubation. 

3.  the  microtiter  adaptation  of  (1),  using  v-type  microtiter 
plates  (Cooke  Engineering  Co.,  Alexandria,  Va)  as  described  by 
Gaultney,  Wende  and  Williams.^ 

The  OXK  results  obtained  by  each  method  were  essentially  the 
same,  but  the  microtiter  method  was  easier  to  read,  and  quicker  to 
perform,  and  much  more  economical  of  antigen  and  serum. 

Using  the  microtiter  technique,  OXK  agglutination  titers  were 
measured  in  225  control  subjects  (see  Table  8).  There  was 
confirmation  of  earlier  observations,  that  rises  in  titer  occur  also 
in  leptospirosis,  and  malaria.  OXK  titers  measured  in  209  sera 
obtained  from  112  isolate  positive  scrub  typhus  patients  are  shown 
in  Table  9. 

LEPTOSPIROSIS 

The  sera  collected  in  the  Mentakab,  Kuala  Pilah  and  Bukit 
Mendi  studies  have  also  been  examined  by  the  HL  technique  for 
leptospiral  antibody.  The  results  are  shown  in  Table  10.  These 


* \ f 


1 181 


Table  7 


CQmparis°n  of  Total  Chiggers  and  Vector  Chiggers  L.  (L.)  deliense 
Collected  from  Rattus  tiomanicus  jalorensis  from  Phase*  Tand 
Phase  III  Oil-Palm,  Bukit  Mendi,  Pahang. 


Month 


Number  of  Chiggers 
per  R.  t_.  jalorensis 


Phase  I 

Phase  III 

Phase  I 

February 

26.5 

36.5 

10.7 

March 

33.7 

64.3 

7.8 

April 

28.5 

52.5 

7.4 

Number  of  L.  (L.)  deliense 
per  R.  t.  jalorensis 


Phase  III 
13.8 
3.6 


27.7 


Table  8 


OXK  Titers  in  225  Control  Subjects 


Source 

Reciprocal  Titers 

Total  Sera 

140 

80 

160 

320 

640 

1280 

50 

British  soldiers 

39 

11 

- 

- 

- 

50 

50 

Malaysian  soldiers 

41 

9 

- 

- 

- 

- 

50 

25 

1 2 

Malaria  ’ patients 

34 

12 

3 

- 

1 

- 

50 

100 

1 3 

Leptospirosis  ' 
patients 

66 

68 

51 

8 

6 

1 

200 

1.  Acute  and  convalescent 

2.  A 4-fold  rise  in  titer 

3.  A 4-fold  rise  in  titer 


sera  from  each  patient, 
occurred  in  3 patients, 
occurred  in  12  patients. 


1183 


I 


Table  9 

OXK  Titers  in  112  Scrub  Typhus  Patients* 


Day  of 
Illness^ 

Rec 

;iproca}  Titers 

Positive^/Total 

140 

80 

160 

(Percentage) 

1 -7 

42 

17 

16 

6 

34/93  (37) 

8-14 

4 

11 

13 

10 

18 

50/65  (77) 

15-30 

3 

4 

6 

8 

8 

22 

44/51  (86) 

;lj 

1.  209  sera  from  112  isolate  positive  patients. 

2.  As  reported  by  the  patients. 

3.  Titer  >1/160. 


Table  10 


Leptospirosis 


1 


in  Unselected  Febrile  Patients 


Mentakab 

Kuala  Pilah 

Bukit  Mendi 

Hospital 

Hospital 

clinic 

Leptospirosis 

26  (8)2 

41  (6) 

19  (4) 

Total  Patients3 

318 

688 

431 

1.  Criterion  for  diagnosis:  a 4-fold  or  greater  rise  in  HL  titer. 

2.  Number  of  patients  as  a percentage  of  the  total  at  each 
location. 

3.  Includes  all  patients  with  paired  sera  collected  3 or  more 
days  apart. 


1185 


> N*  ■<  **  * 


7-  j:  * 


I 


I ! 


results  differ  from  those  in  previously  reported  series  from 
Malaysia  in  that  these  patients  were  not  selected  for  symptoms, 
signs,  age  or  sex.  Thus  a balanced  indication  of  the  overall 
importance  of  the  infection  as  a cause  of  fever  is  obtained. 
Noteworthy  features  in  this  series  are  (1)  the  number  of  cases  in 
the  Bukit  Mendi  group  who  were  treated  as  outpatients,  often  with 
no  diagnosis  or  specific  treatment,  (2)  the  fact  that  jaundice  was 
present  in  only  2 {21)  of  the  86  cases,  (3)  no  mortality  was 
documented  and  (4)  the  majority  of  the  cases  were  not  suspected 
clinically. 

IDENTIFICATION  OF  STRAIN  ACTIVITY  IN  NATURALLY  OCCURRING 
SCRUB  TYPHUS  INFECTIONS 

Isolates  recovered  from  human  scrub  typhus  infections  have  been 
classified  on  the  basis  of  antigenic  composition  and  antibody 
response  to  infection  with  the  isolates.  Although  the  studies  are 
still  in  progress,  findings  to  date  indicate  that  the  Karp  strain 
group  produces  the  preponderance  of  symptomatic  infections  in  the 
study  area. 

NEAR-L. (L.)  arenicola 

A species  of  chigger  taxonomically  intermediate  to  L.  (L.) 
deliense  and  L.  (L.)  arenicola  has  been  found  to  occur  in  several 
locations  in  the  central  part  of  West  Malaysia.  This  species  is 
currently  being  referred  to  as  near-L.  (L. ) arenicola.  Tlje  scutal 
measurements  matches  that  of  L.  (L.)  arenicola  but  the  scutal  setae 
measurements  are  closer  to  L.  (L.-)  deliense.  Traub4  in  his  original 
description  of  L.  (L.)  arenicola  described  it  as  having  a palpal 
formula  of  NNNNN  but  indicated  that  "on  an  occasional  specimen,  the 
dorsal  seta  of  the  palpal  tibia  is  frayed  or,  rarely,  even  slightly 
branched'',  thus  giving  a palpal  formula  of  NNbNN.  Subsequent 
collections  of  L.  (L. ) arenicola  have  shown  that  the  palpal 
formula  is  more  often  NNbNN.  The  palpal  setae  of  this  intermediate 
species  is  also  NNbNN. 

The  name  arenicola  (or  "sand  loving")  was  originally  coined 
because  the  chigger  was  only  collected  from  sandy  beaches,  not  from 
rocky  beaches  in  which  the  scrub  or  forest  came  down  to  the  water's 
edge.  L.  (L.)  arenicola  has  been  collected  throughout  West  Malaysia 
from  only  sandy  beaches . 

The  chigger s which  are  currently  being  referred  to  as  near- 
arenicola  have  not  been  collected  from  a pure  sandy  habitat.  In 
fact,  some  of  the  black  plate  collections  have  been  from  a highly 
organic  soil  adjacent  to  a stream  bed.  This  species,  collected 
from  rodents  at  Bukit  Mendi,  tends  to  be  somewhat  host  specific. 

Of  64  collections,  58  have  been  from  Tupaia  glis , with  the  remaining 
being  collected  from  R.  tiomanicus  jalorensis  (4)  and  R.  argentiventer 
(2).  If  this  species  is  determined  to  be  a true  L.  (L.)  arenicola^ 


■X  r: £ -VT'^  SMWH' 


sy" 


‘ Ilf  II  Ml  - 


the  significance  of  the  finding  in  regards  to  the  distribution  of 
scrub  typhus  vectors  is  apparent. 

We  are  currently  attempting  to  establish  a colony  of  this 
species  of  chigger  from  the  central  part  of  West  Malaysia.  If  a 
colony  can  be  established,  then  cross -mating  of  this  species  with 
L.  (L.)  arenicola  and  other  taxonomically  similar  species  can  be 
attempted^  In  addition  taxonomic  studies  of  post-larval  stages 
(nymphs  and  adults)  can  be  undertaken. 

AN  ECOLOGICAL  STUDY  OF  RICKETTSIA  TSUTSUGAMUSHI  IN  THE  PRIMARY 
FOREST  OF  TAMAN  NEGARA,  WEST  MALAYSIA 

There  has  been  considerable  reference  to  the  possible  existence 
of  a jungle  cycle  of  scrub  typhus  within  the  literature,  but  little 
actual  evidence  of  such  occurrence  has  been  presented.  To  answer 
this  question,  rodents  and  their  ectoparasites  were  collected  from 
the  Taman  Negara,  West  Malaysia.  Much  of  the  area  is  primary 
forest  and  reachable  only  by  foot  or  boat.  A site  at  Lata  Berhad 
located  approximately  miles  from  the  park  headquarters  at  Kuala 
Tahan  was  selected.  This  area  was  fairly  accessible  by  boat  and 
ranged  from  approximately  250  feet  to  2000  feet  in  altitude. 

The  forest  canopy  was  contiguous  and  the  streams  were  mostly 
dry,  having  water  in  them  only  during  the  rainy  season.  A similar 
area  across  the  Sungai  Tahan  was  described  by  Soepadmo5  as  being 
undulating  hill  or  ridge  dipterocarp  forest. 

Manmals  were  trapped  in  small  animal  basket  traps  (Harrison)6. 
The  chiggers  were  removed  and  returned  to  the  laboratory  for 
identification.  All  the  manmals  were  held  in  traps  and  returned  to 
the  laboratory  for  identification  and  serological  examination.  The 
presence  of  rickettsial  antibody  was  determined  by  the 
microfluorescent  antibody  test  and  R.  tsutsugamushi  isolation 
attempts  were  made  using  the  mouse  passage  technique  (Jackson  et 
al.)7. 

Altogether  35  animals  comprising  10  species  of  rats,  squirrels, 
and  tree  shrews  were  collected  (Table  11).  These  included:  Rattus 
whiteheadi  (8),  R.  surifer  (6),  R.  rajah  (4),  R.  cremori venter  (l) , 
R.  sabanus  (10),  R.  muelleri  (1),  Tupaia  glis  J2) , Callosciurus 
nigrovittatus  (1),  Iomys  horsfieldi  (1)  anTTariscus  msignis  (1). 
the  trapping  success  rate  was  0.6  percent  (35/5479  trapping  nights) 
which  is  low  compared  to  success  rates  in  secondary  forests  in 
Malaysia  (Lim  & Heyneman)®,  but  comparable  to  other  primary  forest 
studies  (Lim) 9. 

Two  individual  rodents,  a R.  surifer  and  a R.  sabanus  were 
trapped  at  250  feet  elevation  in  the  fringe  habitat  by  the  side  of 
the  Kuala  Tahan  river.  The  rest  were  caught  in  primary  forest. 

All  the  animals  caught  were  lowland  forms  (Medway) 10.  r.  surifer 


1187 


and  Tupaia  glis  are  known  to  occur  from  sea-level  up  to  6000  feet 
(Harrison) Tr;  R.  sabunus  and  R.  whiteheadi  have  been  found  to  live 
as  high  as  2000  feet  in  forested  areas  around  Kuala  Lumpur  (Lim)12 
but  none  of  these  two  species  was  trapped  above  1100  feet. 


Of  the  2,107  chiggers  collected  during  this  study  (Table  12), 
only  a single  specimen  of  a vector,  L.  (L.)  deliense,  was  taken  from 
a R.  raj  ah.  This  one  chigger  was  the  only  chigger  present  on  the 
animal.  This  animal  was  trapped  at  approximately  1000  feet  in 
elevation.  Additionally,  the  only  other  species  of  Lept ot r omb id ium 
collected  were  L.  (L. ) bodense  (243:  11. SI  of  the  total  chiggers 
collected)  and  2 specimens  of  a Leptotrombidium  closely  related 
taxonomically  to  L.  (L.)  arenicola. 

By  far  the  largest  number  of  species  and  specimens  collected 
were  of  the  genus  Gahrliepia:  8 species  in  two  different  subgenera 
(Walchia  and  Gahrliepia)  totalling  1205  specimens  (57.2%).  G.  (W.) 
cuspidata  had  the  largest  number  of  specimens  collected;  587  or 
27.8a.  Walchiella  oudemansi  (419:  20.0a)  and  Ascoschoengast ia  (L. ) 
audyi  (214:  10.21)  were  the  only  other  species  in  which  large 
numbers  of  chiggers  were  collected. 


Sera  collected  from  the  rodents  were  screened  at  1/25  dilution 
by  FA  methods  for  antibody  to  the  Karp,  TA  678  and  Gilliam  strains 
of  R.  tsutsugamushi,  epidemic  typhus,  R.  Canada,  Siberian  tick 
typhus , and  Q fever.  Of  this  spectrum  of  antigens  only  two  R. 
surifer  rats  were  positive  for  0 fever  antibody.  No  antibody  was 
detected  to  any  of  the  other  strains  or  species  of  rickettsia. 

Both  whole  blood  and  spleen/kidney  pools  were  examined  for  R. 
tsutsugamushi  by  the  standard  technique.  The  tissue  pool  from  a 
R.  sabaninTand  both  the  blood  and  tissue  pool  from  a Tupaia  glis 
yielded  isolates.  All  three  isolates  were  antigenically  similar 
and  related  to  the  Karp  and  TA  763  strains.  I.iese  antigens  have 
been  the  most  common  detected  in  surveys  conducted  in  inhabited 
areas  of  the  east  and  west  coast  of  Peninsular  Malaysia. 


EFFECT  OF  CYCLOPHOSPHAMIDE,  AZATHIOPRINE , AND  5'  FLUORCXJRACIL 
ON  RICKETTSIA  TSUTSUGAMUSHI  INFECTIONS  IN  MICE 


The  class  of  compounds  most  widely  used  to  block  the  immune 
response  to  infectious  and  non-inf ectious  antigens  are  alkylating 
agents . Of  these  the  most  widely  studied  is  cyclophosphamide  (CY) . 
Kazar  et  al.^  studied  the  effects  of  CY  on  Rickettsia  akari,  R. 
prowazeki  and  Cox ie  11a  bumeti  infections  in  mice.  Their  studies 
showed  that  CY~increased  the  virulence  and  the  number  of  rickettsia 
present  in  tissues  and  was  effective  in  suppressing  antibody 
formation  when  given  at  the  specified  intervals.  Tachibana  and 
Kobayashi^  found  that  CY  increased  the  virulence  and  enhanced  the 
growth  of  R.  sennetsu  in  mice.  Maximum  titers  in  spleen  tissue 
were  approximately  two  logjo  higher  in  chemoinmunosuppressed  mice 
than  in  control  animals. 


Antimetabslites  such  as  purine  and  pyrimidine  analogs  have 
also  been  shown  to  have  significant  effects  on  immune  response. 

For  this  study  the  pyrimidine  analog  5 fluorouracil  (5-FU)  and  the 
purine  analog  azathioprine  were  selected  as  representative  of  this 
group  of  compounds. 

Many  strains  of  R.  tsutsugamushi  are  not  lethal  for  mice,  and 
death  occurs  in  mice  infected  with  virulent  strains  coincident  with 
the  appearance  of  antibody.  The  response  of  chemoinmunosuppressed 
mice  to  inoculation  with  a mouse  virulent  and  a mouse  avirulent 
strain  was  studied  in  anticipation  that  such  studies  would  further 
elucidate  the  mechanisms  responsible  for  pathogenicity. 

The  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi  strains  used  in  the  study  were 
propagated  in  specific  pathogen  free  hens'  eggs  purchased  from 
SPAFAS,  Inc.,  Norwich,  Connecticut.  The  Karp  strain  was  uniformly 
lethal  following  inoculation,  but  the  TA  686  strain  was  not  lethal 
to  our  particular  strain  of  mice.  A 201  yolk  sac  suspension  of  the 
Karp  strain  contained  1()8*5  LD50  and  a 201,  suspension  of  the  TA  686 
contained  10?-6  median  immunizing  doses  for  mice  (ID50). 

D 

Cyclophosphamide  was  purchased  as  F.ndoxan-Asta  200  mg  vials 
for  injection  from  Asta-Werke  Ag,  Chemische  Fabrik,  Brackwede, 
Federal  Republic  of  Germany.  Azathioprine  B.P.  was  purchased  as 
Imuran,  50  mg  tablets  from  Burroughs -We 11 come  and  Co.,  London. 

5- fluorouracil  was  purchased  in  the  injectable  form  from  F. 
Hoffman-La  Roche  and  Co.  Ltd.,  Basle,  Switzerland. 

Azathioprine  was  employed  at  a dosage  of  3 mg/kg/day;  and  5-FU 
at  10  mg/kg/day.  CY  was  given  either  at  a continuous  dosage  of  45 
mg/kg/day,  at  a single  dose  of  400  mg/kg,  or  at  a dose  of  400  mg/kg 
followed  by  a second  dose  of  200  mg/kg  3 days  later  depending  on 
the  experimental  design. 

Initial  experiments  were  conducted  to  determine  the  effect  of 
chemoimmunosuppression  on  survival  following  challenge  with  the 
mouse  lethal  Karp  strain  of  R.  tsutsugamushi.  Administration  of  CY 
was  either  initiated  one  day  post  challenge  and  given  until  7 days 
post  challenge,  or  given  as  a single  dose  concurrent  with  challenge. 

The  results  are  shown  in  Figure  2.  All  the  experimental  mice 
died  following  inoculation  of  the  rickettsia  and  administration  of 
the  drugs.  The  survival  time  appeared  to  be  prolonged  with 
azathioprine  and  5-FU  and  shortened  with  daily  doses  of  CY.  These 
changes  were  consistent  when  the  experiment  was  repeated.  No 
deaths  occurred  in  control  groups  administered  the  drugs  alone. 

The  same  parameter  was  studied  under  the  same  conditions 
following  an  equivalent  infectious  dose  of  the  TA  686  strain.  This 
strain  is  not  lethal  for  mice,  but  previously  exposed  mice  are 
immune  to  challenge  with  virulent  strains.  Since  no  mice  died  when 


I 


I 


i 


Capt ion 


Figure  2.  Effect  of  chemoimnunosuppression  on  infection  with  the 
mouse  virulent  Karp  strain  of  R.  tsutsugamushi. 


A CY  daily,  days  1-8  post  inoculation; A CY  single  dose  on  day 
1 post  inoculation;  0 azathioprine  on  day  1;  • FUDR  on  day  1; 

X control  - Karp  strain  only. 


inoculated  with  TA  686  alone  or  with  TA  686  and  azathioprine  or 
5-FU,  only  the  response  of  mice  to  CY  inoculation  is  shown  in 
Figure  3.  The  mice  given  a single  8 mg  dose  of  CY  first  evidenced 
signs  of  illness  on  day  10  post  challenge  which  was  approximately  2 
days  longer  than  the  incubation  period  of  the  virulent  Karp  strain. 

A few  mice  died  each  day  through  day  15  post  inoculation  when  17/39 
(44$)  were  alive.  The  daily  administration  of  a small  dose  of  CY 
with  TA  686  produced  signs  of  infection  1 day  later,  but  the  death 
patterns  more  nearly  approximated  the  Karp  strain  in  that  the 
majority  of  the  mice  died  ever  a three  day  period.  At  28  days,  the 
termination  of  the  experiment,  10$  (4/40)  of  the  mice  were  alive. 

The  effect  of  varying  the  day  of  administration  of  the  drugs  on 
survival  and  antibody  titers  is  shown  in  Table  13.  No  deaths 
occurred  in  the  experimental  groups  inoculated  with  TA  686  strain 
and  given  azathioprine  or  5-FU.  Flowever,  CY  given  by  either  dosage 
schedule  increased  the  sensitivity  of  the  mice  to  this  normally 
avirulent  strain.  When  the  single  dose  was  given  near  to  the  time 
of  the  rickettsial  challenge  some  mice  survived,  but  when  the  CY 
was  given  between  days  4 and  7 post  challenge  there  were  no 
survivors . 

The  titers  of  rickettsia  in  liver/spleen  pools  and  in 
peritoneal  exudate  were  determined  when  all  of  the  CY  mice  were 
showing  signs  of  the  disease  and  approximately  20$  had  died 
(Table  14).  At  8 days  post  inoculation  little  difference  could  be 
detected  between  the  titers  in  peritoneal  fluid  between  mice 
inoculated  with  CY  and  those  inoculated  with  PBS.  Also,  little 
difference  could  be  detected  between  the  titers  in  tissues  from 
mice  treated  with  a single  8 mg  dose  on  day  3 and  control  titers. 
When  the  8 mg  dose  was  followed  on  day  5 with  a 4 mg  dose  the 
maximum  mean  difference  was  1.0  log^o* 

When  peritoneal  exudate  containing  cells  was  stained  by  the 
direct  fluorescent  antibody  method  a distinct  difference  was  noted 
between  CY  treated  mice  and  the  other  experimental  groups  as  well 
as  controls.  The  individual  organisms  stained  much  more  distinctly 
and  larger  numbers  were  visible.  We  reasoned  that  significant 
levels  of  humoral  antibody  would  coat  the  organisms  and  interfere 
with  the  direct  staining  technique.  A series  of  exudates  were 
stained  with  the  direct  fluorescent  antibody  method  using  conjugated 
rabbit  origin  antimouse  globulin,  and  the  rickettsia  from  the 
azathioprine,  5-FU,  and  control  animals  fluoresced  indicating  that 
they  were  coated  with  mouse  globulin.  However,  the  organisms  from 
CY  treated  mice  could  not  be  observed  by  the  use  of  antimouse 
globulin  alone. 

Smears  were  prepared  from  the  peritoneal  fluid  of  drug  treated, 
infected  mice  and  stained  with  monospecific  conjugate.  No  antigens 
were  detected  in  the  isolates  that  had  not  been  detected  in  the 
original  seed  material. 


1194 


■ •»■■...  - -.~-^  -■>. 


Table  13 


The  Effect  of  Varying  the  Day  of  Administration  of  Cyclophosphamide 
on  Survival  and  IFA  Titer  in  Mice  Experimentally  Infected  with  TA  686 

Strain  of  R.  tsutsuuamushi 


Administration 
f 


Simile  dose 


Control 


Titer 

Titer 

320 

80  j 

640 

160 

i 

640 

160 

i 

640 

320 

320 

160 

) 

320 

160 

640 

160 

640 

160 

320 

160 

80 

160 

a.  0 was  day  of  inoculation  of  TA  686  strain. 

b.  percent. 

c.  reciprocal  homologous  IFA  titer  of  sera  pool  from  survivors  at 
28  days. 


Table  14 


R.  tsutsugamushi  Titers  in  Normal  and  CY  Treated  Mice 


Strain 

PBS 

L _ ^ 

8 mg 

12  mg 

TA  686  (avirulent) 

Liver/spleen  pools 

5.6a,  4.7 

5.8,  5.5 

6.6,  5.8 

Peritoneal  fluid 

4.6,  4.2 

5.2,  4.5 

VI 

ss 

4* 

00 

ivi  p (virulent) 

Liver/spleen  pools 

6.3,  6.5 

NDb 

7.3,  6.0 

Blood 

4.5,  3.3 

i 

ND 

5.4,  3.8 

a.  Log values  of  separate  experiments. 

b.  Not  done. 


1198 


■ "AT- 


The  antibody  titers  presented  in  Table  13  are  from  sera 
collected  at  28  days  post  inoculation.  The  titers  of  the  4 groups 
of  control  mice  varied  from  1/80  to  1/160  which  was  not 
significantly  different  from  the  titers  of  the  groups  given  CY 
subsequent  to  the  inoculation  of  organisms.  Groups  given  CY  prior 
to  or  concurrent  with  challenge  usually  had  lower  titers,  but  the 
small  numbers  of  survivors  in  these  groups  may  have  distorted  the 
results.  Mice  given  azathioprine  had  significantly  higher  titers 
than  controls  at  28  days,  but  no  difference  was  detected  between 
control  and  experimental  values  following  the  administration  of  5-FU. 

The  antibody  response  of  mice  following  inoculation  of  the 
TA  686  strain  with  drug  treatment  was  studied  to  determine  the 
production  of  antibody  to  each  of  the  9 putative  prototype  strains. 
The  results  are  presented  in  Tab  15.  The  titers  were  closely 
associated  in  every  case  with  the  sane  5 strains.  This  indicated 
that  immunosuppression  early  in  tne  course  of  the  infection  did  not 
allow  additional  antigens  to  be  expressed  in  comparison  to  control 
mice. 

Idle  inoculation  of  homologous  convalescent  sera  had  no  effect 
on  the  survival  of  mice  inoculated  with  CY.  When  CY  was  given  90°& 
of  the  mice  died  following  inoculation  with  the  TA  686  regardless  of 
the  administration  of  0.5  ml  of  homologous  antibody  which  titered 
1/320  in  IFA. 

The  administration  of  CY  to  mice  infected  with  an  avirulent 
strain  of  R.  tsutsugamushi  increased  the  virulence  of  the  strain  in 
the  treated  mice".  These  results  are  similar  to  those  found  with 
other  rickettsia  (Kazar  et  al)13.  The  cause  of  the  increased 
virulence  in  R.  tsutsugamushi  is  not  as  clear  as  it  is  in  the  other 
rickettsial  d I senses ."  Increased  virulence  in  immunosuppressed  mice 
has  been  correlated  with  increased  growth  of  the  organism  in  R. 
sennetsu,  R.  prowazeki „ R.  akari  and  C.  burnet i ; but  we  did  not 
find  such  a correlation  In  R.  tsutsugamushi'.  Titers  in  spleen 
cells,  blood,  and  peritoneal  fluids  of  imnunosuppressed  mice  were 
<1  logjQ  different  than  in  control  animals. 

In  this  study  CY  treated  mice  died  following  inoculation  of  a 
normally  non-lethal  strain.  Deaths  were  not  mitigated  by  passive 
immunity,  and  mice  which  had  recovered  from  the  infection  several 
months  before  became  rickettsemic  and  a small  percentage  died 
following  CY  treatment.  These  facts  indicate  that  the  increased 
virulence  can  not  be  solely  attributed  to  the  inhibition  of 
antibody  production.  Other  investigators  have  postulated  a 
nonspecific  toxic  effect  of  CY  which  may  be  important  in  decreasing 
the  resistance  of  animals  following  inoculation  of  normally 
avirulent  strains  or  species. 

There  is  general  agreement  that  CY  is  effective  in  aborting 
antibody  responses  when  given  concurrently  with  or  soon  after 


1199 


— ^ . 


antigen  (Aisenberg)1^.  In  our  system,  the  titers  of  the  survivors 
did  not  appear  to  be  reduced  when  compared  to  controls  which  had  not 
received  CY.  This  was  a result  of  the  unavoidable  bias  of 
necessarily  studying  the  titers  in  survivors  and  our  choice  of  28 
days  as  a time  to  measure  antibody  production.  Stockman  et  al. 
showed  that  mice  given  an  equivalent  dose  of  CY  regained  B cell 
responsiveness  at  10-14  days.  The  organism  persists  for  long 
periods  of  time  in  mice:  and  therefore,  was  able  to  act  as  an 
immunogen  once  the  mouse  had  recovered  B cell  reactivity. 

The  increase  in  antibody  titer  following  treatment  with 
azathioprine  was  not  expected  since  the  drug  is  widely  used  to  reduce 
the  immune  response  to  homografts.  However,  this  property  has  been 
used  to  advantage  in  the  laboratory  to  produce  hyperimmune  sera  to 
several  strains  which  are  poorly  antigenic. 

A NEW  CAPSULE  FOR  FEEDING  CHIGGERS  (ACARINA:  TROMBICULIDAE) 

In  the  life  cycle  of  trombiculid  mites,  the  larval  stage  or 
chigger  must  feed  on  a vertebrate  host.  Thus,  to  maintain  colonies 
for  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi  transmission  and  general  bionomic 
studies,  chiggers  are  usually  fed  on  laboratory  white  mice.  Two 
basic  feeding  methods  have  been  employed  at  the  Institute  for  Medical 
Research  in  Kuala  Lumpur.  The  ear  feeding  technique  as  described 
by  Nadchatram1?  has  been  used  for  both  mass  feeding  and  single 
rearing,  but  intensive  observation  of  the  feeding  of  the  chiggers  is 
difficult  as  the  mouse  must  often  be  anesthetized.  The  use  of  a 
capsule  (Baker  et  al.)*8,  glued  to  the  back  of  a vhite  mouse,  has 
been  useful  for  feeding  and  provides  a means  of  close  observation. 

The  first  capsule  for  the  feeding  of  chiggers  was  constructed 
from  the  screw  top  end  of  a toothpaste  tube  and  was  followed  by  the 
use  of  a small  piece  of  laboratory  glass  tubing  that  had  been 
flanged  to  provide  a greater  surface  area  for  application  of  glue 
(Baker  et  al)18.  This  type  of  capsule  has  proved  effective  for 
several  years,  however,  a major  disadvantage  to  this  type  of 
capsule  is  the  small  area  in  which  the  chiggers  are  applied  (5  mm) , 
making  observation  of  the  feeding  chigger  difficult. 

The  development  of  a new  capsule  was  initiated  in  conjunction 
with  systemic  acaricidal  studies  (Dohany  et  ai.)1^.  Several  types 
of  capsules  were  tried,  including  flanged  tubing,  the  neck  portion 
of  screw  cap  glass  shell  vials  and  the  upper  portion  of  disposable 
hypodermic  syringes  with  the  rubber  from  the  plunger  acting  as  a 
cap.  None  of  these  proved  satisfactory  for  the  intended  purpose  of 
these  studies.  The  most  effective  capsule  proved  to  be  a portion 
of  a container  for  a disposable  hypodermic  syringe  (Figure  4). 

To  prepare  the  capsule,  the  expanded  portion  of  a 2.5  cc 
hypodermic  syringe  container  was  cut  off  and  the  resulting  hole 
was  smoothed  of  its  rough  edges.  A nontoxic  glue  (Bostick 
Universal  Cement)  was  applied  to  the  turned -under  edge  of  the 


1201 


Figure  4.  Construction  of  chigger  holding  capsule  made  from  the  container 
of  a disposable  hypodermic  syringe. 


capsule.  The  capsule  was  then  applied  to  the  previously  shaved 
back  of  a guinea  pig,  laboratory  mouse  (Figure  5),  or  silvered 
leaf  monkey  (Figure  6) . Masking  tape  was  wrapped  around  the 
capsule  and  animal  to  hold  the  capsule  in  place  until  the  glue  had 
set,  usually  for  one  to  two  hours. 

The  plastic  top  of  the  container  was  used  as  the  cover  for 
the  capsule.  Filter  paper  was  cut  to  fit  into  the  top  and  was  kept 
moist  throughout  its  use.  This  moisture  prevented  desiccation  of 
the  chigger  upon  detaching. 

While  applying  the  chiggers,  a piece  of  lens  paper  is  used  as 
a gasket  between  the  cap  and  the  capsule  proper,  thus  preventing 
escape  of  the  unengorged  chiggers.  For  laboratory  mice  the  cap  is 
removed  after  all  the  chiggers  attach  to  the  host,  and  the  engorged 
chiggers  are  collected  from  a pan  of  water  as  described  by  Baker  et 
al.lo.  This  method  has  been  used  for  approximately  one  year  with 
good  success  for  the  rearing  of  colonies  of  scrub  typhus  vector 
chiggers  (Leptotrombidium  spp.).  Alternatively,  the  cap  can  be 
left  on  and  the  chiggers  can  "be  collected  at  specific  intervals. 
Usually  the  chiggers  move  to  the  top  of  the  capsule  upon 
disengaging  and  become  trapped  in  the  moisture  droplets  of  the 
cap,  allowing  for  easy  collection. 

Advantages  of  this  capsule  over  the  glass  tubing  capsule 
include:  (1)  ease  of  production  (used  hypodermic  syringe  containers 
can  be  obtained  from  most  hospitals) , (2)  an  increased  feeding  area 
allows  for  an  increased  number  of  chiggers  to  feed  and  easier 
observation  of  feeding  chiggers,  and  (3)  a tight  fitting  cap  is 
included. 

DEVELOPMENT  OF  AN  ANIMAL  MODEL  FOR  R.  TSUTSUGAMUSHI 

The  laboratory  mouse  has  been  used  for  many  years  for  the 
isolation  of  R.  tsutsugamushi  and  as  an  animal  model  for  the  study 
of  R.  tsutsugamushi  infections.  However,  the  requirement  for  a 
larger,  intermediate  animal  model  is  well  recognized.  Work  in  this 
laboratory  has  shown  that  silvered  leaf -monkeys , Presbytis 
cristatus , are  susceptible  to  infection  with  R.  tsutsugamushi. 
Following  intradermal  inoculation  with  virulent  prototype  strains 
the  monkeys  developed  fever,  eschars,  lymphadenopathy,  rickettsemia, 
and  specific  antibodies  to  the  infecting  strain.  However,  there 
were  several  drawbacks  to  the  use  of  silvered  leaf-monkeys:  (1)  the 
supply  is  not  unlimited;  (2)  shipping  of  the  animals  would  be 
impossible,  difficult  or  impractical,  thus  geographically  limiting 
their  use;  (3)  some  captured  animals  have  shown  evidence  of  prior 
natural  infections;  (4)  many  animals  are  lost  (up  to  40  50i)  during 
the  conditioning  period;  and  (5)  the  apparent  inability  to  restrain 
leaf  monkeys  for  a sufficient  period  of  time  to  allow  chiggers  in  a 
capsule  to  feed  to  repletion  seriously  jeapordized  the  potential 
use  of  this  animal  as  a satisfactory  model  for  scrub  typhus. 


1203 


Figure  6.  Chigger  holding  capsule 
leaf -monkey. 

1204 


attached  to  back  of  silvered 


Figure  5.  Chigger  holding  capsule  attached  to  back  of  laboratory 
mouse . 


These  findings  prompted  us  to  pursue  the  development  of  an 
intermediate  animal  model  on  a broad  front.  During  the  past  year 
other  animals  have  been  considered  and  studied,  and  the  above 
mentioned  problems  associated  with  the  use  of  silvered  leaf-monkeys 
have  been  reexamined  with  the  objective  of  overcoming  or  reducing 
the  limitations. 


Serological  studieszu  have  indicated  that  the  dog  is  often 
naturally  infected  in  endemic  areas.  This  observation  plus  the 
results  of  recent  studies  with  R.  rickettsii  which  clearly 
demonstrated  that  the  dog  is  a "good  model  for  the  human  disease 
prompted  investigation  of  the  dog  as  a possible  animal  model  for 
R.  tsutsugamushi  infection.  Additionally,  dogs  are  easily  acquired, 
can  be  handled  readily,  have  been  previously  used  in  well  documented 
laboratory  studies  in  which  ectoparasites  in  capsules  were  allowed 
to  successfully  feed,  and  are  one  of  the  animals  on  which  an 
enormous  amount  of  basic  biological  data  has  accumulated. 


In  addition  to  the  dog  we  have  recently  studied  experimental 
infections  in  bom  - and  raised-in-captivity  cynomolgus  monkeys. 
Early  studies  with  this  species  indicated  that  it  was  relati.ely 
resistant  to  disease  following  experimental  inoculation  with  R. 
tsutsugamushi , and  previous  reports  from  this  laboratory  indicated 
that  tne  resistance  to  disease  in  wild  caught  cynomolgus  monkeys 
may  be  due  to  imnunity  resulting  from  prior  infection,  since 
antibody  was  detectable  in  a large  number  of  sera  collected  from 
wild  caught  animals. 21 


Studies  on  dogs  and  cynomolgus  monkeys  are  still  in  progress 
and  final  conclusions  on  their  potential  as  a model  for  R. 
tsutsugamushi  must  await  completion  of  these  studies. 


The  other  approach  in  the  development  of  an  intermediate 
animal  model  consisted  of  further  examination  of  the  silvered  leaf- 
monkey  with  the  objective  of  overcoming  factors  which  appeared  to 
limit  its  use. 


It  is  highly  desirable  in  some  studies  to  infect  animals  by 
the  natural  route  (i.e.  feeding  of  infected  chiggers) . Thus,  a 
means  of  producing  chigger-transmitted  disease  in  controlled 
studies  is  essential  to  the  development  of  a reliable  intermediate 
animal  model.  As  was  mentioned  above  early  attempts  in  this  unit 
to  develop  a reliable  and  predictable  means  of  producing  chigger- 
transmitted  infections  in  silvered  leaf  monkeys  failed  due  to  the 
inability  to  restrain  the  animals  sufficiently  long  to  allow 
chiggers  to  feed  to  repletion. 


Studies  have  been  initiated  to  develop  a more  suitable  means  of 
restraining  silvered  leaf-monkeys.  In  preliminary  trials,  using 
a newly  designed  restraint  chair,  silvered  leaf -monkeys  have  been 
restrained  for  a period  of  5 days,  sufficient  to  allow  chiggers  to 
feed  to  repletion. 


W 


1205 


SYSTEMIC  ACARICIDE  TESTS  USING  DIMETHQATE  FOR  THE  CONTROL 

OF  CHIGGERS 


Acaricidal  spraying  for  the  control  of  chiggers  frequently  is 
not  feasible.  The  habitat  for  the  vectors,  particularly  scrub 
habitat  of  L.  (L.)  deliense,  is  often  too  dense  to  permit  ease  of 
spraying  or  effective  coverage.  Use  of  a systemic  acaricide, 
particularly  in  conjunction  with  other  control  measures,  could 
prove  valuable  in  certain  situations. 

Systemic  insecticides  are  effective  in  the  control  of  numerous 
insects  affecting  animals,  particularly  cattle  grubs,  fleas,  lice 
and  ticks.  Dimethoate  used  systemically  has  proven  successful  in 
the  control  of  chiggers  in  laboratory  tests  in  the  United  States 
(Dohany  et  al,  to  be  published)  and  in  Malaysia  (Dohany,  unpublished 
data).  Dimethoate  is  a general  usage  organophosphate  insecticide 
which  is  rapidly  eliminated  from  the  animal. 

An  area  located  on  the  Kuala  Selangor-Kuala  Lumpur  road  was 
selected  for  a preliminary  study.  The  site  consisted  of  a small 
island  of  forest  surrounded  by  lalang.  A grid  system  of  120  traps 
and  50  dimethoate  bait  stations  was  established.  Bait,  consisting 
of  0.01  per  cent  dimethoate  mixed  with  a 1:1  ratio  of  ground  com 
and  milo,  is  maintained  in  the  bait  stations.  The  bait  is  removed 
only  during  trapping  periods.  Rodents  are  trapped  for  4 nights  of 
each  month.  The  chiggers  are  removed  from  the  rodents  and  the 
rodents  are  marked  and  released  for  retrapping.  A control  site 
separated  from  the  study  site,  was  established  in  the  same  general 
area  with  70  trapping  locations.  Acceptance  of  the  bait  has  proved 
to  be  good  and  initial  results  indicated  that  there  is  considerable 
reduction  in  the  chigger  population  within  the  dimethoate  area 
(Figure  7).  Although  reduction  has  occurred,  complete  control  has 
not  been  obtained  due  to  irmugration  of  rodents  from  adjacent  lalang 
and  nearby  forests.  Future  studies  will  be  concentrated  in  a 
location  in  which  such  imnigration  of  nontreated  rodents  does  not 
occur . 

DISEASES  OF  MILITARY  WORKING  DOGS 
Tropical  Canine  Pancytopenia 

Since  the  early  1970's  USAMRU  has  provided  minimal  technical 
support  to  the  Canine  Unit  of  the  Malaysian  Armed  Forces.  The  unit 
is  located  at  the  Jungle  Warfare  School,  Pulada,  Johor  Bahru. 

Pulada  is  utilized  as  a home  base  for  dogs  used  in  operations  as 
well  as  training  and  breeding.  The  initial  support  consisted 
primarily  of  surveillance  for  tropical  canine  pancytopenia  (TCP) , a 
disease  which  was  responsible  for  the  death  of  approximately  500 
U.S.  military  dogs  in  Vietnam.  In  the  1960's  numerous  military, 
police,  and  privately  owned  dogs  died  of  the  disease  in  Singapore 
and  Malaysia.  This  included  a large  number  of  dogs  at  the  Jungle 
Warfare  School  at  Pulada. 


1206 


Figure  7.  Control  of  trombiculid  mites  with  the  use  of  a systemic  acaricide-dimethoate 


Before  a serological  test  became  available  periodic 
hematological  examinations  provided  the  only  practical  means  of 
surveillance.  With  the  development  of  a serological  test  for 
Ehrlichia  cards,  the  causative  agent  of  TO5,  a more  definitive 
means  of  identifying  infected  animals  became  available.  With  the 
collaboration  of  investigators  at  WRAIR  and  the  University  of 
Illinois,  periodic  serological  examinations  have  been  made  on  the 
dogs  at  Pulada. 

The  Canine  Unit  at  Pulada  has  afforded  an  excellent  opportunity 
to  observe  and  study  selected  clinical  and  epidemiological  aspects 
of  diseases  of  military  working  dogs  and  the  efficacy  of  various 
therapeutic  and  prophylactic  measures  in  treating  and  controlling 
these  diseases. 

Following  the  report  of  Amyx  et  al.22,  which  showed  that  dogs 
given  tetracycline  hydrochloride  orally  at  a daily  rate  of  3 mg  per 
pound  body  weight  were  refractoiy  to  infection  with  E.  canis,  a 
decision  was  made  in  1972  to  gi\e  each  dog  in  the  unit  one  250  mg. 
capsule  of  tetracycline  hydrochloride  in  its  daily  feed.  The  policy 
has  continued  for  four  years. 

Sera  collected  in  1972  from  22  dogs  were  tested  for  antibodies 
to  E.  cartis  in  the  immunofluorescence  test.  Seven  of  these  sera 
contained  demonstrable  antibody.  Since  E.  canis  has  been  shown  to 
produce  infections  which  persist  in  untreated  dogs  for  many  years, 
one  can  assume  that  many,  if  not  all,  of  the  dogs  serologically 
positive  in  1972  were  indeed  infected  despite  a lack  of  overt 
clinical  signs.  These  findings  also  provide  evidence  that  the 
organism  is  endemic  in  the  areas  in  which  the  dogs  are  trained  and 
utilized. 

Since  1972  there  has  been  no  clinical  evidence  of  infection  in 
the  unit.  Recent  serological  studies  on  50  dogs  showed  that  only  2 
dogs  had  titers  to  E.  canis,  and  in  both  instances  the  titers  were 
low  (1:20).  In  addition  no  untoward  side  effects  from  continuous 
administration  of  tetracycline  have  been  observed,  and  no  impairment 
of  training  or  working  capabilities  of  the  dogs  has  occurred. 

These  studies  plus  those  recently  reported  from  Thailand^  have 
demonstrated  that  TCP  can  be  controlled  in  military  dogs  by  daily 
administration  of  tetracycline  without  untoward  effects. 

Chronic  Anemia  in  Military  Dogs  at  Pulada 

During  the  past  two  years  a large  number  of  the  60  military 
dogs  of  the  Malaysian  Army  at  Pulada  in  Johor  Bahru  have  developed 
an  anemia  which  rendered  them  incapable  of  duty.  Sone  dogs  have  had 
repeated  episodes.  Serological  evidence  indicated  that  the  cause 
was  babesiosis.  Blood  inoculation  studies  confirmed  this  diagnosis. 
Five  normal  dogs  were  inoculated  with  the  blood  of  five  military 
dogs  with  low  packed  cell  volume.  Of  the  five  dogs  inoculated  two 


1208 


mm 


* !.  wm.r  MUM  i.m» 


developed  clinical  signs  typical  of  babesiosis  with  Babesia 
gibsoni  organisms  visible  in  blood  smears.  Four  of  the  five 
inoculated  dogs  converted  from  negative  to  positive  for  babesia 
on  serological  examination. 


Rabesiosis  probably  goes  unrecognized  in  many  pet  dogs  which 
are  seldom  required  to  do  vigorous  work  or  exercise.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  military  dog  is  exercised  over  a prescribed  course 
on  a regular  basis  and  any  loss  of  stamina  becomes  immediately 
evident  to  the  dog's  handler.  The  anemia,  which  is  often  severe 
renders  the  dog  incapable  of  completing  a course,  or  worse, 
incapable  of  properly  performing  field  duty.  These  dogs  are  being 
utilized  as  tracker  dogs  in  jungle  terrain  and  are  sent  out 
routinely  for  duty.  The  dogs  then  return  to  Pulada  to  wait  for 
reassignment.  In  order  to  combat  the  problem  of  babesiosis  in  this 
group  of  military  dogs  more  information  is  required  concerning  the 
clinical  disease,  the  epidemiology,  and  effective  means  of 
treatment  or  control. 


MANAGEMENT  OF  TROPICAL  LABORATORY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES 


Respons ibil it ies  are  shared  with  IMR  for  production  of 
research  animals.  The  major  effort  is  related  to  mouse  production 
although  rabbits,  guinea  pigs,  hamsters,  rats  and  gerbils  are  also 
bred.  Approximately  100,000  mice  are  produced  each  year  and  USAMRU 
uses  about  60$  of  that  number. 


A group  of  silvered  leaf -monkeys  were  acquired  and  conditioned 
for  use  in  scrub  typhus  work.  This  species  is  extremely  fragile, 
and  of  51  animals  acquired  only  26  survived  the  conditioning 
period.  Necropsies  were  performed  on  all  dead  animals,  however,  few 
lesions  were  seen.  Tissues  were  collected  from  some  animals  for 
histological  examination,  and  the  cause  of  death  was  generally  felt 
to  be  of  enteric  origin. 


Cynomolgus  Monkey  Breeding  Colony 


Reports  in  the  literature  based  on  serological  studies  indicate 
that  a large  number  of  wild  caught  cynomolgus  monkeys  have  been 
naturally  exposed  to  scrub  typhus.  In  order  to  supply  monkeys  which 
had  not  previously  been  exposed  to  scrub  typhus  a breeding  colony 
was  initiated.  The  facility  used  to  house  the  colony  has  a concrete 
floor  and  consists  of  a wooden  supporting  frame  with  2"  x 2"  wire 
mesh  walls  and  a zinc  sheet  roof.  Piped  water  is  available  for 
cleaning  and  general  sanitation  purposes.  The  colony  consists  of 
two  groups  comprised  of  a male  and  ten  females.  Each  group  is  kept 
in  an  area  approximately  8 feet  wide,  12  feet  long  and  7 feet  high. 
All  breeders  were  tuberculin  tested  and  found  to  be  negative  by 
intradermal  test.  In  addition,  each  animal  was  cultured  and  found 
to  he  free  of  enteric  bacterial  pathogens  and  underwent  a minimum 
of  two  treatments  with  levamisole'  until  no  intestinal  parasite  ova 


‘Nilverm  - Imperial  Chemical  Industries  Ltd.,  Cheshire,  England. 


1209 


1 


:..TyT.  T v 


fr 


were  present  in  stool  samples  examined  by  flotation. 

The  first  group  was  placed  together  in  September  1975  and  the 
second  group  was  placed  together  between  December  1975  and  March 
1976.  Some  difficulty  was  encountered  with  the  second  group  and 
several  animals  were  mauled  and/or  killed  before  a compatible 
grouping  could  be  arranged.  Thus,  in  the  second  group  there  was  an 
adjustment  period  over  several  months  with  culling  and  replacement 
of  incompatible  animals. 

There  have  been  eight  births  in  the  first  group  although  only 
five  are  surviving.  One  infant  was  stillborn  and  two  were  killed 
shortly  after  birth.  Since  the  last  death  occurred  a new  procedure 
has  been  instituted  whereby  pregnant  females  are  placed  into  smaller 
cages  within  the  gang  cage  room.  They  are  left  in  the  gang  cage 
room  so  their  association  with  other  members  of  their  group  is  not 
severed  completely.  It  was  felt  that  complete  severance  of  this 
association  might  cause  fighting  when  the  females  were  reintroduced 
after  weaning  of  their  infants  at  6 months  of  age. 

\t  present  there  is  a female  in  the  advanced  stages  of  pregnancy 
in  the  first  group  and  three  pregnant  females  in  the  second  group. 

Infants  are  weighed  once  each  month  and  recordings  are  made  of 
tooth  eruptions  and  weights. 


mm 


Project  3A762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  071  Field  Studies  of  Rickettsioses  and  Other  Tropical 
Diseases 

Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Hubert,  A. A.,  and  Baker,  H.J.:  Studies  on  the  habitats  and 

population  of  Leptotrombidium  (Leptotrombidium)  akamushi  and  L.  (L.) 
deliense  in  Malaya  (Acarina:  TromDiculidae) . Am.  J.  Hyg.  78:  131- 
142,  1963. 

2.  Shaffer,  J.G.,  and  Goldin,  M.:  In  Clinical  Diagnosis  by 
Laboratory  Methods.  Ed.  Davidsohn  and  Wells,  W.B.  Saunders  Co., 
Philadelphia,  Ch.24,  p.885,  1962. 

3.  Gaultney,  J.B.,  Wende,  R.D.,  and  Williams,  R.P.: 
Microagglutination  procedures  for  febrile  agglutination  tests.  Appl. 
Microbiol.,  22:  635,  1971. 

4.  Traub,  R. : Two  new  species  of  chiggers  of  the  genus 

Leptotrombidium  (Acarina,  Trombiculidae) . Malaysian  Parasites  XLV. 
Studies  from  the  Institute  for  Medical  Research,  No. 29:  198-204, 

1960. 

5.  Soepadmo,  E.:  Plants  and  vegetation  along  the  paths  from 

Kuala  Tahan  to  Gunong  Tahan.  Malay  Nat.  J.  24:  118-124,  1971. 

6.  Harrison,  J.L.:  A simple  trap  for  squirrels.  J.  Mammal. 

41:  142-143,  1960. 

7.  Jackson,  E.B.,  Danauskas,  J.X.,  Smadel,  J.E.,  Fuller,  H.S., 

Coale,  C.  and  Bozeman,  F.M.:  Occurrence  of  Rickettsia  tsutsugamnshi 

in  Korean  rodents  and  chiggers.  Am.  J.  Hyg.  66:  309-320,  195/. 

8.  Lim,  B.L.  and  Heyneman,  D. : A collection  of  small  maamals 

from  Tauran  and  southwest  face  of  Mt.  Kinabalu,  Sabah.  Sarawak  Mus. 
J.  16:  257-276,  1968. 

9.  Lim,  B.L.:  Host  relationships,  and  seasonal  abundance  of 

immature  tick  (Haemaphysalis  spp.  and  Dermacentor  spp.)  in  primary 
and  mixed  secondary  rainforest  of  West  Malaysia.  SE  Asian  J.  Trop. 
Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  3:  605-612,  1972. 

10.  Medway,  L.:  The  wild  mamnals  of  Malaya.  Oxford  Univ. 

Press,  Kuala  Lumpur,  127  pp.,  1966. 


1211 


11.  Harrison,  J.L.:  Introduction  to  the  mammals  of  Singapore 

and  Malaya.  Singapore  Branch  Malayan  Nat.  Soc.,  340  pp.,  1966. 

12.  Lim,  B.L.:  Distribution,  relative  abundance,  food 

habits  and  parasite  patterns  of  giant  rats  (Rattus)  in  West 
Malaysia.  J.  Mammal.  51:  730-740,  1970. 

13.  Kazar,  J.,  Brezina,  R.B.,  and  Mayer,  V. : Study  on  the 

effect  of  cyclophosphamide  on  experimental  rickettsial  infection. 

Act.  Virol/  15:  499,  1971. 

14.  Tachibana,  N.  and  Kobayashi,  Y.:  Effect  of  cyclophosphamide 

on  the  growth  of  Rickettsia  sennet su  in  experimentally  infected  mice. 
Infect.  Ininun.,  12:  625,  1975. 

15.  Aisenberg,  A.C.:  Studies  on  cyclophosphamide  induced 

tolerance  to  sheep  erythrocytes.  J.  Exp.  Med.  125:  833,  1967. 

16.  Stockman,  G.D.,  Heim,  L.R.,  South,  M.A.  and  Trentin,  J.J.: 
Differential  effects  of  cyclophosphamide  on  the  B and  T cell 
compartments  of  adult  mice.  J.  Immunol.  110:  277,  1973. 

17.  Nadchatram,  M.:  A technique  for  rearing  trombiculid  mites 
(Acarina)  developed  in  a tropical  laboratory.  J.  Med.  Fnt.  5: 
465-469,  1968. 

18.  Baker,  H. J. , Hubert,  A. A.  and  Manikumaran,  C.:  A 

technique  for  feeding  larval  trombiculid  mites  on  laboratory 
mice.  J.  Med.  Ent.  5:  511-513,  1968. 

19.  Dohany,  A.L.,  Cromroy,  H.L.  and  Cole,  M.M. : Studies  of 

systemic  acaricides  in  the  control  of  chigger  (Acarina: 

Trombiculidae)  populations  on  rodents.  J.  Med.  Ent.  (in  press) 

20.  Alexander,  A.D.,  Binn,  L.N.,  Elisberg,  B.,  Husted,  P., 
Huxsoll,  D.L.,  Marshall,  J.D.,  Jr.,  Needy,  C.F.  and  White,  A.D. : 
Zoonotic  infections  in  military  scout  and  tracker  dogs  in  Vietnam. 

Inf.  Ininun.  5:  745-749,  1972. 

21.  Walker,  J.S.,  Cadigan,  F.C.,  Vosdingh,  R.A.,  and  Chan, 

T.C.:  The  silvered  leaf -monkey  of  Malaysia,  Presbytis  cristatus: 

Disease  model  for  human  scrub  typhus.  J.  Inf.  Dis.  1 28:  223-226, 

1973. 


22.  Amyx,  H.L.,  Huxsoll,  D.L.,  Zeiler,  D.C.  and  Hildebrandt, 

P.K.:  Therapeutic  and  prophylactic  value  of  tetracycline  in  dogs 

infected  with  the  agent  of  Tropical  Canine  Pancytopenia.  J.  Am.  Vet. 
Med.  Assn.  159:  1428-1432,  1971. 

23.  Davidson,  D.E.,  Jr.,  Dill,  G.S.,  Jr.,  Tingpalapong,  M. , 
Premabutra,  S.,  Nguen,  P.L.,  Stephenson,  F.H. , and  Ristic,  M. : 

Canine  ehrlichiosis  (Tropical  Canine  Pancytopenia)  in  Thailand. 

SE  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  6:  540  543,  1975. 

1212 


Publications: 

1.  Walker,  J.S.,  Chan,  C.T. , Manikumaran,  C.,  and  Elisberg, 

B.L.:  Attempts  to  infect  and  demonstrate  transovarial  transmission 

of  R.  tsutsugamushi  in  three  species  of  Leptotrombidium  mites. 

Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  266:  80-90,  1975. 

2.  Roberts,  L.W. , Gan,  E.,  Rapmund,  G. , Chan,  T.C.,  Ramasamy, 

S.M.  and  Walker,  J.S.:  Identification  of  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi 

in  the  life  stages  of  Leptotrombidium  fletcheri  with  isolation  and 
immunofluorescence  techniques . Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  266:  73-79, 
1975. 


3.  Dondero,  T.J.,  Jr.,  Parsons,  R.E.  and  O'Holohan,  D.R.: 
Increased  frequency  of  chloroquine  resistant  P.  falciparum  on  a 
rubber  estate  in  Peninsular  Malaysia  during  two  years  of  systematic 
chloroquine  treatment.  SE  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  6: 

488-494,  1975. 

4.  Robinson,  D.M.  and  Huxsoll,  D.L.:  Protection  against  scrub 

typhus  infection  engendered  by  the  passive  transfer  of  irmiune  sera. 
SE  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.,  6:  477-482,  1975. 


. { 


" 1,1  API* 


1 in  iiiiiii  wiiuiiiiim 


L OATC  RRIV  IUFRY 

75  07  01 

4 KINO  OR  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

t.  SUMMARY  SC  TV* 

u 

S.  NORN  SCCURITY* 

u 

t RCMRAMNO* 

NA 

IA  OR 

Sr R IMSTR*N 

NL 

tfc  IPICIPIC  DATA- 
CONTRACTOR  ACCCSS 

(3  TII  Ono 

1 LIVIL  OP  BUM 

A-  FOR*  IMT 

10  WO  /COOCS  • PROGRAM  ILIMNT 

FROJCCT  NVMMN 

TASK  ARIA  NUMSCR 

WORK  UNIT  NUMNR 

It  RUMMIIKI  OOO  ORSANIIATK>N 


irm*?  fiAfk 

73  11 

(A  (Ffims  COM?:  It  ION  oat! 

CONT 

<S  pun  dins  asCncy 

DA  | 

IS  FCRFORMAMCC  msThoo 

C.  In-House 

IT  CORTRACT/OAANT 

A OATIS/tPPCCTlVC.  IRRlRATIOR: 

A NUMSCR * 

C TYRI.  A AMOUNT. 

W RtSOURCIS  IS  TIM  A TI 

A PUN  os  ffn  Rmim*) 

fiscal 

YlAR 

76 

6 -1 

161 

77 

5 

147 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


& RRWART 


h.  co«rm*uTt«G 


:.KX*)UWHM 


62759A 


CARDS  1 1 4F 


3A762759A831 


tTycR  tPt***4»  -I.  ferity  CI—IHt+tlmt  C«M»J* 


T-TnrTTTT^ST 

DA  OB  6528 


76  07  01 


"ThT 


**po*t  comrmoL  irumoL 
DDDR*E(AR)*36 


urr 


(U)  Disease  Transmission  in  Tropical  Populations 

I.  SCllNTIPlC  AND  TICMNOLOOICAL  TmI? 


...i*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


RCIRORSISLt  INDIVIDUAL 


—*J0Y,  R.  J.  T.  COL 
202-576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  -'ot  considered 

ii  m mm  vaas  bb  bib  kok  ixitm-iul; 


i.  R|RRORMR«OR*AHI|ATWH 

,»US  Army  Medical  Research  Unit 
Belem  (Transamazo.n ) 


aooatu  ■ APO  New  York  09675 


amaciaxL  imviitiiiton  f/mn  mm  ii  i-  i.  .....  > it  mom 

«•  DIXON,  K.  E.,  MAJ,  MC 


TILtPHOm 

tociat  BICUKITT  AC-OUMT  NUHM* 
auociatl  IMvIlTieiTOM 


■“«  ROBERTS,  D.  R.  , MA.i , MSC 
LOVELACE ■ J.  K..  CPT,  MSC 


(U)  Brazil;  (U)  Infectious  Disease;  fU)  Epidemiology; 
(U)  Entomology;  (U)  Parasitology;  (U)  Virology;  (U)  Serology 


I TICMNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  |4  APPROACH.  II  N NO  ONI  M fFwvU*  ImOMNAmW  IONn  HtH4  Mr  R*»«»N  Mil  •<  M**  «M*  fatwrltr  ClMilltlllNi  C«N»; 

23.  (U)  Conduct  epidemiologic  studies  of  infectious  diseases  transmitted  among  population 
along  the  Transamazon  Highway  in  collaboration  with  the  Evandro  Chagas  Institute.  In- 
formation regarding  health  hazards  are  of  importance  to  military  personnel  transiting  or 
stationed  in  this  geographic  area. 

24.  (U)  Routine  diagnostical,  epidemiological,  entomological,  microbiological,  serologi- 
cal and  virological  procedures  are  employed.  Emphasis  is  on  field  studies  along  800  Km 
of  the  Transamazon  Highway  and  epidemic  investigations  with  laboratory  support. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  The  surveillance  program  including  biweekly  visits  to  a strati- 
fied random  sample  of  2300  colorists  along  the  Transamazon  Highway  continued.  The  oc- 
currence of  Toxoplasma  gondii  transmission  and  acute  leptospirosis  in  the  colonists  was 
demonstrated.  Approximately  20%  of  the  population  had  antibodies  to  Trypanosoma  cruzi 
but  local  transmission  was  r.ol  documented.  Results  from  epidemiological  and  entomolog- 
ical studies  during  3 epidemics  of  Oropouche  virus  incriminated  Culicoides  parensis  and 
Culex  pipiens  quinquefasc  atws  is  vectors.  Laboratory  transmission  studies  were  begun 
with  these  2 species.  Survoi  , lance  Jki'i.i  indicated  exophilic  transmission  of  malaria 
along  the  highway.  Rearing  anopiiel  j nos  for  taxonomic  studies  was  begun.  The  first  case 
of  chloroquine  resistant  fair  n.urum  a(&lwv!a  was  detected  in  the  State  of  Para.  A pro- 
gram of  surveillance  and  treatment  was  initiated  to  control  malaria  in  a migrant  work 
force.  The  program  will  be  evaluated  tW  its  impact  on  malaria  transmission  and  poten- 
tial for  local  use  in  comhai^.vg  malaria  in  migrant  populations.  A collaborative  study 
on  the  effects  of  simuliidae  bites  on  newly  arrived  Brazilian  Army  personnel  in  the 
Altamira  areas  was  begun.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Re- 
search Annual  Progress  Report,  July  76  - 30  .June  76.  Support  in  the  amount  of  $34,000 
from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  perioc  1 Jul  - 30  Sep  76. 

'HNItMl  la  cwilMclafi  wr  •Nj»ilw,i  inwf 


DD,:#.VJ498 


PRIV IOU  § COITIONS  Q*  THIS  FORM  ARC  OSSOLCTC.  OO  FORMS  I ASM  A I NOV  «S 

AND  l ASS*  I 1 MAR  SS  l F OR  ARMY  Ud«)  ARC  OSSOLCTC 

1214 


.-IN*  -vJaT £X, 


iTOj-W-iil-m-'kife 


PROJECT  3A7 62759A83 1 TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  073  Disease  transmission  in  tropical  populations 


Investigators 

Principal:  MAJ  Kenneth  E.  Dixon,  MC;  CAPT  A.  Lynn  Hoch,  MSC; 

CAPT  James  K.  Lovelace,  MSC;  Mr.  Norman  Peterson,  M.S.; 

MAJ  Donald  R.  Roberts,  MSC. 

Associate:  Amelia  Andrade,  B.S.;  Gilberta  Bensabath,  M.D.;  Elizabeth 
Hagerby,  B.S.;  Mario  Moraes,  M.D.;  SFC  Peter  J.  Ozypowski; 
Francisco  Pinheiro,  M.D.;  SP5  Liborio  C.  Truncal i,  SP5  Jimmie 
R.  Tullis. 


The  following  acronyms  and  Portuguese  terms  are  used  standardly  in  this 
report. 


1.  Bairro  - a district  of  a city. 


2.  Fazenda  - a ranch  or  a large  farm. 


3.  FSESP  - Fundagao  Servico  Especial  de  Satide  Pdblica;  a national  public 
health  service  responsible  for  the  administration  of  special  hospitals 
and  research  centers. 


4.  FUNAI  - Fundagao  Nacional  de  Assistencia  aos  Indios;  national  Indian 
agency. 


;! 

-} 

i 

. 

: 

; 


5.  Gleba  - a standard  division  of  land  along  the  Transamazon  highway;  5Km 
in  width  and  varies  in  depth;  divided  into  10  roadfront  lots  and 
varying  numbers  of  interior  lots. 


6.  IEC  - Instituto  Evandro  Chagas;  FSESP  research  center  in  Bel6m. 


7.  Lote  - a lot;  a subdivision  of  a gleba,  normally  1000m  x 500m. 


8.  Municipio  - county. 


9.  SUCAM  -national  malaria  control  agency. 


/zcm. 


i 

1 

[ » 


1 
$ 


INTRODUCTION 


In  1970  the  Brazilian  government  began  construction  of  the  Transamazon 
Highway  on  an  east-west  axis  between  the  Belem-Brasilia  Highway  and  the 
Peruvian  border  (see  map),  A government  sponsored  colonization  program 
began  in  1971.  Colonists  participating  in  the  program  originate  from 
every  state  of  Brazil  and  will  undoubtedly  be  encountering  some  disease 
agents  for  the  first  time  as  well  as  bringing  with  them  organisms  not 
endemic  to  the  Amazon  region.  In  recognition  of  the  potential  for  the 
study  of  disease  transmission  within  a large  diverse  population  that  is  in 
the  process  of  settling  a heretofore  uninhabited  area,  and  the  similarity 
between  ti«e  ingress  of  a large  number  of  colonists  and  the  deployment  of 
troops  into  a medically  unstudied  region,  USAMRU-Belem  was  established  in 
1973  and  headquartered  in  the  city  of  Belem  in  the  state  of  Para. 
Subsequently  two  permanent  field  bases  were  established  along  the  highway, 
one  in  the  town  of  Maraba,  the  other  in  the  town  of  Altamira  (see  map). 

USAMRU-Belem  presently  consists  of  four  sections-  Epidemiology,  Entomology, 
Laboratory,  and  Mammal  Ecology.  These  sections  are  mutually  supporting 
and  share  in  the  mission  of: 

1.  Gathering  baseline  epidemiologic,  entomologic  and 
ecologic  data  from  multiple  sites  in  previously 
unstudied  areas. 

2.  Rapid  investigation  of  disease  outbreaks. 

3.  Identification  of  specific  research  targets  with 
potential  importance  for  military  medicine. 

Personnel  from  USAMRU-Belem  also  participate  in  cooperation  with 
researchers  from  the  Instituto  Evandro  Chagas  in  the  investigation  of 
medical  problems  in  areas  of  the  Brazilian  Amazon  other  than  the 
Transamazon  Highway. 

Significant  progress  to  date  includes: 

1.  Establishment  of  a large  scale  malaria  study  project 
on  a cattle  ranch  near  the  town  of  Paragominas  in 
southern  Para  (see  map.).  The  ranch  is  being  cleared 
of  forests  by  a largely  itinerant  work  force  and 
provides  an  opportunity  for  in-depth  study  of  the 
dynamics  of  malaria  transmission  among  migrant 
populations.  Initial  evidence  suggests  that  this 
project  will  afford  ample  opportunity  for  both  iji 
vivo  and  i£  vitro  drug  resistance  testing. 

2.  Field  studies  demonstrating  the  efficacy  of  repellent 
impregnated  mesh  jackets  in  reducing  the  number  of 
Simuliidae  bites  in  areas  of  high  black- fly 
population  density. 


1217 


3.  The  detection  of  significant  levels  of  transmission 
of  Toxoplasma  gondii  and  Leptospira  spp.  among 
Transamazon  colonists.  Further  serologic  testing  and 
comparison  of  laboratory  results  with  personal 
history  data  collected  from  colonists  at  regular 
intervals  during  the  past  18-24  months  will  clarify 
the  roles  of  these  organisms  in  colonists'  morbidity. 

4.  Cul icoides  paraensis  Root  was  incriminated 
epidemiological ly  as  a vector  of  Oropouche  virus  in 
1975  epidemics  in  Para. 

5.  Seropositivity  for  plague,  schistosomiasis,  tularemia, 
and  toxoplasmosis  is  uncommon  in  the  mammalian 
specimens  tested  to  date.  Forty-five  percent  of  the 
animals  captured  at  one  trapping  site  were 
seropositive  for  trypanosomiasis. 


1218 


I.  EPIDEMIOLOGY 


A.  Passive  Surveillance  Program 

DESCRIPTION  OF  PROGRAM  AND  OBJECTIVES:  The  passive  surveillance  program  is 
designed  to  collect  disease  information  from  Brazilian  organizations 
active  in  the  study  areas.  These  organizations  include  SUCAM,  the  FSESP 
hospitals  and  the  town  death  registries.  In  addition  blood  is  collected 
and  a history  taken  from  selected  patients  in  the  FSESP  hospitals. 

ANALYSIS  OF  DATA:  Maraba:  The  data  from  the  death  registry  in  Maraba 
shows  a decrease  in  deaths  from  malaria,  hepatitis,  diseases  of  the  GI 
tract  and  diseases  of  the  respiratory  tract  (TABLE  1)  since  1974.  The 
largest  category  of  deaths  (64%)  was  recorded  as  "no  medical  assistance" 
indicating  that  a physician  was  not  present  and  no  official  cause  for 
death  could  be  given. 

There  were  3553  admissions  to  the  FSESP  hospital  in  the  period  covered. 
Aside  from  OB-GYN  problems,  malaria  was  the  largest  single  reason  for 
admission  (TABLE  2).  Malaria  also  accounted  for  the  largest  number  of 
notafiable  diseases  reported  by  the  hospital,  although  there  was  a marked 
decrease  in  malaria  cases  since  1974  (TABLE  3).  In  contrast,  there  were 
more  cases  of  syphilis  and  leprosy  than  1974. 

A review  of  the  SUCAM  records  showed  3949  positive  malaria  slides  in  the 
current  reporting  period,  a slight  decrease  from  the  4089  positive  slides 
reported  in  1974.  There  was  much  regional  variation,  however.  The 
municipios  of  Itupiranga,  Jacunda  and  Maraba,  all  of  which  are  within  the 
study  area  of  the  USAMRU  epidemiology  program,  showed  a marked  decrease  in 
malaria  cases.  Tucurui,  also  within  the  study  area,  showed  little  change. 
Several  municipios  south  of  Maraba,  and  outside  the  study  area,  showed  a 
large  increase  in  malaria  since  1974  (TABLE  4).  The  data  from  the  highway 
itself  shows  a much  higher  number  of  cases  from  Maraba  south  to  Paranorte 
than  in  the  stretch  between  Maraba  and  Altamira  which  includes  the 
USAMRU  study  area  (TABLE  5). 

Between  1 July  1975  and  20  March  1976,  history  forms  were  filled  out  on 
944  patients  in  the  FSESP  hospital,  70  of  whom  were  febrile  at  the  time  of 
admission.  Blood  for  serology  and  virus  isolation  was  drawn  from  585 
patients,  including  42  of  the  70  febrile  patients. 

Altamira:  The  numbers  of  deaths  recorded  in  the  death 
registry  in  shown  in  TABLE  6.  As  was  found  in  Maraba,  the  number  of 
deaths  due  to  malaria  in  Altamira  was  lower  than  in  1974.  Deaths  from 
diseases  of  the  respiratory  tract  were  also  lower,  but  there  was  an 
increase  in  deaths  due  to  gastrointestinal  diseases. 

The  admissions  to  the  FSESP  hospital  are  shown  in  TABLE  7.  Little  data  is 
available  from  1974,  but  the  decrease  in  admissions  for  malaria  and  the 
increase  in  gastrointestinal  disease  is  sipporting  evidence  for  the  trends 
noted  above  in  death  rates  from  these  diseases.  The  decrease  in  malaria 
is  even  more  evident  in  the  records  of  notifiable  diseases  (TABLE  8).  The 
number  of  malaria  cases  dropped  from  928  in  1974  to  85  in  the  11  month 
period  covered  in  the  table.  There  was  a decrease  in  hepatitis  and,  as 
was  found  in  Maraba,  an  increase  in  syphilis  and  leprosy. 


1220 


A total  of  386  history  forms  were  filled  out  on  patients  admitted  to  the 
FSESP  hospital  in  Altamira,  114  of  whom  were  febrile.  A blood  sample  for 
virus  isolation,  serology  and  a malaria  slide  was  obtained  from  370  of  the 
386  patients. 


1221 


I 

3 


» 


TABLE  1.  Number  of  Deaths  in  the  Maraba  Jurisdiction  July  1975-June  1976 
by  Diagnosis  and  Month. 


MONTH 

MALARIA 

HEPATITIS 

DISEASES 
THE  GI 
TRACT 

OF  DISEASES  OF  No  MEDICAL 
THE  RESPIRA  ASSISTANCE 
TORY  TRACT 

OTHER 

July 

3 

0 

1 

6 

8 

16 

August 

1 

2 

2 

2 

5 

12 

September 

1 

0 

3 

3 

6 

9 

October 

0 

0 

1 

7 

17 

11 

November 

0 

4 

2 

4 

16 

13 

December 

0 

1 

3 

2 

5 

20 

January 

1 

1 

1 

3 

8 

8 

February 

2 

1 

0 

3 

3 

13 

March 

3 

0 

1 

4 

6 

11 

April 

2 

1 

1 

3 

5 

15 

May 

0 

0 

2 

3 

9 

16 

June 

1 

0 

3 

5 

4 

12 

TOTAL 

14 

9 

17 

43 

87 

136 

1974  TOTAL 

28 

12 

42 

61 

61 

102 

TABLE  2.  Admissions  to  the  FSESP  Hospital  in  Maraba,  July  1975-June  1976  by  Diagnosis  and  Month 


t 


TOTAL  477  168  215  217  1382  1094  3553 


Reportable  Diseases  Seen  at  the  FSESP  Hospital  in  Maraba 


1974  TOTAL  928 


TABLE  4.  Positive  Malaria  Slides  Reported  by  SUCAM  in  the  Maraba  Jurisdiction,  July  1975-Junel976  by 


! 


TABLE  5.  Positive  Malaria  Slides  Reported  by  SUCAM  along  the  Transamazon 
Highway  July  1975-June  1976. 


MONTH 

PARANORTE-MARABA 

MARABA-JATOBAL 

JATOBAL-ALTAMIRA 

July 

87 

10 

11 

August 

116 

2 

9 

September 

116 

1 

15 

October 

83 

12 

13 

November 

120 

1 

24 

December 

103 

2 

16 

January 

83 

1 

1 

February 

88 

3 

44 

March 

66 

4 

75 

April 

61 

2 

44 

May 

31 

1 

5 

June 

66 

0 

9 

/zcm. 


TABLE  7.  Admission  to  the  FSESP  Hospital  in  Altamira,  July  1975-June  1976,  by  Diagnosis  and  Month 


TABLE  8.  Reportable  Diseases  Seen  at  the  FSESP  Hospital  in  Altamira,  July  1975-June  1976  by  Diagnosis 


B.  Active  Surveillance  Program 

DESCRIPTION  OF  PROGRAM  AND  OBJECTIVES:  The  surveillance  program  along  the 

Transamazon  Highway  is  designed  to  provide: 

1.  Prevalence  data  on  the  sample  population  every  six 
months. 

2.  Incidence  data  on  the  same  population. 

3.  Rapid  identification  of  disease  outbreaks  so  that 
intensive  investigations  may  be  started  at  the 
earliest  possible  moment. 

The  study  population  is  composed  of  persons  living  along  the  road  and 
persons  living  away  from  the  road.  The  former  were  chosen  by  randomly 
selecting  a 20%  sample  of  roadfront  lots  (2  in  each  gleba)  along  one  side 
of  the  highway  and  then  including  an  equal  number  of  lots  directly  across 
the  road.  This  was  done  from  Maraba  west  to  Aratau  (approximately  270  Km.) 
and  from  the  city  of  Altamira  west  to  the  end  of  the  Altamira  jurisdiction 
(about  250  Km.).  In  the  Altamira  area,  many  people  live  off  roadfront, 
in  agrovilas  (small  villages  of  approximately  60  houses).  Six  of  these 
agrovilas  were  chosen  for  study,  and  all  families  living  in  them  were 
included  in  the  sample. 

On  the  first  visit  to  a family,  blood  is  drawn  from  each  family  member  for 
serological  studies,  a malaria  smear  is  made  and  q:estionaires  are  filled 
out.  Every  six  months  thereafter,  blood  is  drawn  from  each  person  and 
the  data  on  the  questionaires  is  updated.  Every  two  weeks  after  the 
original  survey,  each  family  is  visited  by  the  field  teams.  If  any  member 
of  a family  has  had  an  illness  episode  during  the  previous  two  weeks,  the 
details  are  noted  on  a questionaire.  At  that  time,  blood  is  drawn  for 
virus  isolation,  serology  and  a malaria  slide.  Liquid  nitrogen  is  used 
for  holding  and  transport  of  specimens. 

Information  on  the  number  of  illnesses  encountered,  types  of  illness  and 
results  of  malaria  slides  is  summarized  on  a spot  map  each  week  by  the 
field  supervisor  and  transmitted  to  Belem.  If  it  appears  that  a disease 
outbreak  is  in  progress,  supplementary  data  from  the  records  of  FSESP, 
SUCAM  and  the  death  registry,  together  with  more  detailed  information  from 
the  colonists,  may  be  requested.  If  these  data  indicate  that  a disease 
outbreak  is  in  progress,  an  investigating  team  is  sent  from  Belem. 

Each  of  the  two  field  sites  has  a field  supervisor  and  a simple 
laboratory  equipped  With  laboratory  benches,  stools,  a desk,  a file 
cabinet,  equipment  for  separating  serum  and  staining  slides  and  enough 
supplies  to  last  three  months.  In  Maraba  there  are  three  fields  workers 
and  one  vehicle;  in  Altamira  there  are  four  field  workers  and  two  vehicles. 

The  initial  results  of  the  active  surveillance  program  were  presented  in 
the  annual  report  for  July  1974  to  June  1975.  These  data  included  the 
age-sex  distribution  of  the  colonists  and  of  our  sample;  the  state  of 
origin;  number  of  illnesses  encountered  on  each  visit;  numbers  of 
colonists  in  each  lot  and  agrovlla;  and  examples  of  each  of  the  forms  used 
in  the  field  work. 


1230 


WORK  ACCOMPLISHED:  In  July  1975,  the  field  workers  completed  the  12  month 

visit  in  Maraba  and  the  six  month  visit  in  Altamira  (TABLE  1).  In 
February  1976,  they  completed  the  18  month  collection  in  Maraba  and  the  12 
month  collection  in  Altamira.  The  situation  in  the  agrovilas  was 
complicated  by  the  fact  that  many  of  the  families  originally  enrolled 
moved  from  their  houses  in  the  agrovilas  to  their  lots  (TABLE  2).  The 
number  of  illnesses  reported  in  each  of  the  bi-weekly  visits  is  shown  in 
TABLE  3 and  4. 

DATA  OBTAINED:  Data  on  the  symptomatology  of  each  disease  episode  was 
collected  and  is  being  coded  for  computer  analysis.  This  data  will  be 
correlated  with  the  results  of  serological  Lests  for  parasitic,  bacterial 
and  viral  pathogens. 

Arboviral  serology  has  been  done  on  the  sera  from  the  original  visits  in 
Maraba  and  Altamira  and  the  sera  froi  the  first  six  month  visit  in  Maraba. 
In  Maraba,  13%  of  the  sera  were  positive  for  group  A arbovirus  and  38% 
were  positive  for  group  B.  Many  of  the  later  group  are  reactions  to  the 
17-D  vaccine  for  yellow  fever.  Nine  percent  of  the  sera  were  positive  for 
miscellaneous  arboviruses  (see  TABLE  5),  principally  Guaroa  and  Itupiranga. 
About  1%  of  the  sera  reacted  with  Oropouche  antigen.  There  were  11  sera 
that  converted  from  negative  to  a positive  titer  for  Group  A,  30  that 
converted  to  a positive  titer  for  group  B and  17  that  converted  to  a 
positive  titer  for  miscellaneous  arboviruses. 

Of  the  451  sera  tested  from  the  original  visit  in  Altamira,  34  (7.5%)  were 
positive  for  a group  A virus,  80  (17.7%)  were  positive  for  a group  B virus 
and  18  (4.0%)  were  positive  for  other  arboviruses. 

Mayaro  was  the  Group  A virus  most  commonly  encountered,  with  43  (59%)  of 
the  73  positive  sera  from  the  original  sample  in  Maraba  reacting  only  to 
Mayaro.  The  affected  colonists  came  from  various  areas  of  Brazil  and  are 
spread  out  along  the  entire  study  area.  Twenty-seven  (63%)  were  male  and 
36  (84%)  were  greater  than  15  years  of  age.  Six  (1.2%)  of  the  485  sera 
collected  during  the  six  month  visit  represented  seroconversions  to 
Mayaro.  A similar  situation  was  found  in  Altamira  where  29  (85%)  of  the 
sera  positive  for  Group  A virus  reacted  only  to  Mayaro.  The  affected 
colonists  came  from  various  areas  of  Brazil  and  are  spread  out  along  the 
entire  study  area.  Twenty-five  (86%)  were  male  and  24  (83%)  were  greater 
than  15  years  of  age.  It  would  appear  that  the  disease  is  transmitted 
i along  the  Transamazon  Highway  and,  since  it  primarily  affects  adult  males, 

is  probably  transmitted  in  the  forest. 

jj  Aside  from  the  arboviruses  in  Group  A and  Group  B,  Guaroa  was  the  virus 

| encountered  most  frequently  in  the  active  surveillance  program,  with  19 

i (3.8%)  of  the  original  sample  in  Maraba  reacting  only  to  Guaroa.  Twelve 

( (63%)  of  the  19  were  male  and  the  youngest  was  33  years  old.  Twelve  (63%) 

| moved  to  the  Transamazon  from  the  state  of  Maranhao.  In  comparison  33%  of 

< the  sera  tested  at  the  time  of  the  original  visit  came  from  people  who 

J originated  in  Maranhao.  A chi-square  test  was  performed  and  the  difference 

t was  significant  (p  < .01).  In  the  original  visit  in  Altamira,  12  (2.3%) 

' of  the  449  persons  whose  sera  were  tested  reacted  only  to  Guaroa.  All 

( were  males  and  only  two  were  under  the  age  of  fifteen.  Of  the  six  sera 

4 drawn  from  people  who  had  come  from  the  state  of  Maranhao,  two  (33%)  were 

\ positive  for  Guaroa.  Although  transmission  of  this  arboviruses  does  occur 


1231 


along  the  highway,  it  would  appear  that  many  of  the  colonists  with 
antibody  to  Guaroa  had  contracted  their  infection  in  Maranhao. 


TABLE  1.  Number  of  sera  obtained  during  the  routine  semi-annual  visits  in 
Maraba  and  Altamira. 


12  month  collection 

Maraba 

Sera  collected 

703 

(87%) 

Absent 

81 

(10%) 

Refusal 

23 

( 3%) 

TOTAL 

803 

18  month  collection 

Maraba 

Sera  collected 

643 

(79.5%) 

Absent 

120 

(14.8%) 

Refusal 

46 

( 5.7%) 

TOTAL 

809 

6 month  collection 

Altamira 

Sera  collected 

634 

(78.6%) 

Absent 

131 

(16.2%) 

Refusal 

42 

( 5.2%) 

TOTAL 

807 

12  month  collection 

Altamira 

Sera  collected 

539 

(66%) 

Absent 

141 

(17.2%) 

Refusal 

137 

(16.8%) 

TOTAL 

817 

/zcm. 


1233 


table  2 


/zcm. 


1 


Population  and  Number  of  Sera  Collected  from  Agrovilas  During 
the  Routine  Semi-Annual  Visits. 


6 months 

12  month  visit 

Sera  collected 

614 

(71%) 

292 

(64.9%) 

Absent 

237 

(27.4%) 

119 

(26.4%) 

Refusal 

14 

( 1.6%) 

39 

( 8.7%) 

TOTAL 

865 

450 

TABLE  3.  Number  of  Illnesses  and  Number  of  Febrile  Illnesses  Seen  on 

Each  of  the  Biweekly  visits  in  Maraba,  1 July  1975-30  June  1976. 


VISIT  N? 

DATE  STARTED 

NUMBER  OF  DAYS 
SINCE  START  OF 
PREVIOUS  VISIT 

TOTAL 

ILLNESSES 

FEBRILE 

ILLNESSES 

A - 9 

29  Jun 

75 

20 

8 

7 

A - 10 

15  Jul 

75 

16 

5 

5 

B ( s i x month 
visit) 

11  Aug 

75 

27 

3 

3 

B - 1 

24  Aug 

75 

13 

0 

0 

B - 2 

16  Sep 

75 

23 

3 

3 

B - 3 

03  Oct 

75 

17 

1 

1 

CD 

28  Oct 

75 

25 

4 

4 

B - 5 

15  Nov 

75 

18 

6 

6 

B - 6 

08  Dec 

75 

23 

3 

3 

B - 7 

23  Dec 

75 

15 

6 

6 

00 

1 

CO 

22  Jan 

76 

30 

2 

2 

C( six  month 
visit) 

.09  Feb 

76 

18 

6 

6 

C - 1 

16  Mar 

76 

35 

8 

8 

CM 

1 

(J 

11  Apr 

76 

26 

0 

0 

C - 3 

25  Apr 

76 

14 

8 

7 

C - 4 

11  May 

76 

17 

4 

4 

C - 5 

26  May 

76 

15 

0 

0 

C - 6 

09  Jun 

76 

14 

3 

1 

C - 7 

28  Jun 

76 

19 

1 

1 

/zcm. 


1235 


TABLE  4.  Number  of  Illnesses  and  Number  of  Febrile  Illnesses  Seen  on 

Each  of  the  Biweekly  Visits  in  Altamira  1 July  1975-30  June  1976. 


VISIT  N? 

DATE  STARTED 

NUMBER  OF  DAYS 
SINCE  START  OF 
PREVIOUS  VISIT 

TOTAL 

ILLNESSES 

FEBRILE 

ILLNESSES 

A - 1 

07  Jul  75 

32 

7 

4 

A - 2 

21  Jul  75 

14 

4 

4 

A - 3 

08  Aug  75 

17 

0 

0 

A - 4 

27  Aug  75 

19 

1 

1 

A - 5 

12  Sep  75 

17 

5 

5 

A - 6 

01  Oct  75 

19 

7 

7 

A - 7 

13  Oct  75 

12 

11 

10 

1 

00 

21  Oct  75 

8 

11 

10 

A - 9 

05  Nov  75 

14 

9 

7 

A - 10 

17  Nov  75 

12 

24 

17 

A - 11 

03  Dec  75 

16 

10 

6 

B 

21  Jan  76 

49 

2 

2 

B - 1 

20  Feb  76 

29 

3 

2 

B - 2 

11  Mar  76 

21 

7 

5 

B - 3 

22  Mar  76 

11 

7 

5 

B - 4 

05  Apr  76 

14 

4 

4 

B - 5 

27  Apr  76 

22 

4 

4 

B - 6 

17  May  76 

21 

1 

1 

B - 7 

02  Jun  76 

15 

0 

0 

TABLE  5. 


Total 

Positive 

% 


Total 

Positive 

% 


Total 

Positive 

% 

/zcm. 


IMP  IWUI.I 


Results  of  Arbovirus  Serology  on  Specimens  Collected  on  the 
Original  and  Six-Month  Visits  in  Maraba. 


Group  A Arbovirus 


Original  Visit 


6 Month  Visit 


589 

73 

12.4% 


485 

63 

13.0% 


Group  B Arbovirus 


Original  Visit 


6 Month  Visit 


589 

224 

38.2% 


485 

174 

36.0% 


Other  Arbovirus 


Original  Visit 


6 Month  Visit 


589 

55 

9.4% 


485 

44 

9.1% 


1237 


II.  OROPOUCHE  VIRUS 


BACKGROUND:  Oropouche  virus  is  the  causative  agent  of  many  urban  epidemics 

in  the  Amazon  basin.  Until  recently,  the  vector  of  this  virus  was  unknown. 
Joint  studies  by  the  USAMRU  entomology  and  epidemiology  sections,  in 
collaboration  with  the  IEC  virology  section,  have  incriminated  Culicoides 
paraensis  as  the  major  vector  in  urban  areas. 

Preliminary  data  were  reported  on  this  subject  in  the  1975  annual  report. 
Some  of  those  observations  will  be  repeated  in  this  section  with  additional 
data  to  finalize  the  studies  undertaken.  These  data  were  collected  during 
3 epidemic  in  1975. 

A.  Santarem  Epidemic 

In  the  first  quarter  of  1975  there  was  an  epidemic  of  oropouche  fever  in 
the  town  of  Mojui  dos  Campos,  about  40  Km  south  of  the  city  of  Santarem. 

As  this  time  there  were  no  cases  in  the  city  of  Bel  terra  and  only 
scattered  suspected  cases  in  Santarem.  The  physicians  at  the  FSESP 
Hospital  in  Santarem  were  asked  to  be  on  the  alert  for  new  outbreaks  in 
the  area,  and  to  report  any  cases  immediately  to  the  Instituto  Evandro 
Chagas. 

During  the  last  week  of  June,  information  reached  the  I.E.C.  and  USAMRU- 
Belem  from  two  different  sources  that  there  was  an  increase  of  cases  with 
the  symptoms  of  oropouche  being  seen  in  Santarem.  A team  composed  of 
MAJ.  Dixon,  MAJ.  Roberts,  CAPT.  Lovelace,  Dr.  Francisco  Pinheiro  and  three 
technicians  travelled  to  Santarem  to  make  initial  inquiries. 

The  physicians  in  Santarem  indicated  that  the  first  cases  in  the  city  had 
been  seen  over  two  months  before,  in  the  last  week  of  April,  and  that  new 
cases  continued  to  appear.  Most  of  the  convalescent  cases  interviewed  had 
been  ill  in  May  or  June.  In  Belterra,  the  outbreak  had  occurred  earlier 
and  been  more  explosive.  Most  convalescent  cases  had  first  become  ill  in 
March  and  all  the  illness  episodes  since  that  time  appeared  to  be 
recrudescences.  Many  people  spoke  of  reoccurrence  of  symptoms  2-4  weeks 
after  the  first  attack.  In  some  instances,  a third  attack  occurred. 

An  analysis  of  the  SUCAM  data  showed  an  increase  of  non-malaria  fever  in 
April  and  May  in  most  of  the  municipios  (counties)  served  by  the  Santarem 
headquarters.  There  was  no  such  increase  reported  in  the  city  itself. 

Data  from  the  FSESP  Hospital  showed  a slightly  increased  number  of 
admissions  for  fever  of  unknown  origin  and  meningismus.  No  consistent 
pattern  emerged  from  the  outpatient  data. 

During  4-8  July,  three  technicians  remained  in  Santarem  to  collect  school 
absentee  data  and  draw  bloods  from  a random  sample  of  six  different  areas 
of  the  city.  Boundaries  were  drawn  so  that  the  city  was  divided  into  three 
riverfront  areas  and  three  inland  areas.  There  was  a gradient  of 
relatively  dry,  somewhat  higher  land  on  the  east  to  lower  wetter  areas  in 
the  western  edge  of  the  city.  Thirteen  to  twenty-one  families  were 
selected  from  each  area  and  blood  was  drawn  from  all  family  members. 

During  meetings  between  USAMRU  and  I.E.C.  personnel  in  Belem,  a plan  for 
coordinated  work  in  Santarem  was  devised.  The  I.E.C.  took  responsibility 


for  clinical  studies  of  acute  cases,  entomologic  captures  in  areas  from 
which  fresh  cases  were  identified,  and  field  transmission  studies  using 
freshly  caught  Culicoides,  the  suspected  vector,  and  hamsters.  IISAMRU  was 
responsible  for  a broad-based  epidemiologic  survey  including  collection  and 
analysis  of  school  absentee  data  and  collection  of  demographic  information, 
environmental  data  and  blood  specimens  from  a randomly  selected  sample  of 
the  urban  population;  and  for  a broad-based  entomologic  survey  of  the 
entire  city. 

Analysis  of  the  school  data  from  the  beginning  of  school  in  March  to  the 
summer  vacation  in  July  showed  a uniform  pattern  of  increased  absences  from 
late  April  and  early  May  to  the  end  of  classes.  The  only  exceptions  were 
schools  from  which  the  data  was  too  scanty  for  accurate  analysis  and  one 
private  school  attended  by  older  and  wealthier  students.  When  absentee 
rates  were  collected  separately  for  morning,  afternoon  and  evening  classes, 
it  was  seen  that  the  highest  rates  were  found  in  pupils  attending  evening 
classes  and  the  lowest  rates  in  those  attending  afternoon  classes.  This 
supports  our  previously  formed  hypothesis  that  attendance  in  the  afternoon, 
during  the  peak  of  the  Culicoides  biting  cycle,  should  confer  some 
protection  against  a disease  transmitted  by  Cul icoides.  Attendance  in  the 
morning,  when  the  insects  are  less  active  should  confer  less  protection, 
and  students  going  to  school  at  night,  and  therefore  exposed  during  the 
entire  biting  cycle  of  Cul icoides,  would  be  expected  to  have  the  highest 
absentee  rates. 

Blood  for  serology  was  drawn  from  a total  of  93  families  with  430  members 
living  in  the  city  of  Santarem.  Blood  was  also  obtained  from  10  families 
with  56  members  living  in  two  villages,  Jacumin  and  Maruru,  along  the  main 
highway  out  of  Santarem.  In  September  a second  blood  specimen  was 
obtained  from  50%  of  the  original  sample.  The  following  seropositivity 
rates  for  oropouche  were  found: 


AREA 

DESCRIPTION 

1st  VISIT 

2nd  VISIT 

1 

inland,  east 

1.35% 

0% 

2 

inland,  central 

3.44% 

3.44% 

3 

inland,  west 

40.47% 

44% 

4 

riverfront,  east 

0% 

0% 

5 

riverfront,  central 

22.38% 

34.14% 

6 

riverfront,  west 

37.34% 

38.63% 

Jacumin 

outside  Santarem 

0% 

0% 

Maruru 

outside  Santarem 

0% 

0% 

There  was  a clear  division  of  areas  into  a group  with  a very  low  attack 
rate  (0-3.44%)  and  a group  with  an  attack  rate  of  22-44%.  When  this  latter 
group  was  analyzed  in  more  detail,  it  was  found  that  attack  rates- differed 
by  sex  as  shown  in  TABLE  1 (x‘  10.5,  p < .001)  but  did  not  differ 
significantly  by  age. 


1239 


Twenty-two  of  the  514  persons  interviewed  in  the  city  of  Santarem  reported 
a febrile  illness  accompanied  by  headache  or  muscular  pains  during  the 
previous  two  months.  Eight  (36%)  of  the  persons  with  a history  of  fever 
were  found  to  have  antibodies  against  oropouche.  Seventy-six  (19%)  of  the 
408  persons  with  no  history  of  fever  had  antibodies  against  oropouche. 


-v  f'-wsp.  ' 


* 


A 


TABLE  1.  Santarem,  1975  - Oropouche 

Age/Sex  Attack  Rate  in  Areas  3,  5,  and  6. 


AGE  GROUP 

M 

F 

0 - 4# 

pos 

2 

2 

total 

11 

8 

% attack 

rate 

18,18 

25 

5 - 9# 

pos 

3 

5 

total 

18 

17 

% attack 

rate 

16,16 

29,41 

10  - 19# 

pos 

6 

18 

total 

28 

38 

% attack 

rate 

21,42 

47,36 

20  - 29# 

pos 

2 

15 

total 

6 

35 

% attack 

rate 

33,33 

42,85 

30# 

pos 

7 

21 

total 

28 

45 

% attack 

rate 

25 

46,66 

TOTALS  # 

pos 

20 

61 

Total 

91 

143 

/zcm. 


1241 


crj-  ' 


J2, 


B.  Oropouche  Epidemic  in  Itupiranga 

During  the  first  week  of  June,  1975,  the  USAMRU  team  in  Maraba  received 
word  of  an  epidemic  in  the  nearby  town  of  Itupiranga.  The  symptoms  of  the 
disease  were  fever,  headache,  muscle  pain,  pains  in  the  eyes  and  a burning 
sensation  of  the  skin.  The  earliest  cases  were  reported  to  have  occurred 
in  the  first  week  of  April. 

During  the  preliminary  investigation  blood  for  serology  was  drawn  from  59 
persons  who  claimed  to  have  had  a recent  febrile  illness.  Thirty-nine  of  the 
sera  had  antibodies  to  oropouche  virus,  most  with  a titer  of  1:80.  A 
review  of  the  cases  presenting  at  the  clinic  with  a history  of  fever, 
headache  and  muscle  pains  showed  that  the  epidemic  started  in  the  latter 
part  of  April  and  reached  a peak  in  the  third  week  of  May.  School  absentee 
data  followed  the  same  general  curve  (FIGURE  1). 

A map  of  the  city  was  made  and  45  families  wtre  randomly  selected. 
Environmental  data,  a history  of  recent  febrile  disease  and  20  cc  of  blood 
was  collected  from  each  person  in  the  sample. 

Six-two  (41.3%)  of  the  150  persons  from  whom  blood  was  drawn  had  antibodies 
to  oropouche.  There  were  no  significant  differences  in  attack  rates  for 
different  ages  or  sexes.  There  also  appeared  to  be  no  significant 
differences  in  attack  rates  for  different  areas  of  the  town,  with  the 
exception  that  those  families  living  on  the  extreme  edge  of  the  town, 
farthest  from  the  river,  had  a lower  incidence  (about  20%). 


1242 


Si*,  m 


C.  Oropouche,  Entomologic  Studies 


' - 


f 


The  first  epidemic  was  studied  at  Mojui  dos  Campos,  Para,  in  February,  1975. 
The  village  is  33  Km  southeast  of  Santarem  with  a population  of  about  2000. 
The  second  epidemic  was  studied  at  Itupiranga,  Para,  in  June,  1975,  and  the 
third  was  studied  at  Santarem,  Para,  in  July,  1975.  The  collections 
relative  to  this  presentation  were  conducted  as  follows: 


1.  Mojui  dos  Campos:  Hourly  collections  were  made  in  the 
early  morning  and  late  afternoon  at  3 houses  each  day. 
The  collections  were  conducted  inside  and  outside  the 
house  simultaneously.  Collections  were  conducted  3-14 
March,  1975. 


2.  Itupiranga:  Continuous  landing  captures  were 

conducted  in  the  back  yards  of  selected  houses  within 
the  city  from  0600  to  2000  hrs.  Collections  were  made 
by  2-man  teams  that  rotated  in  3 hour  shifts.  Landing 
captures  were  also  conducted  at  the  margin  of  the 
Tocantins  River  at  sunset.  Shannon  and  CDC  light  trap 
collections  were  made  within  the  city. 


3.  Santarem:  The  city  was  divided  into  6 sampling  areas 

and  collections  were  made  at  6 randomly  selected 
houses  in  each  area.  (FIG.  1).  Collections  were  made 
in  the  backyards  and  were  conducted  continuously  from 
1400-2000  hr.  for  3 days  at  each  house.  Twelve  teams 
of  collectors  were  employed  (2  men  per  team)  and  2 
areas  were  covered  simultaneously.  Each  team  was 
visited  hourly  by  trained  entomology  technicians. 
During  the  visits,  the  hourly  collections  were 
gathered  and  new  collection  containers  were  left  with 
the  teams.  The  collections  were  returned  to  the 
laboratory  where  the  C.  paraensis  were  killed, 
identified,  enumerated  and  grouped  for  virus  isolation. 
Mosquitoes  were  preserved  in  liquid  N2  for  later 
processing.  The  teams  were  rotated  between  houses 
each  day.  Forms  were  also  completed  for  each  house  on 
environmental  variables,  e.g.,  types  of  trees, 
domestic  water  source,  sanitary  facilities,  etc.,  to 
correlate  with  the  absence  or  presence  of  C.  paraensis. 

4.  Belem:  Belem  has  been  the  site  of  two  epidemics  of 

Oropouche  virus  since  1961.  Six  barrios  in  Belem  were 
selected  for  study  in  the  manner  employed  in  Santarem. 
This  study  was  undertaken  to  see  if  there  was  a 
correlation  in  occurrence  of  C.  paraensis  in  a similar 
type  of  urban  area  as  was  found  in  Santarem  and 
specially  for  future  reference  when  Oropouche  again 
occurs  in  the  city 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  Culex  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  and  Cul icoides  paraensis 

were  abundant  during  the  epidemic  at  Mojui  dos  Campos.  In  36  paired, 
indoor-outdoor  collections  of  C.  paraensis  29%  of  the  total  number  were 
collected  inside  the  houses.  The  documentation  of  this  species  as  readily 


or  >v^'  *V 


1245 


seeking  blood  meals  indoors  was  done  in  small  domestic  lotes  and  probably 
reflects  the  proximity  of  breeding  sites  and  abundant  vegetation  for 
protected  resting  sites.  Studies  at  Palestina  demonstrated  the 
anthropophil ic-endophil ic  behavior  of  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  (see 
Malaria). 

Several  hematophagous  insects  were  abundant  during  the  epidemic  at 
Itupiranga.  These  included  black  flies,  C.  paraensis,  Cx.  pipiens 
quinquefasciatus,  and  Mansonia  titillans  {TABLE  1).  Black  flies  and  C. 
paraensis  were  day  active;  whereas  the  mosquito  species  were  crepuscular 
(TABLE  2).  Culicoides  paraensis  had  a pronounced  peak  in  biting  activity 
between  1700  and  1800  hr  (FIG.  2). 

Several  species  were  collected  from  Santarem;  but,  again,  only  C.  paraensi s 
and  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  were  present  in  dense  populations  (TABLE  3). 
The  other  species  were  more  abundant  in  rural  areas  away  from  the  city 
(TABLE  4). 

Dense  populations  of  C.  paraensis  and  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus 
correlated  with  the  prevalence  of  human  Oropouche  seropositivity  (TABLE  5). 
The  best  numerical  correlation  was  obtained  with  the  populations  of  C. 
paraensis  (FIGS.  3 and  4).  Culicoides  paraensis,  unlike  Cx.  pipiens 
quinquefasciatus  were  also  abundant  in  the  rural  areas  along  the  Santarem- 
Curu-Una  highways.  The  absence  of  human  Oropouche  seropositivity  in  the 
rural  areas  may  be  a product  of  low  human  population  density  that  did  not 
support  the  spread  of  the  virus. 

The  distribution  of  specific  populations  could  not  be  correlated  with  the 
environmental  variables  included  on  the  questionaires  completed  for  each 
house  in  the  survey.  This  way  primarily  a result  of  poor  quantification 
of  the  variables  listed.  A one-way  analysis  of  variance  test  did  show  a 
significantly  (P  < 0.05)  greater  number  of  C.  paraensis  associated  with 
lotes  that  were  5 or  more  years  old.  Since  f.  paraensis  is  a tree  hole  or 
container  breeder  this  may  be  related  to  the  presence  of  more  and  larger 
trees  on  older  lotes. 

Past  epidemics  in  Belem,  Brazil  have  occurred  in  the  low  socio-economic 
suburban  areas  and  did  not  occur  in  the  residential  old  city  ("cidade 
velha")  nor  in  the  commercial  center.  Several  mosquito  species  were 
collected  during  the  survey  of  6 bairros  in  January  (TABLE  6).  The  best 
represented  species  were  C.  paraensis  and  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus. 

These  species  were  least  abundant  in  the  "cidade  velh  " and  commercial  area 
(TABLE  7).  Maximum  number  of  cases  of  Oropouche  was  detected  in  area  #9 
during  the  1968  epidemic.  Of  the  areas  surveyed,  area  #9  presented  the 
largest  numbers  of  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  and  C.  paraensis. 

The  available  data  indicate  a consistent  association  in  within-city 
distribution  by  areas  of  C.  paraensis  and  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus 
population  densities.  However,  there  is  no  correlation  in  densities  by 
house.  Their  presence  in  the  same  general  areas  is  probably  a result  of 
socio-economic  factors  in  the  human  population. 


1246 


FIGURE  2 


Temporal  Distribution  of  Host-seeking  Culicoides  paraensis 
(Goeldi)  in  a Peridomiciliary  Environment,  Itupiranga,  Brazil. 


1249 


DISTRIBUTION  OF  DENSE  POPULATIONS 
OF  ANTHROPOPHILIC  INSECTS  BY  AREA 


E23  CULICOIDES  PARAENSIS  (GOELDI) 

^ CULEX  PIPIENS  QUINQUEFASCIATUS  SAY 

P 

\ 


AMAZON  RIVER 

1252 


SPECIES 


LANDING  CAPTURE3 
AT  EDGE  OF  RIVER 


SHANNON  TRAP 
CAPTURE 


Ad.  sauamipes  0 

An.  ( Nys . ) jguasaljs  3 (I.O)c 

An.  (N^s. ) nuneztovari  3 (1.0) 

An . (Nys . ) tri annul atus  0 

Cx.  (M§1.)  taeniopus  0 

Cx.  (Cux. ) coronator  0 

Cx.  (Cux. ) corniger  0 

Cx.  (Cux. ) pipiens 

qumquefasciatus  0 

Culex  sp.  B #19  0 

Ma.  humeral  is  150  (37.5) 

Ma.  titillans  262  (174.6) 

Anopheles  spp.  57 

Culex  spp.  2 

Uranotaenia  spp.  0 


1 (0.25) 


11  (2.75) 
1 (0.25) 


& 0.0) 

9 (2.2F' 
2 (0.5) 


1 (0.03) 


1 (0.03) 
5 (0.18) 

30  (1.07) 

27  (1.0) 

2 (0.07) 
1 (0.03) 
4 (0.14) 


Culicoides  spp. 


Number  of  collections 


3 (30  min.  each)  4 (1  hr  each)  27 


a Collections  conducted  at  the  edge  of  the  Tocantins  river  (which  is  bordered 
by  the  village)  from  1845-1915. 

b Collections  were  made  for  1 hr  within  the  village  of  Itupiranga. 

c Probably  represents  a morphologic  variant  of  An.  nuneztovari  or  is  a new 
species. 

/zcm. 


12  <5a 


TABLE  2.  Numbers  of  Insects  Collected  in  Hourly  Landing  Captures  During  an  Epidemic  of  Oropouche  Virus  in 


r^.  or  O 

O CO 

co 


o 

CO 


co  cm  co  o 

o •—  o 

r—  CV 


Lf>  CM 

m in 


rs,  co  CM  CM 

m cm  co  co 

co 


o o in 

CM 

CM 


O r—  CM  VO 
O 


CC  o o 

n:  o in 

\ m m 

Q r—  r— 


O O O (Ti 
CO 


O O 


cd  o a> 

cO 


o o o in 
in 


o o r- 

in 


o o *—  CM 
VO 


o o »—  **■ 

m 


o o cm 

co 


O O r-  m 
CM 


CM  O O'  CO 
CM  CM 


«0  l/> 

f—  3 

3 l/> 

C C 

= (D  -r- 

(0  •»-  u 

•r-  d l/) 

L.  *r-  <0  00  i/) 

■U  Oj<4-  •*“  C 

0)  f—  f0 

— * 3 *0  *— 

• • CT  »— 


1 1 1! 


s ■;  3 


J=l  +j| 


5l  51 


51  51 


1255b 


1 JMUMhfwt'w 


V 


SPECIES 

a AVERAGE 

NUMBER  COLLECTED 

Areas  1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

Culicidae 

An.  (Nys.)  albitarsis 

0 

0 

1.0 

0 

0 

0.. 

An.  (Nys.)  triannunatus 

2.2 

6.0 

0 

0 

0.3 

0 

Cx.  (Cux.)  coronator 

0.5 

2.5 

0.7 

1.0 

0.3 

0 

Cx.  (Cux.)  pipiens 
quinquefasciatus 

4.2 

0.7 

26.7 

7.2 

24.5 

31.3 

Ma.  amazonensis 

8.2 

6.0 

0 

0 

0.3 

0 

Ma.  titillans 

1.3 

1.0 

1.5 

0.5 

0 

6.8 

a Average  collected  from  6 sites  in  each  area, 
/zcm. 


1256 


«■***•»-  ,r.«.  T - 


r*w>^.r 


TABLE  4.  Relative  Densities  of  7 Species  in  the  Rural  and  Urban  Areas  of 

Santarem,  Para,  Brazil.  The  Landing  Collections  were  Made  in  July 
1975. 


SPECIES 

AVERAGE  COLLECTED  PER  HOUSE 

a WITHIN  CITY  OF 
SANTAREM 

b RURAL  AREA  ALONG  THE 
SANTAREM-CURU-UNA  HIGHWAY 

Culicidae 

An.  (Nys.)  albitarsis 

0.2 

6.6 

An.  (Nys.)  triannulatus 

1.4 

29.1 

Cx,  (Cux.)  coronator 

0.6 

2.25 

Cx.  (Cux.)  pipiens 
quinquefasciatus 

15.5 

1.0 

Ma.  amazonensis 

1.6 

0.5 

Ma.  titillans 

1.8 

10.5 

Ceratopogonidae 

Culicoides  paraensi^ 

9.5 

32.0 

a Each  value  is  based  on  36  man-hr  of  collections  at  each  of  39  houses, 
b Each  value  is  based  on  36  man-hr  of  collections  at  each  of  9 houses. 


/zcm. 


1257 


! 


TABLE  5.  Population  Densities  of  Culicoides  paraensis  (Goeldi)  Within 
the  City  of  Santarem,  Para,  Brazil,  July  1975. 


TOTAL  COLLECTED 

BY  AREAS 

AREAS 

4 

2 

1 

5 

6 

3 

5 

5 

55a 

1 

38 

42 

0 

0 

46a 

52b 

27 

17 

0 

9 

4 

20 

37 

170 

3 

1 

4 

18 

11 

41 

4 

6 

3 

17 

9 

36 

2 

1 

1 

1 

54 

55 

TOTAL  COLLECTED 

14 

22 

113 

109 

176 

361 

a Houses  in  proximity  to  areas  5 and  6. 
b House  located  adjacent  to  area  6. 

/zcm. 


1258 


f T.  TT  V ' ; 


TABLE  6 


. List  of  Species  and  Numbers  in  Landing  Collections  Conducted  in 
January  and  February  1976  in  Belem,  Para,  Brazil. 


Culicidae 

Number  Collected 

Ae.  (Gch.)  diqopistus 

1 

Ae.  (Och.)  scapularis 

15 

Ae.  (Och.)  serratus 

1 

Ae.  (Och.)  taeniorhynchus 

62 

An.  (Ano.)  intermedius 

1 

An.  (Nys.)  aquasalis 

98 

An.  (Nys.)  nuneztovari 

1 

Cq.  venezuelensis 

168 

Cx.  (Cux.)  corniger 

2 

Cx.  (Cux.)  coronator 

345 

Cx.  (Cux.)  pipiens  quinquefasciatus 

1117 

Cx.  (Mel.)  spissipes 

1 

Cx.  (Mel.)  taeniopus 

2 

Ma.  (Man.)  amazonensis 

108 

Ps.  (Gra.)  cinqulata 

27 

Ps.  (Jan.)  ferox 

5 

Li . durhami 

10 

Culex  sp.  B #21 

1 

Culex  (Mel.)  spp. 

1 

Coqui 11 ettidia  spp. 

4 

Culicoides  paraensis 

1396 

TOTAL 

3366 

/zcm. 


. 77^  .54T-SBK  TPI5*9rW' 


1259 


TABLE  7.  Average  Number  of  6 Species  Collected  per  Day  in  6 Bairros  (Areas) 
in  Belem,  Para,  Brazil. 


AVERAGE  NUMBER  COLLECTED  PER  DAY  PER  AREA 


SPECIES 


Culicidae 

An.  (Nys) 
aquasal 

Cx.  (Cux.) 


Cx.  (cux. ) pipiens 
quinquefas- 
ciatus 


Ceratopogonidae 
Cul icoides 


Are 

I 

#7 

#8 

#9 

#20 

#2/3 

#12 

~Wi 

l 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

0.2 

0 

4.5 

3.3 

2.7 

0.8 

1.3 

1.2 

0.7 

1.5 

0 

0 

3.8 

3.2 

0 

16.8 

33.7 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

5.5 

4.0 

0.5 

0.3 

4.2 

3.3 

5.3 

1.5 

1.2 

2.0 

0 

0.2 

3.3 

1.0 

2.8 

0.2 

3.8 

6.0 

0.2 

0.2 

0.3 

0 

0 

0.2 

14.5 

12.7 

24.2 

17.3 

28.8 

26 

20.5 

28 

3.7 

4.5 

4.7 

1.3 

15.8 

6.3 

2.5 

0.2 

83 

38 

23 

9.5 

4.5 

3.2 

21.8 

39.8 

/zcm. 


'■rt  rW  **  * W* 


► 


III.  MALARIA 


BACKGROUND:  Malaria  continues  to  be  a major  health  problem  in  Brazil.  It 

is  recognized  as  1 of  the  5 most  important  diseases  in  the  country  and  is 
clearly  the  major  problem  in  the  Amazon  basin.  During  the  2 years  of  this 
project  there  has  been  accumulated  considerable  epidemiological  evidence 
that  malari  a is  being  transmitted  in  some  rural  areas  in  the  absence  of 
recognized  primary  or  secondary  vectors. 

Road  construction  throughout  the  region  is  opening  new  rural  areas  for 
occupation.  The  rural  and  semi-rural  populations  are  rapidly  increasing 
with  access  to  remote  areas,  and  the  mobility  of  migratory  work  forces  has 
likewise  increased.  Both  phenomena  now  present  particulary  acute  problems 
to  the  control  of  malaria. 

For  obvious  reasons,  highways  are  generally  constructed  through  areas  away 
from  the  rivers  and  riverine  habitats.  Since  the  recognized  vectors  seem 
predominantly  riverine  in  occurrence,  it  is  reasonable  that  any 
non-riverine,  secondary  vectors  will  become  increasingly  important  with  the 
current  shift  in  populations  to  non-riverine  areas.  Thus,  knowledge  of  any 
potential  secondary  vectors  is  important  in  assessing  the  impact  of  the 
conventional  control  procedures  being  employed  by  SUCAM. 

A.  Entomology  Program 

Objectives  for  the  entomology  program  relating  to  malaria  are: 

1.  Document,  over  a large  geographical  area,  the  spatial 
and  temporal  distribution  of  the  various  anopheline 
species  with  the  use  of  the  routine  surveillance 
program. 

2.  Study  specific  behavior,  e.g.  endophily,  of  species 
suspected  as  secondary  vectors. 

3.  Document  natural  transmission  by  secondary  vectors  in 
areas  with  active  malaria  transmission. 

4.  Conduct  a program  of  rearing  taxonomic  specimens  to 
resolve  the  taxonomic  difficulties  in  the 
Nyssorhynchus  subgenus. 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  No  recognized  malaria  vectors  have  been  found  at  the 
routinely  visited  sites  along  the  Transamazon  Highway.  In  August  1975,  4 
teenage  members  of  a colonist  family  in  Gleba  36  became  ill  with  malaria 
(3  with  falciparum  and  1 vivax);  all  denied  recent  travel  from  their  lote. 
Migratory  workers  had  been  employed  on  the  lote  during  the  preceeding  2-3 
months.  Two  weeks  of  collections  at  that  site  revealed  no  known  vector 
species  and  dense  populations  of  Anopheles  ( Nys . ) nuneztovari  Gabaldon  and 
An.  (Nys. ) oswaldol  (Peruassu).  Results  from  the  routine  surveillance 
program  likewise  revealed  an  absence  of  known  vector  species  in  the 
vicinity  of  that  lote. 

A site  was  established  in  Palestina  (a  village  100  Km  southwest  of  Maraba) 
to  study  the  behavior  of  the  common  anopheline  and  culicine  species.  The 


1261 


. -7W-  - WFMW..  .... 


program  was  initiated  in  March  1975  and  consisted  of  conducting  hourly 
landing  collections  throughout  the  night.  The  collections  were  for  30  min. 
each  hour  and  were  conducted  simultaneously  inside  and  outside  the  house. 

In  addition,  a 10  min.  resting  collection  was  conducted  inside  the  house  at 
the  end  of  each  hour.  Other  collections  were  made  nightly  with  the 
Shannon  trap,  CDC  light  trap,  and  a pyrethrin  spray  inside  one  room  from 
0630-0635  hrs. 


The  dominant  species  collected  by  the  landing  and  resting  collections  were 
Anopheles  nuneztovari  Gabaldon,  Coquillettidia  venezuelensis  (Theobald), 
Culex  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  Say  and  Mansonia~titil1ans  (Walker) 

(TABLE  1 ) . The  outdoor  collections  were  considerably  more  productive  with 
all  species  but  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus.  The  "0/1  ratio"  for  the  9 
most  abundant  species  are  as  follows: 

SPECIES  0/1  ratio 


Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  0.42 

Ma.  ti til  Ians  1.96 

fin.  aquasal is  3.9 

C£.  venezuelensis  4 . 0 

Ps.  cingulata  5.1 

fin.  a! bi tarsi's  5.3 

C£.  nigricans  5.4 

fin . trXanfiulatus  5 . 5 

Ae.  serratus  7.8 


Based  on  these  data,  the  3 common  anophelines  in  Palestina  do  not  readily 
enter  houses  to  feed  or  rest.  The  specimens  identified  as  An.  aquasal  is 
are  probably  morphological  variants  of  An.  nuneztovari  or  a new  species. 
This  species  (?)  was  more  likely  to  enter  houses  than  the  other  anophelines 
and  seemed  relatively  more  abundant  in  collections  at  0530-0600  hrs 
(TABLE  2). 


Specimens  of  Ma.  ti ti 11 ans  were  frequently  encountered  inside  the  house. 

The  Cx.  pipiens  quinquefasciatus  were  the  only  populations  that 
demonstrated  a real  preference  for  entering,  feeding,  and  resting  inside 
the  house. 


The  peak  period  of  biting  activity  for  the  5 most  abundant  exophilic 
species  occurred  at  sunset  (TABLE  2).  Coquillettidia  venezuelensis  and  An. 
triannulatus  had  small,  but  pronounced,  secondary  peaks  at  sunrise. 

The  3 species  represented  in  greatest  numbers  in  the  Shannon  trap 
collections  were  Cg_.  venezuelensis,  Cx.  coronator  and  An.  triannulatus. 

The  CDC  light  trap  collections  conducted  on  the  same  nights  in  the  same 
locale  produced  highest  numbers  of  Cx.  corniqer,  Cx^.  coronator  and  An. 
triannulatus.  Other  than  the  quantitative  differences,  the  traps  were 
qualitatively  about  equal,  i.e.,  Most  species  were  represented  in  both 
traps. 

A program  to  rear  taxonomic  specimens  was  initiated  in  February  1976. 
Material  has  been  collected  from  the  Palestina,  Maraba  and  Itupiranga  areas. 
The  reared  material  is  being  sent  to  Dr.  Ronald  Ward,  Project  Manager, 


1262 


Medical  Entomology  Project  at  the  Smithsonian  Institution  for  taxonomic 
work-up. 


. COMMENTS:  Plans  for  studying  the  behavior  of  An.  darlingi  at  Agrovila 

Uniao  were  not  realized  because  populations  of  this  species  disappeared 
after  the  program  was  initiated.  A continuation  of  these  studies  is 
planned  at  a fazenda  site  near  Paragominas.  With  the  abundance  of  malaria 
cases,  the  presence  of  An.  darlingi  and  other  species  make  this  site  idea1 
for  future  studies.  Efforts  will  also  be  made  to  infect  potential  vectors 
and  to  detect  natural  transmission  by  secondary  species  along  the 
Transamazon  highway. 


d 


TABLE  1.  Numbers  of  Insects  Collected  in  72  all-night  Collections  in 
Palestina,  Brazil,  March  1975-April  1976,  Hourly  30-min 
Collections  of  Insects  Landing  on  man  were  Made  Simultaneously 
Outside  and  Inside  the  House.  Collections  of  Insects  Resting  on 
Walls  were  Made  During  the  Last  10  min.  of  Each  hr. 


Culicidae 

An.  (Nys. ) al bi tarsi s 
*An.  (Nys. ) aquasal is 
An.  (Nys. ) nuneztovari 
fin.  ( Nys . ) oswaldoi 
fin.  (Nys. ) triannulatus 
Ae.  (Och.)  ful vus 
Ae.  (Och. ) scapuTaris 
fie.  (OcF. ) serratus 
C^.  albicosta 
C£.  arribalzaqai 
C£.  nigricans 
C^.  venezuelensis 
Cx.  iMeTT ) spissipes 
Cx.  (Mel.)  taeniopus 
Cx.  (ReT. ) vomer ifer 
Cx.  (Cux. ) corniger 
Cx.  (Cux.)  coronator 
C7.  (Cux.)  declarator 
Cx.  (Cux. ) pipiens 

quinquefasciatus 
Culex  sp.  Bf  IS 
Ma.  (Man.)  humeral  is 
Ma.  (Man.)  pseudoti til  Ians 


Ma.  (Man.)  titillans 
Ps.  (Cra. ) cingulata 
Ps.  (Jan.)  ferox 
Tr.  ( trc. ) digltatum 

Anopheles  spp. 

Aedes  spp. 

Coqui 1 lettidi a spp. 
Culex  spp~ 

Mansonia  spp. 
Psorophora  spp. 
UranotaenTa  spp. 
Wyeomyla  spp. 

TOTALS 


OUTSIDE 


INSIDE 


RESTING 


TOTALS 


TABLE  1.  (Cont.) 


Culicidae 

OUTSIDE 

INSIDE 

RESTING 

TOTAL' 

TOTALS 

2110 

1039 

986 

4037 

Simuliidae 

21 

0 

0 

21 

Ceratopogonidae 

4 

0 

0 

4 

TOTALS 

25 

0 

0 

25 

GRAND  TOTALS 

2135 

1039 

986 

4062 

Number  of  man-hours 

432 

432 

144 

Ave.  number  collected/man-hr 

4.94 

2.4 

6.85 

Probably  represents  a morphological  variant  of  An.  nuneztovari  or  a new 
species. 


/zcm. 


TABLE  2.  Nunbers  of  5 Mosquito  Species  Collected  In  Landing  Captures  at 
Palestine,  Brazil,  March  1975-Aprll  1976.  Each  Value  is  Based 
on  36  Man-hr  of  Collecting  Time  Within  10  m of  the  House. 


Cfl- 

venezuelensls 

An. 

trlannulatus 

Ma. 

tTtlllans 

Ps. 

cTnqulata 

An. 

albltarsls 

T0TA1 

1130- 

1800 

2 

2 

2 

0 

2 

7 

1830- 

1900 

345 

297 

145 

62 

94 

943 

1930- 

2000 

31 

28 

13 

7 

3 

82 

2030- 

2100 

22 

17 

4 

12 

2 

57 

2130- 

2200 

15 

6 

4 

10 

0 

35 

2230- 

2300 

1 

7 

1 

7 

1 

17 

2330- 

2400 

7 

1 

2 

2 

0 

12 

0030- 

0100 

6 

2 

3 

2 

0 

13 

0130- 

0200 

10 

3 

0 

1 

0 

14 

0230- 

0300 

9 

0 

0 

2 

0 

11 

0330- 

0400 

13 

4 

6 

1 

0 

23 

0430- 

0500 

5 

1 

1 

3 

0 

10 

0530- 

0600 

35 

38 

4 

3 

4 

84 

TOTALS 

601 

406 

184 

112 

105 

1308 

1266 


B.  Investigation  of  Malaria  Epidemic  at  Vila  Nova 

In  August,  1975,  USAMRU-Belem  was  asked  to  investigate  an  epidemic  of 
febrile  disease  which  had  started  approximately  one  month  previously  in 
Vila  Nova,  Para.  During  the  intervening  period  there  had  been  ten  deaths. 
Fever  and  jaundice  were  symptoms  comnon  to  the  ten,  and  yellow  fever  was 
suspected  to  be  the  cause. 

Vila  Nova  is  a town  of  about  500  inhabitants,  located  950  Km  south  of  Belem 
and  14  Km  inland  from  Sao  Geraldo  and  Xambioa  on  the  Araguaia  River.  The 
houses  are  all  constructed  of  mud  and  the  only  water  in  the  immediate  area 
is  a small  stream  which  flows  past  one  end  of  the  town.  The  area  as  a 
whole  is  dry. 

On  July  20th,  58  persons  with  fever  were  examined  and  blood  was  drawn  for 
virus  isolation,  serology  and  a malaria  slide.  Demographic  information  and 
symptomatology  were  recorded,  temperature  measured,  and  abdomen  examined 
for  a palpable  spleen.  Thirty-two  persons  had  a temperature  greater  than 
37°C  and  eight  had  a palpable  speen.  Almost  all  reported  an  intermittent 
fever  of  long  duration  with  epigastric  pains,  headache  and  sometimes 
vomiting.  Many  reported  remissions  after  taking  chloroquin,  usually  in 
non-curative  doses. 

Blood  was  drawn  and  information  taken  from  an  additional  12  families  with 
60  members  randomly  selected  from  the  village. 

About  two  hours  were  spent  doing  insect  resting  captures  inside  houses  and 
90  man-hours  doing  biting  collections  inside  houses,  outside  houses  and  on 
the  banks  of  the  stream  that  flows  past  the  village.  Total  captures  were  5 
anophelines  and  about  50  culicines.  All  the  mosquitos  were  captured  on  the 
banks  of  the  stream. 

The  two  physicians  in  Xambioa,  the  nearest  large  town,  claimed  to  hav;' 
treated  120  cases  of  malaria,  most  of  which  they  diagnosed  as  P.  vivax. 

They  also  reported  three  cases  of  yellow  fever,  two  of  which  died.  These 
cases  were  diagnosed  clinically.  Blood  was  not  taken  for  serology  nor  were 
examinations  for  malaria  made.  No  liver  specimens  were  taken  from  the  two 
fatalities.  There  were  no  reports  of  dead  monkeys  in  the  area,  and  there 
appeared  to  be  few  live  ones. 

Upon  return  to  Belem,  blood  slides  were  examined  for  malaria  parasites. 
Twenty-nine  of  the  58  persons  with  a history  of  recent  fever  were  positive 
for  malaria,  including  seven  of  the  eight  with  a palpable  spleen.  Three  of 
these  were  identified  as  vivax;  the  rest  were  falciparum.  Five  of  the  60 
persons  constituting  the  random  sample  had  a positive  malaria  slide.  All 
five  were  identified  as  falciparum.  Since  only  one  slide  was  taken  from 
each  person,  and  since  it  is  a common  practice  to  take  small  doses  of 
chloroquine  for  any  fever,  the  actual  prevalence  of  malaria  is  probably 
higher  than  is  indicated  by  the  number  of  positive  slides. 

All  five  anophelines  were  identified  as  Anopheles  darlingi . 

Virus  isolation  and  serology  studies  revealed  no  evidence  for  the  presence 
of  yellow  fever  or  other  arboviral  disease. 


1267 


C.  Malaria  Control  in  Migrant  Workers 

Malaria  among  migrant  workers,  especially  on  fazendas  in  the  states  of  Para 
and  Maranhao,  is  considered  a major  threat  to  Brazil’s  national  malaria 
control  program.  These  workers  often  are  singled  out  as  the  source  of 
reintroduction  of  the  infection  into  areas  where  malaria  control  programs 
have  greatly  reduced  or  erradicated  the  disease.  Large  numbers  of  itinerant 
laborers  are  hired  for  forest  clearing, grass  planting,  fencing,  and 
construction  on  the  many  existing  and  developing  fazendas  in  the  Amazon 
region.  The  workers  normally  live  in  primitive,  walless  shelters  and  sleep 
in  hammocks.  The  forest  clearers  usually  live  furthest  from  the  roads  in 
areas  that  are  difficult  to  reach  by  spraying,  examination,  and  treatment 
teams.  The  national  malaria  control  organization  (SUCAM)  has  the  task  of 
developing  proposals  for  combating  malaria  among  migrant  workers,  primarily 
at  the  fazenda  level.  Malaria  rate  estimation  in  itinerant  populations  and 
evaluations  of  control  procedures  under  fazenda  conditions  are  important 
types  of  information  for  developing  a rational  protocol  for  malaria  control. 
These  data  are  not  available  for  the  Amazon  region. 

BACKGROUND:  In  mid-February,  1976,  a program  was  initiated  by  Fazenda  Uraim 

near  Paragominas  in  the  state  of  Para;  to  combat  an  increasingly  serious 
malaria  problem.  The  program  was  designed  by  the  USAMRU-Belem  staff  and 
financed  by  Fazenda  Uraim.  This  fazenda  was  opened  in  virgin  jungle  and  was 
initially  accessible  only  by  river.  During  the  first  year  of  work  there 
were  no  malaria  problems  among  the  workers.  A road  (92  Km  in  length)  was 
constructed  into  the  fazenda  the  following  year.  During  the  second  year 
cases  of  malaria  began  to  appear  and  continued  to  increase  during  the  third 
year  (1975). 

A visit  was  made  to  the  fazenda  in  July  1975  to  evaluate  the  area  for 
studying  malaria  in  the  migrant  labor.  Malaria  was  a major  problem  in  the 
areas  where  the  forest  was  being  cleared.  Populations  of  Anopheles  darl ingi 
Root  were  not  found.  A second  trip  in  October,  1975, reaffirmed  the 
seriousness  of  malaria  among  the  forest  workers  and  revealed  the  presence  of 
An.  darl ingi  at  a riverine  area  where  the  forest  was  being  cleared.  In 
January,  1976,  An.  darl ingi  was  discovered  throughout  the  fazenda  in  both 
cleared  and  partially  uncleared  areas.  It  was  on  the  basis  of  these  visits 
that  an  experimental  program  was  presented  to  the  fazenda  management  for 
malaria  control.  The  program  design  included  a malaria  detection  - treatment 
team  and  2 men  for  vector  surveillance.  Vector  surveillance  was 
subsequently  discontinued  and  certain  types  of  entomologic  data  are  not 
available.  All  persons  on  the  fazenda  are  examined  biweekly  (each  biweekly 
survey  is  called  a visit) , and  all  malaria  positives  are  treated.  A 
preliminary  analysis  of  data  was  made  at  the  end  of  the  third  visit;  and  a 
ten  visit  analysis  is  being  done,  but  the  results  are  not  presently  available 
Positivety  rates  for  ten  visits  will,  however,  be  presented. 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  The  maximum  number  of  persons  examined  during  the  Tirst  3 
visits  was  437  (TABLE  1).  The  actual  population  size  of  the  fazenda  is 
unknown  since  there  are  insufficient  controls  on  exiting  personnel. 
Consequently,  the  efficiency  of  coverage  can  not  be  evaluated  Percentages 
derived  from  frequency  distributions  of  persons  seen  during  each  of  the  3 
visits  (TABLE  2)  indicate  that  a mean  of  30.3%  of  all  persons  were  not  seen 
during  preceding  or  subsequent  visits.  This  approximates  a 60%  turnover  of 
the  entire  fazenua  population  per  month. 


A mean  number  of  72  cases  of  malaria  were  detected  during  each  visit  (TABLE 
3).  Calculations  based  on  data  in  TABLE  1 would  give  17%  positivity  for  the 
fazenda  population.  The  lowest  number  of  positive  cases(15%  positivity)  and 
particularly  of  cases  of  falciparum,  was  found  during  the  third  visit.  A 
comparison  of  the  percentage  of  persons  seen  only  once  in  visits  1 and  2 
with  the  percentage  of  total  cases  of  malaria  contributed  by  these  people  is 
presented  in  TABLE  4.  This  group  represented  28%  of  the  population  surveyed 
and  contributed  an  average  of  44%  of  the  malaria  cases. 

It  appears  that  case  treatment  is  relatively  effective.  From  cases  included 
in  subsequent  visits,  17%  of  falciparum  cases  (total  of  64  cases)  and  10%  of 
vivax  cases  were  positive  at  the  next  biweekly  visit.  The  results  are 
probably  due  to  1)  not  taking  medicine  as  prescribed  2)  some  cases  of 
falciparum  that  were  initially  under  dosed. 

Crude  estimates  of  transmission  rates  were  derived  from  persons  examined 
during  two  or  more  visits  to  determine  the  percentage  of  persons  converting 
from  negative  to  positive.  The  transmission  rate  of  falciparum  was  reduced 
between  the  first  and  third  visits  (TABLE  5).  Transmission  of  vivax  malaria 
remained  more  or  less  constant.  The  net  effect  was  a reduction  of 
transmission  from  19%  during  the  initial  visit  to  12%  during  the  second  and 
third  visits.  The  bulk  of  these  cases  probably  represent  on-fazenda 
transmission.  There  was  no  reduction  in  total  number  of  cases  during  the 
first  three  visits;  however,  the  reduction  in  transmission  rate  seems  to 
indicate  that  a true  decrease  in  total  cases  will  occur. 

Results  from  the  first  ten  visits:  The  impact  of  the  active  surveillance 

and  treatment  program  became  obvious  during  the  fourth  visit.  The 
positivity  rate  decreased  with  each  visit  and  was  lowest  at  the  eighth  visit 
An  increase  in  the  number  of  cases  during  the  ninth  and  tenth  visits 
corresponds  with  the  reinitiation  of  forest  clearing  (the  first  since  1975). 
This  increase  is  a result  of  the  inaccessabil ity  of  forest  workers  and  their 
hesitance  to  walk  4-6  Km  for  examination  and  treatment. 

Since  the  program  has  been  in  effect,  each  person  applying  for  work  has  been 
examined  for  malaria  before  he  enters  the  fazenda.  The  overall  positivity 
rate  of  applicants  for  February-May  was  9.7%  most  of  which  (5.7%)  was 
falciparum  malaria. 

COMMENTS:  The  Fazenda  Uraim  program  is  providing  much  malariogenic  data 

that  is  relevant  to  the  most  pressing  problem  faced  by  the  malaria  control 
effort,  viz.  malaria  control  in  the  migratory  labor  force  employed  on 
fazendas.  For  a variety  of  social  and  cultural  reasons,  this  problem  may 
have  strong  influence  on  the  development  of  chloroquine  resistance  in  this 
region.  A detailed  analysis  of  thefirst  10  visits  is  being  conducted,  to 
include  effectiveness  of  treatment. 

Work  at  the  fazenda  affords  an  opportunity  to  conduct  a variety  of  studies 
on  malaria  that  would  otherwise  be  difficult.  Future  plans  include 
continuation  of  past  studies  on  chloroquin  resistante  falciparum  malar iu, 
efforts  at  detecting  natural  infections  in  secondary  vectors,  testing  the 
susceptibility  of  various  species  to  infection,  and  study  of  the  behavior  of 
the  principal  vector  - An.  darlingi. 


I 269 


TABLE  1.  Total  Number  of  Persons  Examined  During  Visits  1,  2,  and  3 at 
Fazenda  Uraim. 


VISITS 

NUMBERS  OF  PERSONS  EXAMINED 

1 

/ 424 

2 

397 

3 

437 

/zcm. 


1 I l .,[1  P IAJUM1 


1 

:.5 


I 

I 

TABLE  2.  Frequency  Distrubution  of  Fersons  Examined  by  Visits  1,  2,  and  3 
at  Fazenda  Uraim. 


VISITS 


1,2,3 

1 

1,2 

1 

2,3 

■ " ■ l 
2 

3 

3,2 

■* 

Numbers  of  persons 
examined 


TABLE  5.  Percent  of  Individuals  that  Convert  (Negative  to  Positive)  on 
Subsequent  Visits  at  Fazenda  Uraim. 


MALARIA  TYPES 

VISITS 

i 

1-2 

2-3 

1-3 

Falciparum 

14% 

7% 

8% 

Vivax 

5% 

5% 

10% 

Combined  % 

19% 

12% 

18% 

zcm. 


1274 


rrw»» 


TABLE  6.  Malaria  Positivity  Rates  for  the  1st  10  Visits  at  Fazenda  Uraim, 
Paragominas , Brazil. 


TYPE  OF  MALARIA 


% POSITIVE  BY  VISIT 


1 

2 

i 

3 

4 

i 

5 

6 

1 

7 

8 

9 

10 

Vivax 

5 

5 

6 

4 

4 

2 

1.5 

1 

3 

4 

Falciparum 

13 

14 

9 

4 

4 

3 

2.5 

2 

3 

3 

TOTAL 

18 

i 

19 

15 

8 

8 

5 

4 

3 

6 

7 

TOTAL  NUMBER 
EXAMINED 

i 

424 

397 

437 

347 

442 

486 

528 

1 — . 
co 

587 

654 

/z  cm. 


1275 


"~T,r-7?X;  r-  - 


IV.  LABORATORY  PROGRAM 


BACKGROUND:  The  primary  functions  of  the  laboratory  section  of  USAMRU- 

Belem  are  .he  technical  support  of  the  epidemiology  surveillance  program 
and  the  provision  of  diagnostic  capabilities  in  parasitology,  bacteriology, 
and  a variety  of  clinical  lab  procedures  as  required  in  epidemic 
investigation,  special  projects,  and  the  mammalian  ecology  program.  The 
laboratory  section  is  also  responsible  for  the  receipt,  recording,  and 
labeling  of  sera  and  whole  blood  specimens  collected  by  epidemiology  and 
ecology  field  teams. 

A.  Serology 

The  fundamental  emphasis  of  the  laboratory  program  h<.s  been  the  serologic 
analysis  of  specimens  collected  in  the  epidemiology  surveillance  program. 

A screening  procedure  was  designed  to  facilitate  determination  of  antibody 
prevalences  and  detection  of  titer  rises  and  seroconversions  (TABLE  1).  At 
present  sera  are  being  tested  for  antibodies  to  the  following  agents: 

Toxoplasma  gondii , Brucella  abortus,  Leptospira  spp,  Entamoeba  histolytica, 
Trypanosoma  cruzi , Schistosoma  mansoni , TrichinelTa  spiralis,  and 
Ecni nococcus  granulosus. 

A screening  test  for  antibodies,  to  Leishmania  spp  and  confirmatory  tests 
for  T.  cruzi  and  S.  mansoni  are  being  developed. 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  Maraba:  To  date,  690  Transamazon  colonists  in  the  area 

of  Maraba  have  been  studied.  This  number  represents  all  the  colonists,  for 
whom  two  or  more  sera  are  available,  presently  enrolled  in  the  epidemiology 
surveillance  program  in  that  region. 

LEPTOSPIRA:  Sera  were  tested  for  antibodies  to  six  pools  of  Leptospira  spp 

(TABLE  2)  using  the  macroagglutination  test  (Difco).  Results  of  these 
tests  are  presented  in  TABLES  3 and  4. 

Original  sera  of  colonists  showing  positivity  to  one  or  more  pools  at 
twelve  months  were  tested  concurrently  with  12  months  specimens  in  order  to 
detect  seroconversions. 

Seventy-two  colonists,  10.4%  of  the  individuals  tested,  showed 
seroconversions  to  at  least  one  Leptospira  pool.  Seroconversions  to  pools 
3 and  4 were  most  common.  Preliminary  analysis  indicates  that  the 
seroconversions  tend  to  be  localized  within  families  or  among  neighboring 
lotes  in  the  same  gleba.  Fifty-six  colonists  showed  reactivity  of  both 
original  and  12  month  sera. 

BRUCELLA:  Six  hundred  and  seventy-nine  (679)  Maraba  12  month  sera  were 

tested  for  antibodies  to  Brucella  abortus  and  B.  melitensis  by  the 
macroagglutination  test  (Difco  antigen).  Of  these,  6 sera  (less  than  1%) 
were  reactive.  Since  original  sera  from  these  colonists  were  also  reactive, 
transmission  of  this  agent  in  the  Maraba  area  study  population  was  not 
demonstrable. 

SCHISTOSOMIASIS:  Schistosoma  mansoni  is  not  endemic  in  the  Amazon  region 

of  Brazil;  however,  at  least  one  planorbid  species  capable  of  serving  as 


1276 


intermediate  host  for  this  parasite  has  been  found  in  this  area  (Lacaz 
et.al . , 1972).  Several  hundred  stool  positive  immigrants  from  endemic 
areas  of  the  country  have  been  identified  and  treated  by  SUCAM. 

The  sera  of  666  colonists  were  tested  for  antibodies  to  S.  mansoni  using 
the  indirect  hemagglutination  (IHA)  test.  The  distribution  of  the  IHA 
titers  for  the  12  month  sera  is  given  in  TABLE  5.  Only  17.2%  of  the  sera 
were  reactive,  and  there  were  no  titers  greater  than  1:64.  The  accepted 
diagnostic  titer  for  this  test  is  1:256,  but  titers  greater  than  or  equal 
to  1:16  are  probably  specific  for  exposure  to  Schistosoma  spp.  (Cuadrado 
and  Kagan,  1967).  These  titers  apparently  represent  residual  antibody  from 
exposure  occurring  prior  to  the  arrival  of  the  colonists  in  the 
Transamazon. 

One  four-fold  titer  increase  (1:8  to  1:32)  was  recorded  between  the 
original  and  12  month  sera  of  a single  colonist.  Repeated  IHA  testing 
confirmed  this  titer  increase.  The  colonist  is  an  adult  female  who 
immigrated  to  Para  in  1972  after  having  lived  in  the  state  of  Espirito 
Santo,  an  endemic  area  for  S.  mansoni,  her  entire  life.  Her  original  serum 
was  drawn  in  June,  1974,  approximately  20  months  after  her  arrival  in  the 
region.  The  low  12-month  titer  (1:32)  makes  it  impossible  to  state  with 
certainty  that  this  titer  increase  represents  infection  with  human 
schistosomiasis.  Future  sera  and  stool  exams  will  be  done  to  clarify  the 
nature  of  this  case. 

AMOEBIASIS:  It  is  assumed  that  Entamoeba  histolytica  infection  occurs 

throughout  Brazil,  but  data  on  the  prevalence  of  the  parasite  in  rural 
areas  are  almost  nonexistent.  Prevalence  data  acquired  by  stool  examination, 
moreover,  do  not  serve  as  an  index  for  the  occurrence  of  serious  amoebic 
disease,  the  latter  being  dependent  upon  a variety  of  host  factors  as  well 
as  the  pathogenicity  of  the  amoeba  strain.  Serologic  tests  have  the 
advantage  of  being  an  objective  and  rapid  method  for  screening  large 
populations  for  the  presence  of  invasive  amoebiasis.  A variety  of 
serologic  techniques  were  tested,  including  a commercial  latex  agglutination 
test  and  the  indirect  hemagglutination  (IHA)  test  using  either  antigen 
sensitized  human  - 0 or  sheep  erythrocytes.  The  latex  agglutination  test 
proved  unsatisfactory  because  of  its  extremely  low  sensitivity.  The  IHA 
test  using  sheep  erythrocytes  yielded  more  consistently  reproducable 
results  than  did  the  same  test  using  human  cells,  and  is  therefore  the  test 
being  used  in  this  laboratory. 

TABLE  6 shows  the  IHA  titer  distribution  of  686  twelve  month  sera  from 
Maraba  area  colonists.  Twenty  sera  were  reactive,  and  only  two  of  these 
were  found  to  have  the  minimum  significant  titer  of  1:256.  The  reactive  12 
month  sera  were  retested  concurrently  with  homologous  original  sera.  There 
was  no  evidence  of  significant  titer  increases  or  seroconversions.  In  view 
of  this  low  positivity  rate,  200  sera  were  tested  concurrently  by  this 
laboratory  and  by  the  Department  of  Immunology,  WRAIR.  Comparable  results 
affirmed  the  validity  of  the  test  being  performed  at  this  laboratory. 

The  IHA  titers  of  persons  with  invasive  amoebiasis  remain  high  over  a 
relatively  long  time  period  (Healy  et.  al . , 1970).  It  is  therefore 
unlikely  that  a high  incidence  of  this  disease  would  have  been  missed  by 
serologic  screening.  The  absence  of  invasive  amoebiasis  in  a population  in 
which,  judging  from  prevalence  of  the  other  intestinal  parasites,  there 

1277 


'mim. 


7i£i rT-.-jjJSJ.  - 


exist  suitable  conditions  for  transmission  of  £.  histolytica  can  be 
explained  if  a)  the  parasite  does  not  occur  in  the  population;  b)  the 
parasite  does  occur  but  is  not  a highly  pathogenic  strain.  Host  factors, 
which  are  highly  variable  and  hard  to  identify,  are  not  being  considered. 

The  virtual  absence  of  antibody  and  the  varied  physical  and  nutritional 
states  within  this  large  population  would  apparently  preclude  host  immunity 
and  resistence  as  significant  factors.  Discussions  with  laboratory 
personnel  at  SUCAM  and  the  FSESP  Hospital  in  Maraba  indicate  that  diagnosis 
of  E.  histolytica  is  fairly  common  at  these  facilities.  Unfortunately  no 
records  of  stool  examinations  are  maintained.  Both  laboratories  are  being 
requested  to  maintain  a ledger  of  the  number  of  stool  exams  performed  and 
the  number  of  diagnosis  of  E.  histolytica  for  a definite  time  period  in 
order  that  an  estimate  of  parasite  prevalence  may  be  made.  It  will  then  be 
possible  to  conclude  whether  low  parasite  prevalence  or  low  pathogenicity 
of  amoeba  strains  accounts  for  the  absence  of  significant  antibody  titers. 

CHAGAS  DISEASE:  Although  an  important  disease  on  a national  basis, 

infection  with  Trypanosoma  cruzi  has  not  been  reported  from  Para.  Six 
hundred  and  fifty-five  12  month  specimens  were  tested  for  antibodies  to  T. 
cruzi  using  a latex  agglutination  test.  Six  hundred  and  three  (92.1%)  were 
non-reactive.  Forty-six  colonists  (7-030  had  reactive  sera  at  both  0 and' 
12  months.  Six  colonists  (0.92%)  showed  seroconversions.  These  colonists 
were  dispersed  over  a wide  area  and  no  two  were  from  the  same  family.  In 
only  one  case  did  another  family  member  show  seropositivity. 

In  order  to  determine  the  specificity  of  the  test  system,  a battery  of 
antisera  to  various  Leishmania  species  (TABLE  7)  was  tested.  The  Chagas 
antigen  cross  reacted  only  with  serum  from  a cutaneous  case  of  l. 
brasiliensis  brasil iensis.  No  data  on  false  positive  reactions  due  to 
exposure  to  animal  trypanosoma  is  available.  This  test  system  appears  to 
be  suitable  for  screening  procedures,  however,  the  complement  fixation  test 
will  be  used  for  future  confirmatory  testing.  C.F.  testing  of  future  sera 
from  the  apparently  seropositive  colonists  will  be  required  before  the 
significance  of  the  latex  agglutination  seroconversions  can  be  known. 

TOXOPLASMOSIS:  TABLE  8 gives  the  IHA  titer  distribution  of  679  Maraba  area 

12  month  sera.  FIGURE  1 is  a graph  of  the  frequency  distribution  of  the 
same  group  of  sera.  Exposure  to  Toxoplasma  gondii  was  demonstrated  in 
36.5%  of  the  population,  with  past  or  present  infection  (titer  greater  than 
or  equal  to  256)  in  21.6%.  Slightly  more  than  7.0%  of  the  population  had 
experienced  relatively  recent  infection  (titer  greater  or  equal  to  2048). 
Forty-one  seroconversions  or  four-fold  titer  increases  were  demonstrated 
between  original  and  12  month  sera.  Seroconversions  were  not  localized  in 
any  one  area  of  the  Transamazon,  but  did  tend  to  occur  in  groups  in 
families.  The  frequency  of  high  IHA  titers  indicates  the  high  transmission 
efficiency  of  the  parasite  in  this  region.  A serologic  study  of  domestic 
animals  will  be  undertaken  to  elucidate  the  epidemiology  of  T.  qondi i 
infection  along  the  highway. 

ECHINOCOCCOSIS:  The  latex  agglutination  test  was  used  to  screen  431  sera 

for  antibodies  to  Echinococcus  granulosus.  Five  sera  (1.16%)  were  reactive. 
Data  on  this  infection  do  not  exist  for  humans  in  the  Amazon  region.  Since 
patients  with  cysticercosis,  collagen  diseases,  and  hepatic  cirrhosis  react 
positively  to  Echinococcus  antigen,  further  study  will  be  required  to 
determine  the  significance  of  positive  reactions  among  Transamazon  colonists. 

1278 


KrPtTf . .<  7*- 1 -7.1 

, *r r -a.i£ ■■  A? — 


« ^ 


TRICHINOSIS:  A latex  agglutination  test  was  used  to  screen  194  sera  for 

antibodies  to  Trichinella  spiralis.  Fifty-five  sera  (28.3%)  reacted 
positively,  and  15  sera  (7.6%)  were  weakly  positive.  The  importance  of 
this  infection  in  the  Amazon  region  is  unknown.  Dietary  habits  would 
provide  ample  opportunity  for  transmission,  but  there  is  little  information 
on  infections  of  wild  and  domestic  animals  in  the  region.  No  extensive 
program  of  study  will  be  conducted  in  relation  to  this  infection.  Twenty 
percent  of  the  human  study  population  will  be  tested  routinely,  and  a 
serologic  survey  of  a discrete  number  of  possible  wild  and  domestic 
reservoirs  will  be  conducted. 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  Altamira:  At  present  sera  from  the  12  months  collection 

along  the  Transamazon  from  Altamira  and  the  Altamira  area  agrovilas  are 
being  screened  for  reactivity  to  the  standard  battery  of  antigens.  TABLE  9 
lists  the  reactions  of  the  sera  already  screened.  All  positive  sera  will 
be  retested  concurrently  with  homologous  original  sera,  and  titers  will  be 
determined. 

COMMENTS:  Preliminary  comparisons  between  Altamira  and  Maraba  show  similar 

positivity  rates  to  all  antigens  tested  so  far.  Complete  data  analysis 
will  not  be  possible  until  information  on  the  personal  history  of  the 
colonists  is  made  accessible  by  computor.  At  present  a manual  data 
recovery  system  is  allowing  study  of  the  complete  serologic  data  for  each 
individual  colonist  and  enables  the  geographical  pinpointing  of  possible 
areas  of  transmission  of  the  organisms  being  studied.  Study  of  serologic 
data  from  colonists  and  domestic  and  sylvatic  animals  will  hopefully 
elucidate  transmission  cycles  of  some  of  the  organisms  in  this  region. 


1279 


TABLE  1.  Serologic  Testing  Scheme 


Screen  12  months  specimens  for  antibodies  to: 


Schistosomiasis 

Toxoplasmosis 

Amoebiasis 

Leptospirosis 

Brucellosis 


Screen  20%  of  12  months  specimens  for  antibodies  to: 


Trichinosis 

Echinococcosis 


Positives  at  12  months  screen  will  be  processed  according  to  system  set  forth 
below.  Negatives  will  serve  as  base  for  testing  24  month  sera. 


Testing  scheme 


If'  month 
Original 
6 mnth 


Test  acutes 
between  0 & 6 


2)  12  months  (+) 

Original  (+) 

If  12  mnth  titer 
is  4 x greater 
than  original  test 
6 mnth  + appropriate 
acutes 


3)  12  mnth 

Original 


Test  acutes 
between  6 & 12  mnth 


/zcm. 


4)  12  mnth 


No  further  testing  of 
previous  sera  at 
present 


Jl  LI  l"f  ,1  ■ ' <■  - . 


TABLE  2.  Leptospirosis  Macroagglutination  Test. 


DIFCO  Leptospira 1 Antigen  Pools  Contain  the  Following 
Antigens: 


Pool  1 


Pool  5 


L.  ballum 
L.  canicola 
L.  icterohemorrhagiae 


L.  cynopteri 
L.  celledoni 
L.  javanica 


Pool  2 


Pool  6 


L.  bataviae 
L.  grippotyphosa 
L.  pyrogenes 


Pool  3 


L.  autumnal  is 
L.  pomona 
L.  wolffii 


L.  cynopteri 
L.  panama 
L.  Sherman i 

L.  ictero  - kremastos  pool 
L.  kremastos 
L.  mendanensis 
L.  seiroe 
L.  biflexa 
L.  biflexa  patoc 


Pool  4 


L.  australis 
L.  hyos 

L.  mini,  georgia 


1281 


TABLE  3.  Leptospirosis  Sorology:  Maraba  12  Month  Specimens. 


Number  of  sera  tested: 


Number  of  sera  reactive  - 1 pool 

52 

(40.6%) 

2 pools 

45 

(35.1%) 

3 pools 

15 

(11.7%) 

a pools 

7 

( 5.4%) 

5 pools 

2 

( 1.5%) 

6 pools 

7 

( 5.4%) 

Total  reactive  sera 

128 

(18.5%) 

Nor -reactive  sera 

562 

(81.5%) 

Seroconversions  (0  - 12  months) 


Individuals  seroconverting  for  1 pool  - 41 

1 

Individuals  serovonverting  for  ^ 1 pool  - 31 


TABLE  4.  Leptospirosis  Serology:  Pool  Distributions  of  Reactions 

Maraba  12  Months  Sera. 

Single  pool  reactions  only 


Pool  1 
1 

Pool  2 
4 

Pool  3 
34 

Pool  4 
11 

Pool  5 
3 

Pool  6 
1 

Multiple  pool 

reactions 

Pool  1 
11 

Pool  2 
20 

Pool  3 
71 

Pool  4 
66 

Pool  5 
22 

Pool  6 
11 

Pool  distribution  of  seroconversion  reactions 
Conversion  to  one  pool  reactive 

Pool  i Pool  2 Pool  3 Pool  4 Pool_5  Pool_6 

0 1 21  12  4 1 

Conversion  to  ;>  1 pool  reactive 

Pool  1 Pool  2 Pool  3 Pool  4 

8 12  23  25 


Pool  5 Pool  6 

13  7 


1283 


TABLE  5. 


Distribution  of  Schistosoma  mansoni  IHA  titers,  Maraba  12 
Month  Sera 


RECIPROCAL 

TITER 

<8 

8 

16 

32 

64 

> 128 

Number  of  sera 

552 

95 

13 

3 

3 

0 

Percent  of  total 

82.8 

14.2 

1.9 

0.45 

0.45 

- 

1284 


f 


TABLE  6.  Distribution  of  E.  histolytica  IHA  Titers  Among  12  Month 
Sera  of  Maraba  Area  Transamazon  Colonists. 


Total  sera  tested  - 686 

Total  sera  reactive  - 20  (2.9%) 


RECIPROCAL 

TITER 


-Cl6  16  32  64  128  > 256 


NUMBER  OF 
SERA 


666  12 


0 


(97.1%) 


(1.7%)  (0.72%)  (0.15%)  (0) 


2 

(0.30%) 


TABLE  7.  Cross  Reactivity  of  Leishmania  Species  Antisera  with  T.  cruzi 
Latex  Agglutination  Antigen. 


SPECIES  REACTION 


1.  L.  mexicani  amazonensis  Negative 

(Diffuse  cutaneous  case) 

2.  L.  brasil iensis  brasiliensis  Negative 

(Mucocutaneous  case) 

3.  L.  brasiliensis  guyanensis  Negative 

(Cutaneous  case) 

4.  L.  brasiliensis  brasiliensis  Positive 

(Cutaneous  case) 

5 . L . mexicani  amazonensis  Negat i ve 

(Cutaneous  case) 

/zcm. 


1286 


I 


I. 


TABLE  8.  Toxoplasma  IHA  Titer  Distribution,  12  Month  Sera,  Maraba 

; 


RECIPROCAL 

TITER 

c 64 

64 

128 

256 

512 

1024  Z 2048 

Number  of  Sera 

431 

55 

47 

36 

35 

26  50 

% of  Total 

63.5 

8.1 

6.9 

5.3 

5.2 

3.8  7. 

Total  no.  sera 

tested: 

679 

No.  titers  Z 

256:  147  (21.6%) 

Titer  rises  (4x)  or  seroconversions:  41 

(6.0%) 

/zcm. 


y 

\ 


Toxoplasma  IHA  titer  frequency 


RECIPROCAL  TITER 


TABLE  9.  Results  of  Serologic  Screening  of  Altamira  12  Month  Sera. 


ANTIGEN 


Toxoplasma  gondii 
Entamoeba  histolytica 
Trypanosoma  cruzi 
Schistosoma  mansoni 
Leptospira  spp 


POSITIVE  SERA 


210  (49.8%) 
25  ( 5.9%) 
33  ( 7.8%) 
70  (16.6%) 
270  (33.9%) 


NEGATIVE  SERA  TOTAL  SERA 


212 

4 

397 

4 

389 

4 

352 

4 

525 

7 

B.  Toxoplasmosis  among  Ticuna  Indians 

In  May  1975,  one  member  of  USAMRU-Belem  (CPT  Lovelace)  accompanied  three 
investigators  from  the  Instituto  Evandro  Chagas  to  an  area  of  the  Upper 
Solimoes  (Amazon)  River  near  the  Colombian  frontier  (FIGURE  1)  in  order  to 
clarify  reports  of  the  occurrence  of  Onchocerca  volvulus  infection  among 
the  Ticuna  Indians  in  that  region.  Onchocerciasis  was  not  seen  in  this 
population,  but  a high  incidence  of  the  non-pathogenic  filarid  Mansonella 
ozzardi  was  found  in  all  the  villages  studied  (Appendix  1).  In  five 
locations,  venous  blood  was  drawn  from  approximately  10%  of  the  village 
population  and  prepared  for  serologic  testing  for  antibodies  to  other 
disease  agents. 

The  Ticunas  comprise  a group  of  approximately  20,000  people,  about  half  of 
whom  live  in  Brazil.  Because  of  their  proximity  to  major  waterways,  the 
Ticunas  are  accultured  in  many  respects,  and  most  have  gathered  into 
villages  associated  with  missionary  activity.  Agriculture  and  animal 
husbandry  are  not  widely  praticed.  The  Ticuna  diet  consists  preferentially 
of  fish  and  manioc.  This  diet  is  supplemented  during  infrequent  periods  of 
poor  fishing  by  hunting  monkeys,  small  deer,  and  paca.  With  the  exception 
of  one  village,  distances  from  cattle  rearing  areas  prohibit  the 
consumption  of  beef.  Dogs  and  cats  are  not  kept. 

TABLE  1 lists  the  Toxoplasma  IHA  titer  distributions  for  each  Ticuna 
village  and  for  the  entire  population.  Since  participation  in  this  program 
was  voluntary  and  the  adults  were  hesitant  to  coax  their  children  to  submit 
to  venipuncture,  data  for  Ticunas  in  the  0-9  age  group  is  virtually  non- 
existent. The  villages  of  Umariagu  and  Nova  Italia  exhibit  the  highest 
geometric  mean  titer  (GMRT)  and  the  largest  percentage  of  sera  with  titers 
greater  than  or  equal  to  256,  the  "significant"  titer  for  this  test  (Walls 
and  Kagan,  1967).  The  relatively  more  efficient  transmission  of  T.  gondii 
in  these  villages  can  be  related  to  various  factors.  Umariagu  is  Tocated 
within  easy  canoeing  distance  of  Tabatinga  and  Benjamin  Constant,  Brazil, 
and  Leiticia,  Colombia.  There  is  frequent  travel  to  these  cities  where 
beef  and  pork  are  readily  available.  Nova  Italia,  on  the  other  hand,  is  an 
isolated  village  off  the  main  course  of  the  Solimoes.  This  village  had  the 
largest  population  of  chickens  and  pigs,  and  it  is  assumed  that  both  animal 
husbandry  and  varied  diet  provide  exposure  to  T.  gondii  in  this  village. 

The  frequency  distribution  of  the  entire  population  (FIGURE  2)  reflects 
exposure  of  the  population  to  Toxoplasma,  but  the  unimodality  of  the  graph 
indicates  a low  prevalence  of  successful  infection.  The  small  peak  of 
titers  at  2:  2048  indicates  a number  of  relatively  recent  infections,  the 
majority  of  which  are  in  Umariagu  and  Nova  Italia.  It  must  be  assumed  that 
the  restricted  Ticuna  diet  and  the  paucity  of  animal  husbandry  limits  their 
contact  with  T.  gondii  infected  animals.  Hunting,  dressing,  and  eating 
wild  game,  keeping  of  yard  animals,  and  supplementing  their  diet  with  beef 
and  pork  seems  to  provide  the  Ticunas  with  opportunities  for  exposure  and 
to  a lesser  extent  infection  with  this  parasite. 

The  Ticuna  sera  will  be  further  tested  for  evidence  of  other  parasitic 
infections.  Results  will  be  compared  with  those  of  other  tribal  groups  who 
live  in  various  geographical  areas  of  north  Brazil  and  who  have  different 
life  styles  and  dietary  habits. 


1290 


F 


TABLE  1.  Toxoplasma  IHA  Titer  Distribution  of  Ticuna  Indians  from  5 Villages 
on  the  Upper  Solimoes  River 


VILA  BETANIA 

RECIPROCAL 

TITER 


1 - 9 
10  - 19 
£ 20-29 
« 30-39 
40  - 49 
> 50 


1024  2 2048 


N9  sera  > 256  - 10  (12.9%) 

Geometric  mean  reciprocal  titer  (GMRT) 


CAMPO  ALEGRE 

RECIPROCAL 

TITER 


10  - 19 
£ 20-29 
5:  30-39 
40  - 49 
50 


N9  sera  2 256  - 16  (16.9%) 
GMRT  - 190 


64  128 


220  (titers  ■<  64  excluded  from 
calculations) 


512  1024  > 2048 


1 


BELEM  DOS  SOLIMOES 
RECIPROCAL  . 

TTTPp  ^ On 


128  256  512  1024  > 2048 


1 - 19 
l - 29 
1 - 39 
I - 49 

10 

11 

7 

4 

50  7 

ITAL  39 

1 sera  £ 
IRT  - 190 

256  - ' 

2 

1 

1 

. 

1 

6 

3 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

2 

2 

5 

1 

1 

: 

TABLE  1.  Toxoplasma  IHA  titer  distribution  of  Ticuna  Indians  from  5 Villages 
on  the  Upper  Solimoes  River  - (Cont.) 


NOVA  ITALIA 

RECIPROCAL 

TITER 

^64 

64 

128 

256 

512 

1024 

> 2048 

10  - 19 

6 

1 

1 

1 

1 

uj  20-29 
< 30-39 

6 

2 

1 

1 

3 

1 

2 

1 

1 

2 

40  - 49 

2 

2 

1 

1 

1 

3 

50 

3 

2 

1 

1 

1 

1 

TOTAL 

20 

5 

6 

4 

3 

4 

7 

N?  sera  2: 

256  - 18  (36.7%) 

GMHT  - 370 

JMARIACU 

RECIPROCAL 

TITER 

-c  64 

64 

128 

256 

512 

1024 

> 2048 

10  - 19 

12 

1 

2 

UJ  20-29 

13 

1 

3 

4 

1 

2 

St  30-39 

7 

1 

1 

2 

1 

40  - 49 

13 

1 

1 

1 

1 

50 

12 

1 

2 

2 

2 

1 

4 

TOTAL 

57 

4 

5 

7 

5 

5 

9 

N?  sera  2 

256  - 26  (28.3%) 

GMRT  - 452 

TOTAL  TICUNA  POPULATION 

RECIPROCAL 

TITER 

-c  64 

64 

128 

256 

512 

1024 

> 2048 

1 - 9 
10  - 19 

1 

44 

6 

3 

2 

3 

2 

6 

<3  20  - 29 

56 

11 

12 

7 

4 

4 

4 

< 30-39 

48 

6 

6 

5 

5 

2 

2 

40..-  49 

46 

11 

1 

5 

1 

2 

6 

50 

48 

14 

11 

9 

4 

2 

8 

243  48  33  28  14  12  26 


60.1  11.9  8.2  6.9  3.5  2.9  6.4 


TOTAL 

PERCENT 


TABLE  1.  Toxoplasma  IHA  Titer  Distribution  of  Ticuna  Indians  from  5 Villages 
on  the  Upper  Solimoes  River  - (Cont.) 


FREQUENCY  (%)  DISTRIBUTION  OF  TOTAL  POPULATION  BY  AGE 

RECIPROCAL 

TITER 

64 

64 

128 

256 

512 

1024 

2048 

10  - 19 

66.6 

9.1 

4.5 

3.0 

4.5 

3.0 

9.1 

uj  20  - 29 

57.1 

11.2 

12.2 

7.1 

4.1 

4.1 

4.1 

< 30-39 

64.9 

8.1 

8.1 

6.8 

6.8 

2.7 

2.7 

40  - 49 

63.9 

15.3 

1.4 

6.9 

1.4 

2.8 

8.3 

50 

50.0 

14.6 

11.5 

9.4 

4.2 

2.1 

8.3 

/zcm. 


1293 


stri 


APPENDIX  1 


>u.i  t 

i'L J i - ' s ' 


‘ ■ g nrte>,  w - . >,  * ' w v 3v  M t »\  i S 7 £ R . 0 C*  A S A w 0 

*4  -■  * • r—N  VUte.kM.tUI  V...  * 

W*  : ; fonoacao  ses? 

„ o w • GIViSAO  DE  £ ? i 0 £ W i 0 c 0 


' C - C - a 

u_» '.<■ 

S O «*.  ^ 

“ * ^ W V 


V 

i ’ ; « 


* GIVIS  AO  DE  E?.D£KiOuOG.A 

* E^TATiSTIGA  c i i\  r G n M A f A o 


So. "no  nos  N25  5 0 6-1.976) 


Ss’toP  u' i.t>  contom  acccs,  .'.-cci.sos  Co  M.n.stir.o  co  Scuco,  acs  Gac'utc'.os  so  Seise  oos  Estooos,Tcrr,t6.-.o<.  * 
t/b'rifo  rCCkj'O.  «2Cd  c'T.CuJcS  . G . V ■ $ A 0 3 £ cftiGiV.  .GwGG.m,  £S7AT.STiCA  C iNFC^MACAQ 

Aw.  ft.e  at  onto,  26**  12s  or.dor . Como  ftOkic..  1630  mg*  "FS£S?“*7«i.  232-&066  • ft  to  d*  <jon« « ro  , ft  j • oft  AS.  w 


?0r\7£  PAGO  i 

iv.pfci  SiO  — C j 

ClNT^AL  - RJ  l 


l/i A nSONcLLA  QZi£fi-if\DI  &N<  * >\ 0 « s> w < • Cw* 


n ¥Ai>;3nc".»  d«  a/,  oaurdi  no  ir^sii  f o*  assiitolid**  pa- 
. - pru.iw.  r*  vu,  «w»  i949,  par  M.  ?,  j««n«,  r.«.  c;a«d6  te  h«- 
r.«*s,  Ar.di&nii.  A ?«rt1r  CdT,  vinos  Inquentos,  f«ncs  peu 
rjtj?  a peio  afiv.go  Servi^  Nacioru'  &j  M«tir.«,  mostrararo  qg« 
oU  ocorro  p.'if.cipAiaor.u  4 oesU  d«qu«W  Copiu*,  ea  loct<i~ 
tawo*  u>  margens  Co  no  So'.imoes  0 scus  triDuunos  a* is  In- 
(nsruAies.  F or*  do  £siaco  do  An«^on»s,  «*ta  prints  •?«&**, 
Ctg  (TiOCO  IHul  »w  1 llill  do,  no  Norto  in  Koto  5ro sso  (olio  rlo  XU 
0-)  i no  Torritono  do  So ruln.o. 

./.  otatdi  * ftlGrio  notivo  co  cor, (icons*  onericono.  AlGo 
00  urosll , suo  arai  d»  aiitriDylyOO  competency  I Mexico  (po- 
do  iucotonj,  Ponaxi,  Colomoio,  Voneic e'.«,  Aopool.c* 

do  Oo.i.n».  Su.'ir.o-u.  ujU.’.a  Froncosa,  AntC.Mi  « Norco  Co  Ar- 
Sdn;.n«.  Por  s«r  ouloctonu.  Com  pravolancU  m‘.o  olovooo  ju>- 
;»sion;u  oncro  po>o'.«(oai  UcTjenot  Oo  con  prodoninoncw  Co 


Oons.ooroCo  cono  noo  pjU.for.ico,  pooco  inporcGr.cio  oo  «• 
or.ow.M  o o«c»  fi.»rio.  A«*roo»  per  isoo,  Coo.  &ioO  oo  00C0C00 


opioento'osicoo  o cHnicoo  ltviCoo  t cobo.  oto  tfor».  > ... 
respoito,  err.  nocto  Po'o,  opooor  ao  lorgo  atstribo.foO  ...  ei» 
opreoor.c*  no  cotodo  Co  Anodonos.  Toit  ootucoo  poour'.j'.,  oner* 
tonto.  ‘.or.f.r  nolU  iu i soar*  o'.guno  proaionao  oinc.  n«o  cor.* 
piovooiento  roooivicos,  core  o Co  oporocinonto  oo  corijo  <n.nt* 
fooi-fcoo  Co  niporoonoioiiiCoao  on  incivTooos  ports. c.aoo,  - 
0 00s  vocoros  rosponsovois  ptit  Crononitsoo  ao  M.  >u«m  no 


Ko  occorror  co  ono  oo  1075,  con  o proposito  principol  — 
Invoscigor  t prosonc*  Co  oncocorcoso  cm  tnaos  wicifon..  «.■.«- 
com  cos,  fort  Co  grope  Itnonomo,  roolUou  o institoco  tv.noro 
cnofts,  con  0 ouxTiiO  Co  5UCAM,  infuontos  port  fllonosos  «_ 
Cro  os  inoios  Ticontt  o Kurt  Piront,  oo  osttco  oo  ArooOn»t  « 
Tirlos,  Co  Port. 

Noo  so  enconertron  nicrofilorits,  ouor  Co  0.  volirkluouo.' 
Ce  H.  oiiardi,  on  45  Tr.oiOs  Tirlos  (rlo  Ptru  oo  Sosu,  o on. 
55  nooittnus  oo  locollCtCt  Koicl  {wilt  Hurt  Pirtno,  no  n o 
X-icI /.  inert  os  Tlcunos,  urn  grupo  cujos  olCtios  so  osionou* 
polo  tl to  Sollnots,  Ctsdo  Stnto  Antonio  ao  ifo  tto  o fronwi- 
ro  co  crosll  con  t Colonoit  t o Peru,  t poscuiso  noo  rovolo. 
0.  ooZuuluo,  porom  45,75  Cos  inoTgcnos  txtntnoaos,  portoncon- 
Us  o solo  o'. Cults,  trtn  porcocoros  Co  mlcrofiltrlos  co  M.  o^ 
tardi.  (is  rosulttCot  Cesu  Inuostlgogoo  os  lie  rosunlcos  nos 


gutcros  sogulntosi 


nontwusa  na  p«y.  07 


ggyUn  JBl  . ToA-  -Ti-'T.  ~ r r«^K!Wi.l 


i^Auw 

uum. 

Posit. 

Mtcrof . 

1 £*wa. 

-L 

Posit. 

Kicrof. 

0 - 4 

3a 

4 

10.5 

25 

1 

04,0 

5 - y 

54 

9 

16,3 

03 

6 

15,7 

0 - 19 

67 

13 

2o,3 

67 

21 

31.3 

20  - I j 

90 

44 

C3 ,3 

- 1 

<2 

53.3 

30  - 39 

69 

46 

66,6 

60 

23 

46,6 

40  - 49 

46 

02 

63.5 

4l 

23 

56,0 

yj  - »9 

27 

20 

74,0 

02 

,7 

o3,l 

6G  o ♦ 

35 

01 

83,5 

39 

23 

58,9 

T0V  A 6. 

426 

206 

C8.1 

374 

161 

43,0 

CwAorOI** 

OiSTA,3UaCAO  PQA  10A0E 


* 0A3& 

EXrP!  I. \A00S 

?05iT;v0S 

MICROFl.AAEKA 

0-4 

63 

5 

7.9 

0 - 9 

92 

15 

16.3 

;o  - .9 

134 

40 

29,6 

c-a 

• 

o 

<VJ 

162 

So 

53,0 

30  - yj 

129 

74 

57,3 

40  "43 

87 

55 

63,2 

* *9 

59 

37 

62.7 

60  e * 

74 

54 

72,9 

total 

600 

366 

45,7 

A ratcrof'  iartmlt  varlou  da  33s  a 57,31  nas  tilt  iii'iU> 
das.  Os  Tnutcas  rails  tlavados  (aci.na  lit  60S)  for.. m tncontra- 
das  tin  Novi  i lil it  t faijoal,  alatlas  sttuadas,  t prlmaira, 
no  rid  Amatura  «,  t stgunda,  no  rio  Sollraots,  proilma  • t.n^ 
rain  Constint. 

Quanto  to  stxo,  t prtvaltncla  slootl  nosirou-st  ..punas 
Itgeiraraentt  motor  no  st«o  raascultno  do  sm  no  'ai..,nlr,o.  Coco 
i atfertnga  mo  a slgntflcatWa,  ooda-st  oeouiir  out  o nsoo 
dt  txposKto  * pratlctmanta  o mi smo  pan  imods  os  su*os.  Hi. 
entra unto,  umi  dlftrenga  no  Quo  st  rtfart  a lodco  tra  c„« 
ratnsontlost  a adqutrtda.  Enquanto  no  stxo  mascuitno  • raicrcfi 
lartraia  crtsct  dt  mtnttn  untformt  ata  atlngtr  caret  -a  60. 
nos  tndivfduos  com  60  inos  ou  nuts,  no  te«o  ftmtn-.no.  apos  i^ 
cangar  quasi  60s  nt  ttrctfrt  dacadt  ot  vtdi,  mantem-sa,  i p»r 
tlr  dtT,  no  matmo  nival  ata  OS  60  Ou  mats  anos.  A oi faring, 
antra  os  dots  stxos  fot  basunta  ngntflcativa  nos  ..rapts  ... 
rtos  da  30  t 39  mot  t 60  t mats  anos.  lima  txpltcagjo  para  o 
fa;o  dt  is  rauU.trts  so  adqulrtrtm  a doangt  nas  pnmt'.r.s  oOc. 
das  da  vtda  stria  a muotngt  dt  habitos  apos  0 ctsarauntd,  fa- 
Jcr.do  dlratnutr  a txpostgio  to  vttor.  Era  outras  pa'.avras,  . 
Mvfuadds  doristtcas,  dapots  cos  20  anos,  afasti.*'*  -s  nwin^ 
ras  dos  locals  ot  transmlssao,  dt  raodo  cut  a prtva'.incla  an- 
tra alas,  a partlr  dtf,  nao  at  raodtftcarta  mutto.  asso  par«co 

oonSwsuaa  rv*  puxp.  at 


7i'SZX,  Syrsw-;  '-V'r.«racbv-ras»*un 


1297 


BEST  MtuLtiUii  G 


•*)4<iua 


Ja  2 7 

tnJ'.Cir  quo  o vgur  cj  .V.  omardi  u u.n  ii.k>w  i.  Ww**»*ii  u a 

ir»r.irvi iioj  Oworr^  ic*~cn»u  ^vitii»o  lr<wWt«tfwi  &w.a*.j7i  <*&  Cu* 

ft*  a«w««4  a VaO  & HAt*.  N . Cuf\yu#<*«  0 A.  J.  Shu  i it/ 
j»  oc.Tor.*tr»rM,~,  »'■  6mjjb»i/mW t wPbv««i 


wco  r.y-.to  obyncinti  no  at  to  Sollmoes,  • urn  vutor  *propruoo  -> 
uL-ier.Vw'.vi.r.into  d*t  mtcroM  wrui  c«  M.  oMarctt. 

r£«\7t;  Mario  A . ?.  Mora**,  G*o\)ar*  A/.  Chavo*,  Marjarida  M.  X. 
Alvoi  • gru^:«i«  Lcvritaa*,  ao  Xnftttkte  Ewndro  Chagas  t 
?ara. 


,\OTA  INTSRNAC:O.MAL 


.v.iorsCOrtiO  i\OS  PZiXZi 


A poluigao  a <i  coAtamnopoo  cc.t  rarcurto  cor.itHug.it  uno 
Aistono  interesser.ta  u complex.,  porqua  r.o  sonttco  toxicolo- 
g.co  r.o  ‘dots  mgrcurios*.  Bg  urn  l«do,  s clorato  murcurtco  a o 
metllmercuno  qua  sJo  oltomanta  vener.osos.  Co  ca..postos  do  bct 
cJria,  gspgdg'ir.gft.c  r.os  pdixes  a Aos  muAlscos,  ten  coasoda 
uipli  p.pl  id  Coco  dg  l AC*.  ggAtu'S  do  gnvg.-.d.'.u.Tu'.'.to  og  ertouros 
Ag.T.oAui . Do  oucrg,  o clorato  rrarcuraso  f at  usoda  coma  loxott- 
vo  a sous  car.poatos  soo  ampregoda:  r.o  eut.nto.crop;.,  gd  dlarS 
t.cos  o pa  las  dantistos. 

Tocos  os  «A/gA0Ao.T.«Atds  por  marcurta  f orum  trjgicos;  01- 
gur.s  fdAu.it  c.usodds  por  r.c,l igoncta , v'..,r.nto  g tAuaSCup-vel, 
pu'.o  industrial  outrgs,  par  onoli-outtsma  cu  masmo  os.upldec. 

tn.ru  as  minerals  qua  as  rtos  carragom  poro  0 .tor  csto  o 
merdurlo,  qua  tom  stda  luvodo  poro  os  occoaos  par  milnoes  a. 
sacaios;  uio  tomoam  cnego  oos  acdoASS  procuuuf.lus  das  vulcaas. 
Alucircrtu , core,  do  iO.QGO  tanaiidos  da  morcurta  correct  poro 
a ur  oAMiRidAti,  soAda  unu  roitodo  do  origan  natural  a autro 
d.s  attviCodes  tndustrtits  mocurn.s  coso.-.volvtu.s  durante  as 
ultimas  23 a oaps.  Os  e.'aitos  faroa  dcsistrusos  eogr.ua  o carcl 
rip  industrial  cnegou  oos  estuortos  no  forma,  toxica  a*  mettl- 
nercurio  g os  n'vots  toxteos  so  ocuisutoro.il  no  pot  .a  a r.o  iu- 
rtsco.  .ur.'.n.ur.ia,  da  >corda  car.  Senretdur,  opcr.as  3,350  oa 
merwrio  e-a  cr.ego  oo  oceono  parr.ar.aca  an  solupoc;  o resume 
a tspi.ap  a ofuAjo , lo  paroor.acar.do. 


A praocupr.;oa  otaol  com  a marcurta  Surgtu  pr»r, ctpa'i. unva 
oa  u ./ur.aAomanta  do  aoTo  da  Mtnomoto,  no  JapoO.  0 roitn Imcrcu- 
rto  astovo  prasanta  no  resTcua  de  tamo  da  u.t.o  foonco  ecu  w 
vo  c'lOAgta  marcurtco  coma  cotottoodar  no  prodapoo  da  cioralo 
oa  v t At  1 , Fat  dascaoarta,  am  1458,  qua  o ittorlsco  oa  r.o  Mao- 
Aui.  continno  carco  da  17  ppm  da  marcurta  r.o  basa  eg  peso  umt 
da.  3a  1553  o 1563,  fot  ralotado  qua  111  passoas  novtom  stda 
cr.vaAaAodas  par  Aovgr  comtda  patxg  a mortsca  oo  orgo  caAlu.itt- 
ntdo,  tnclustvo  15  ertonpos  nosetdos  da  moas  que  ttr.nom  cant- 
ua  tats  altmantos.  Urn  segunao  tnctogr.ta  scmalnor.tg  ocarrau  am 
Nitgoto,  Jopoo,  am  1465. 

0 trotoranto  da  semantes  do  caraots  cam  otctor.uiu,ntd4  mo 
ttlrarcurto  (Ponagan)  fat  ontplomanta  prottcoaa  no  aacodu  da 
1563,  aspactolmanta  no  Suacto.  0 trolomanto  avttovo  o rtou  <r*_ 
ra  oo  forrugam  a os  pulgaas  nos  muaos  do  trtgo  a dg  autras  cc 
i acts.  Os  ovos  dos  ogutos  a dos  folcoas  axottcos  no  Suacto  r.up 
ehagovoa  o cnocor,  a tsto  fat  otrtou'do  oo  consuira  da  posso- 
ros  catudorgs  oa  samantas  polos  p.ssoros  prgaoaares.  As  panes 
dos  folcoas  con  tinhorn  alevodos  quonttuodas  ua  ro.-rcurta.  fot 
vgrtftcodo,  tnasparodomanta,  qua  o patxa  da  oguo  doca  Conti* 
nno  altos  nTvats  da  marcurta,  otrtPuTdas  a cantomtntpoo  (nous, 
triul  dos  oaostact, mantas  da  oguo.  As  fontas  inclutgm  o manofj 
tura  dg  doro  a olcolts  polo  algctroltsa  por  ptinos  da  marcu- 
rto  a o uso  da  produtos  pars  0 controla  oo  algos  g occtartos 
no  tnoustrto  do  papal.  A Suacto  proiptu  a uso  dot  campostas 
os  olqult  rarcurto  car«  ogantas  poro  protepoo  da  scmcr.tas.  Iioo. 
oostonta,  o ar.vanenomanto  com  semantes  trotoc»s  conltr.uorom- o 
ucorrar,  orator  dos  avis  • Algur.s  cosos  rasultorom  do  cansu* 
w o.ruto  dg  tots  caraots  a,  am  urn  Incidents  am  Nova  mastco, 
os  groot  trotodos  forom  uttltoodqs  no  ollngntog.o  oa  parcot  a 
o cornu  con.tdo  polo  fomTlto, 

ou-.t-."— u a-  p-5, . lo 


. lu.u 


C.  Salmonellosis  among  Paracanas  Indians 


6 

t 


In  November  1975,  the  deaths  of  two  indian  children  of  the  tribe  Paracanas 
were  reported.  Both  children,  as  well  as  a third  who  survived,  were  less 
than  3 years  old  an  had  been  admitted  to  the  Maraba  FSESP  Hospital  with 
symptoms  of  diarrhea,  bloody  vomitus,  and  convulsions.  A diagnosis  of 
"nonspecific  encephalitis"  was  made  by  the  attending  physicians.  The 
entire  tribe  of  approximately  100  persons  was  evacuated  from  its  village 
and  temporarily  relocated  at  a FUNAI  post  in  the  town  of  Tucururi  near  the 
Transamazon  highway  where  medical  care  was  more  accessible.  Subsequently, 
a visit  to  the  tribe  was  made  by  CPT  Lovelace  and  a medical  student  from 
the  Instituto  Evandro  Chagas. 

This  group  of  Paracanas  has  originally  occupied  a small  village  15  Km  from 
the  Transamazon  highway  at  a point  approximately  120  Km  from  Maraba.  The 
village  had  consisted  of  3 malocas  (palm  leaf  huts)  in  which  the  tribe 
lived  communally.  The  Indians  praticed  rudimentary  agriculture,  but  their 
staple  diet  was  wild  game  cooked  hastily  over  an  open  fire  with  minimal  or 
no  dressing  or  cleaning.  Questionning  of  the  Indians  and  the  FUNAI  worker 
who  lived  with  them  revealed  a high  incidence  of  diarrhea  in  the  tribe 
during  the  period  in  which  the  deaths  of  the  children  occurred  (TABLE  1 and 
FIGURE  1).  Twenty-seven  random  stool  cultures  were  made.  Salmonella  spp. 
was  isolated  from  10  stools  and  Shigella  spp.  from  three  (11.1%).  Four  of 
the  Salmonella  isolates  were  from  children  0-5  years  old,  three  from 
children  6-10  years  old  and  three  from  age  groups  older  than  10  years.  Two 
Shigella  isolates  were  from  1 year  old  children;  the  other  from  a 32  year 
old  man. 

Diarrhea  was  common  in  all  age  groups,  but  during  the  period  of  the  USAMRU 
visit  symptoms  were  most  pronounced  in  infants  and  young  children.  Most 
cases  from  which  intestinal  pathogens  were  isolated  has  lived  in  a single 
maloca.  The  two  dead  children  had  lived  in  this  maloca  also.  The  high 
prevalence  of  Salmonella  in  the  population,  and  symptomatology  compatible 
with  bacterial  food  poisoning  indicate  that  the  probable  cause  of  death  in 
the  cases  of  the  two  children  was  Salmonellosis.  Observation  of  the 
Paracanas'  dietary  habits  lead  one  to  assume  that  the  original  source  of 
infection  was  a forest  mammal  that  had  been  killed  for  food. 

Contamination  of  living  areas  by  wild  mammals  could  also  be  a possible 
source.  Human  infections  initially  acquired  from  lower  mammalian  sources 
would  be  multiplied  in  the  Indian  population  by  promiscuous  defecation 
around  the  maloca  by  persons,  especially  children,  with  diarrhea. 


n 


^ rthi  rlL^nMl 


TABLE  1.  Attack  Rates  of  Diarrhea  in  Paracanas  Children,  November  1975. 


No.  of  cases  of  diarrhea,  females  <■  1 year 
No.  of  females  ^ 1 year  in  tribe 


No.  cases  of  diarrhea,  males  < 1 year 
No.  of  males  1 year  in  tribe 


No.  cases  diarrhea,  females  1-4  years 
N.  females  1-4  years  in  tribe 


No.  cases  diarrhea,  males  1-4  years 
No.  males  1-4  years  in  tribe 


/zcm. 


— = 83.3% 


pr 


i 


1 

f 


' 


: 


i ! 

I ' 
1 

I » 


[ f 

i 

\ * 

i 


CO 

CM 


r*- 

CM 


CD 

CM 


LD 

CM 


CM 


CO 

CM 


CM 

CM 


CM 


o 

CM 


CTt 


CO 


LD 


>- 

c 

Q 


S3SV3  M3N  30  UHWflN 


130! 


x f 


NOVEMBER,  1975 


D.  Altamira  Soldier  Study 

In  January,  1976,  two  companies  of  Brazilian  soldiers  garrisonned  in 
Altamira  were  enrolled  in  a study  in  cooperation  with  the  Brazilian  army, 
FSESP,  and  SUCAM  to  determine  what  pathogens  recruits  might  encounter 
during  their  six  months  training  period. 

The  soldiers  were  studied  in  two  groups,  by  company,  both  ot  which 
underwent  identical  training,  including  jungle  exercises,  but  on  a 
different  schedule.  In  January  initial  stool  specimens  were  collected  from 
42  soldiers,  examined  for  intestinal  parasites,  and  cultured  for  bacterial 
pathogens.  A follow-up  examination  was  performed  on  the  twenty-seven 
soldiers  of  this  group  who  were  still  in  the  area  in  June.  During  the  same 
time  period  a monthly  platelet  count  was  performed  on  47  other  soldiers. 

Skin  scrapings  from  the  axillary  region  and  left  plantar  surface  of  the 
same  group  of  soldiers  were  cultured  for  mycoses  in  January  and  June. 

TABLE  1 lists  the  most  common  parasites  and  bacteria  recovered  from  stools 
during  the  two  collections.  There  was  an  obvious  increase  in  the  raw 
number  of  intestinal  parasite  and  bacteria  infections  despite  the  smaller 
number  of  soldiers  examined  in  June.  The  absence  of  hookworm  infections  in 
June  is  mysterious  and  can  not  be  attributed  solely  to  the  detrition  of 
soldiers  from  the  study. 

TABLE  2 shows  the  most  common  mycotic  infections  encountered  in  January. 

The  follow-up  cultures,  initiated  in  June,  have  not  been  completed. 

Monthly  platelet  counts  for  two  companies  (1  Companhia  and  C.C.S.)  are  shown 
in  TABLE  3.  The  mean  platelet  counts  for  each  company  are  compared  with 
black  fly  population  counts  in  FIGURE  1.  Platelet  counts  remained  within 
the  normal  range  despite  increases  in  black  fly  population  densities. 
Previous  observations  on  Altamira  hemorragic  syndrome  would  lead  one  to 
antecipate  an  inverse  relationship  between  mean  platelet  count  and  black 
fly  numbers.  This  relationship  was  not  observed  in  the  present  study.  It 
is  probable  that  limited  geographic  distribution  of  the  black  flies 
populations  accounts  for  the  observations.  Captures  of  black  flies  were 
made  at  sites  in  the  forest  at  a minimum  of  20  Km  outside  Altamira.  Fly 
densities  in  the  city  and  at  the  military  garrison  were  subjectively  lower 
than  the  capture  sites  and  lower  than  densities  of  previous  years  according 
t.o  residents.  The  soldiers  would  consequently  not  be  subjected  to 
constant  bites  while  on  post  or  in  the  city. 


1 302 


i 


TABLE  1.  Intestinal  Parasites  and  Bacteria  recovered  from  Altamira  Soldiers. 


SPECIES 


Parasite 


Ascaris  lumbricoides 
Trichurus  trichiurus 
Hookworm 

Entamoeba  histolytica 
Iodamoeba  butschlii 
Giardia  lambia 
Strongyloides  stercoral  is 
No  parasites 


Bacteria 


Protens  sp 
Salmonella  sp 
Shigella  sp 


Normal  flora 


/zcm. 


N9  OF  INFECTIONS 

JAN  (42  soldiers)  JUNE  (27  soldiers) 


TABLE  2.  Mycotic  Organisms  Isolated  from  the  Axillary  Region  and  Plantar 
Surface  of  Altamira  Soldiers,  January  1976. 


Phialophora  gougerotti 
Candida  albicans 
Monosporum  apiosperum 
Aspergillus  fumigatus 
Actinomyces  sp. 
Cladosporum  wernechii 
Sporotrichum  schenchii 
Cephalosporum  sp. 

Nocardia  asteroides 
Torulopsis  glabsata 
Trichosporon  beigelli 
Epidermophyton  floccosum 
Coccidioides  iimiitis 
Trichophyton  schoenleinii 
Geotrichum  sp. 

Aspergillus  flavus 
Nocardia  brasil iensis 
Rhizopus  sp. 


/zcm. 


1304 


TABLE  3. 

Altamira  Soldier  Study 

- Platelets  Counts 

la.  Companhia 

C.C.S. 

January 

Mean 

202,000 

224,000 

S.D 

+ 47,000 

+ 50,000 

February 

Mean 

412,000 

424,000 

S.D 

+ 81 ,000 

+116,000 

March 

Mean 

494,000 

495,000 

S.O 

+96,000 

+101,000 

April 

Mean 

486,000 

481 ,000 

S.D 

+121,000 

+115,000 

May 

Mean 

467,000 

522,000 

S.D 

+ 94,000 

+136,000 

June 

Mean 

448,000 

480,000 

S.D 

+ 89,000 

+123,000 

V.  ENTOMOLOGY 

A.  Surveillance  for  Medically  Important  Insects  Along  the  Transamazon 
Highway 

BACKGROUND:  The  surveillance  program  consists  of  a routine  program  of 
systematically  collecting  medically  important  insects  along  the  highway  in 
the  Maraba  and  Altamira  areas.  The  program  was  initiated,  in  part,  in 
November,  1974,  with  specific  objectives  for  providing: 

1.  Distributional  information  on  medically  important 
insect  species  by  habitat,  time,  season  of  year  and 
location  along  the  highway. 

2.  Insect  specimens  for  pathogen  identification  and/or 
isolation. 

Routine  surveillance  is  conducted  at  12  sites  from  the  Araguaia  River,  east 
of  Maraba,  to  160  Km  west  of  Altamira.  These  sites  are  also  included  in 
the  epidemiology  and  animal  ecology  sueveil lance  programs.  Two  separate 
sites  were  established  for  malaria  studies. 

The  collecting  program  is  designed  to  sample  a variety  of  habitats  through 
much  of  the  day  and  night  using  several  collecting  methods  and  is  started 
with  3 teams  of  collectors  (2  persons  per  team).  Each  lote  is  sampled 
during  2 days  every  3 weeks.  Collections  of  insects  landing  on  man  are 
enphasized  but  collections  are  also  made  with  the  Shannon  trap  and  portable 
CDC  light  traps. 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  The  program  is  in  its  2nd  years  of  collecting  from  the 
original  12  sites  along  the  nighway.  The  systematic  nature  of  the 
collecting  program  has  provided  comparable  data  from  sites  which  cover  a 
large  geographical  area.  Due  to  the  time  requirements  for  detailed 
analysis  of  data,  only  data  from  Gleba  18  lote  4 (Altamira  jurisdiction) 
will  be  used  to  illustrate  the  type  of  entomological  information  available 
from  this  program.  Future  analyses  will  include  correlation  with 
environmental  variables  as  well. 

A total  of  46  species  of  mosquitoes  have  been  collected  at  Gleba  18  lote  4 
from  January,  1975,  to  May,  1976  (TABLE  1).  During  this  time  554 
collections  have  been  made  giving  a total  of  14,265  specimens.  The  landing 
collections  (collections  of  insects  landing  on  man  or  "man-biting 
collections")  made  in  the  forest  during  the  day  produced  the  largest 
number  of  species  (TABLE  2).  Species  represented  by  largest  numbers  were 
Mansonia  titillans  (Walker),  Psorophorr  al blp.es  (Theobald),  and  Aedes 
serratus  (Theobald).  Collections  conducted' in  the  secondary  scrub  growth 
during  the  day  produced  a comparable  number  of  species  with  fewer 
collections  (TABLE  3).  The  2 species  represented  by  largest  numbers  were 
Ma.  titillans  (generic  and  subgeneric  abbreviations  are  taken  from  Reinert, 
1975),  and  Anopheles  nuneztovari  Gaialdon.  The  early  evening  collection 
(1830  hr)  in  the  forest  was  very  productive  in  numbers  of  species  and 
specimens  (TABLE  4).  Mansonia  titillans.  An.  nuneztovari , An.  triannulatus 
(Neiva  and  Pinto),  and  An.  oswaldoi  (Peryassu)  were  well  represented  in 
these  collections  at  sunset.  The  late  evening  collections  were 
considerably  less  productive  in  species  and  specimens  but  did  contribute  a 


1308 


large  number  of  sandflies. 


No  mosquitoes  were  collected  near  the  house  during  the  0930-0945 
collections.  Sunset  and  night  collections  at  this  locale  netted  7 species 
and  revealed  the  presence  of  large  numbers  of  Ma.  titillans  biting  near 
the  house  (TABLE  5).  This  species  was  present  in  most  collections  in 
every  habitat,  day  and  night  (TABLE  7).  Mansonia  titillans  is  present 
throughout  the  year  but  seems  least  abundant  during  the  late  dry  season 
(FIGIRE  1).  The  pest  value  of  this  species  is  increased  by  its  willingness 
to  feed  inside  houses  with  an  outdoor-indoor  ratio  ("0/1  ratio)  of  1.96 
(see  malaria). 

The  number  of  Ae.  scapularies  near  the  house  was  significant  in  respect  to 
the  relative  absence  of  this  species  in  all  other  collections  in  other 
habitats.  Forattini  (1961)  stated  that  this  species  is  becoming 
domesticated  in  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil. 

The  absence  of  An.  darlingi  Root  and  the  relative  ansence  of  anopheline 
species  in  the  peridomicilary  environment  indicate  that  near  the  house 
transmission  of  malaria  is  improbable  (TABLE  7).  However,  the  diurnal 
biting  of  several  species  in  the  forest  and  secondary  scrub  habitats 
present  a possibility  for  secondary  transmission. 

Mansonia  titillans,  Haemaqoqus  capricornii  (Lutz) , Sabethes  chloropterus 
(Humboldt)  and  Sabethes  qlaucodaemon  (Dyar  and  Shannon)  were  dominant  in 
the  canopy  collections  (TABLE  6) . The  scarcity  of  the  latter  3 species  in 
other  habitats  typify  strong  preference  for  the  tree  canopy.  Sabethes 
chioropterus  and  Haemogoqus  leucocelaenus  Dyar  and  Shannon  are  recognized 
vectors  of  sylvan  yellow  fever\  Both  species  were  collected  at  ground 
level  in  the  forest  and  secondary  scrub  habitats.  Equal  numbers  of  H£. 
leucocelaenus  were  collected  at  ground  level  and  in  the  tree  tower.  The 
numbers  are  Tow  but  low  population  densities  seem  characteristic  for  most 
species  at  all  sites. 

Four  species  of  anophelines  and  Ma.  titillans  were  dominantly  represented 
in  the  Shannon  trap  collections.  One  anopheline,  Culex  coronator  Dyar  and 
Knab  and  Ma.  titillans  were  most  abundant  in  the  CDC  light  trap 
collections.  These  collections  increase  the  spectrum  of  Culex  and 
Uranotaenia  species  collected  and  produce  large  members  of  Psychodidae  and 
Ceratopogonidae. 

In  total,  almost  equal  numbers  of  Culicidae,  Ceratopogonidae  and  Psychodidae 
were  collected  at  Gleba  18  lote  4.  The  black  flies  (Simuliidae)  were 
collected  in  all  habitats  but  were  represented  by  fewer  numbers  than  the 
other  3 families.  Detailed  observations  on  the  biting  midges  will  be 
presented  in  another  section. 

COMMENTS:  A variety  of  keys  and  descriptive  literature  is  employed  in 

identifying  the  field  collected  material.  The  specific  identifications  are 
valid  only  to  the  extent  that  the  available  literature  is  correct. 
Unquestionably,  much  taxonomic  work  is  required  for  the  mosquitoes  of  the 
Amazon  region,  as  exemplified  by  such  designations  as  Culex  sp.  B #19  etc. 
in  this  report. 

Seasonal  data  are  being  compiled  for  several  species  and  will  be  presented 


1309 


when  the  data  from  several  sites  have  been  fully  analyzed.  The  routine 
program  is  presently  being  evaluated  and  changes  will  be  made  as  necessary. 
Some  aspects  of  the  program  will  become  oriented  to  answering  specific 
problems  of  vector  behavior  and  disease  ecology. 


The  538  pools  of  sandflies  and  biting  midges  processed  for  virus  isolation 
have  been  negative.  Hopefully,  the  bulk  of  the  remaining  material  will  be 
processed  for  virus  isolation  in  the  near  future. 


1310 


ViulfiiiL  a 


TABLE  1.  Species  list  of  Culicidae  Collected  at  Gleba  18  Lote  4,  in  the 
Altamira  Jurisdiction,  from  January  1975  to  May  1976. 


Aedes  (Ochlerotatus) 
serratus 
ful vus 
scapularis 

(Finlaya) 

a rgyro thorax 

(Howardina) 
arboreal  is 
septemstrTatus 
ful vi thorax 

Aedeomyia 

squamipennis 

Anopheles  (Nyssorhynchus) 
nuneztovari 
oswaldoi 
triannulatus 

(Anopheles) 

mediopunctatus 

mattogrossensis 


(Stethornyia) 

nimbus 

Coquil lettidia 
1 ynchi 

arribalzagia 

venezuelensis 

Culex  (Culex) 
corniger 
coronator 
declarator 

pipiens  quinquefasciatus 

(Lutzia) 

bigoti 

(Melanoconion) 

spissipes" 

taeniopus 

vormifer 

Culex  sp  B # 19 
sp  B # 18 

Haemagogus  (Stegoconops) 
capricornii 
leucocelaenus 


Limatus 

durhamii 


Mansonia  (Mansonia) 
titillans 
humeral  is 

Psophora  (Grabhamia) 
cingulata 

( Janthinosoma) 
albipes 
ferox 
lutzii 

Sabethes  (Sabethes) 
cyaneus 
quasicyaneus 
(Sabethoiaes)' 
chloropterus 
glaucodaemon 
bipartipe? 
bel isarioi 

Trichoprosopon  (Trichoprosopon) 
digitatum 


(Runchomyia) 


Uranotaenia 

geometrica 

calosomata 

Wyeomyia  (Dendromyia) 
aporonoma 


TABLE  2.  Insects  from  15  min.  Landing  Collections  Made  in  the  Forest  at 
Gleba  18  Lote  04  on  the  Transamazon  Highway  Altamira,  Brazil, 
January  1975-May  1976.  A Total  of  90  Collections  were  Made. 


0900- 

1230- 

1600- 

TOTAL 

Culicidae 

Ae.(Fin.)  arqyrothorax 

1 

0 

0 

1 

Ae.  (How.)  fuivitorax 

0 

1 

2 

3 

Ae.  (How.)  septemstriatus 

0 

1 

1 

2 

Ae.  (Och.)  scapularis 

0 

5 

0 

5 

Ae.  (Och . j serratus 

2 

19 

30 

51 

An.  (Ano.)  mediopunctatus 

1 

0 

1 

2 

An.  (Nys.)  nuneztovari 

3 

8 

3 

14 

An.  (Nys.)  oswaldoi 

1 

6 

13 

20 

An.  (Nys.)  triannulatus 

3 

2 

8 

13 

An.  (Ste.)  nimbus 

2 

1 

4 

7 

Cq.  lynchi 

0 

1 

1 

2 

Hq.  leucocelaenus 

1 

6 

0 

7 

Li.  durhamii 

0 

4 

0 

4 

Ma.  ti til  Ians 

5 

39 

21 

65 

Ps.  albipes 

8 

16 

26 

50 

Ps.  ferox 

2 

6 

7 

15 

Ps.  lutzii 

0 

2 

0 

2 

Sa.  bi parti pes 

0 

1 

0 

1 

Sa.  chloropterus 

0 

2 

0 

2 

Sa.  cyaneus 

1 

2 

0 

3 

Sa.  glaucodaemon 

0 

0 

1 

1 

Sa.  auasicyaneus 

0 

3 

0 

3 

Tr.  diqi tatum 

1 

3 

1 

5 

Wy.  aporonoma 

4 

7 

9 

20 

Anopheles  spp. 

7 

18 

12 

37 

Aedes  spp. 

0 

0 

2 

2 

Culex  spp. 

2 

12 

91 

105 

Haemagogus  spp. 

1 

7 

6 

14 

Chaqasia  spp. 

0 

0 

1 

1 

Limiatus  spp. 

2 

5 

4 

11 

Sabethes  spp. 

0 

1 

2 

3 

Trichoprosopon  spp. 

0 

0 

3 

3 

Wyeomyia  spp. 

8 

16 

16 

40 

TOTAL 

55 

194 

137 

374 

Simuliidae 

9 

56 

241 

306 

Ceratopogonidae 

46 

138 

111 

295 

Psychodidae  (Phlebotomus  spp.) 

13 

2 

14 

29 

TOTAL 

68 

196 

366 

630 

GRAND  TOTAL 

123 

390 

503 

1004 

NUMBER  OF  COLLECTIONS 

17 

37 

36 

X PER  COLLECTIONS 

7.23 

10.54 

11.19 

/zcm. 


1312 


F 


TABLE  3.  Insects  from  68  15-min  Landing  Collections  Conducted  in  an  Area  of 
Scrub  Growth  (Secondary  Vegetation)  at  Gleba  18  Lote  4 on  the 


i 

\ 


Transamazon  Highway 
1975-May  1976. 

in  the  Altamira 

Jurisdiction, 

Brazil,  January 

1200 

1530 

TOTALS 

Cul icidae 

Ae.  (How.)  arboreal  is 
Ae.  (Och.)  scapularis 
Ae.  (Och.)  serratus 

0 

1 

1 

9 

0 

1 

3 

10 

3 

An.  (Nys.)  nuneztovari 

4 

11 

15 

An.  (Nys.j  oswaldoi 

1 

5 

6 

An.  (Nys.)  triannulatus 

3 

8 

11 

Culex  sp.  B # 18 

0 

1 

1 

Li.  durhamii 

6 

4 

10 

Li.  flavisetosus 

0 

2 

2 

Hg.  leucocelaenus 

0 

1 

1 

Ma.  ti til  Ians 

2 

24 

26 

Ps.  (Jan.)  albipes 

1 

4 

5 

Ps.  (Jan.)  ferox 

1 

0 

1 

Ps.  (Jan.)  lutzii 

1 

0 

1 

Sa.  bipartipes 
Sa.  chloropterus 

1 

1 

1 

4 

2 

5 

Sa.  cyaneus 

0 

1 

1 

Sa.  qlaucodaemon 

3 

1 

4 

Tr.  aigitatum 
Tr.  lonqipes 

0 

0 

2 

2 

2 

2 

Wy.  aporonoma 

4 

3 

7 

Anopheles  spp. 

20 

11 

31 

Culex  spp. 

31 

57 

92 

Haemaqoqus  spp. 

9 

5 

14 

Limatus  spp. 

2 

11 

13 

Sabethes  spp. 

12 

8 

20 

Wyeomyia  spp. 

3 

20 

23 

TOTALS 

118 

191 

309 

Simuliidae 

151 

315 

466 

Ceratopogonidae 

1 

3 

4 

TOTALS 

152 

318 

470 

GRAND  TOTALS 

270 

509 

779 

X PER  COLLECTION 

8.4 

14.1 

11.5 

/zcm. 


1313 


TABLE  4.  Insects  from  106  15-min  Landing  Collections  Conducted  in  the  Forest 
at  Gleba  18  Lote  4 on  the  Transamazon  Highway  in  the  Altamira 
Jurisdiction,  Brazil,  January  1975-Nay  1976. 


1830 

1925 

2145 

TOTALS 

Cul icidae 

Ae.  f Och . ) fulvus 

1 

1 

0 

2 

Ae.  (Och.)  scapularis 

1 

0 

0 

1 

Ae.  (Och.)  serratus 

13 

0 

0 

13 

An.  (Ano.)  mattogrossensis 

r, 

L 

5 

1 

8 

An.  (Ano.)  mediopunctatus 

5 

2 

1 

8 

An.  (Nys.)  nuneztovari 

30 

16 

7 

53 

An.  (Nys.)  oswaldoi 

57 

0 

3 

60 

An.  (Nys.)  triannulatus 

32 

54 

11 

67 

Cq.  arribalzagagla 

0 

1 

1 

2 

Cq.  lynchi 

3 

0 

0 

3 

Cx.  (Cux.)  coronator 

7 

5 

0 

12 

Cx.  (Cux.j  declarator 

1 

0 

0 

1 

Cx.  (Mel.)  spissipes 
Cx.  (Mel.)  taeniopus 
Cx.  (Mel . ) vomer ifer 

3 

1 

1 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

3 

1 

1 

Cx.  sp  B § 

1 

0 

0 

1 

Ma.  ti til  Ians 

178 

32 

10 

120 

Ps.  (Gra.)  cingulata 

8 

1 

0 

9 

Ps.  (Jan.)  albipes 
Tr.  dTqTtatum 

6 

6 

1 

0 

1 

0 

8 

6 

Anopheles  sp. 

64 

24 

5 

93 

Culex  sp. 

44 

1 

0 

45 

Mansonia  sp. 

0 

1 

0 

1 

Wyeomyia  sp. 

1 

0 

0 

1 

TOTALS 

465 

144 

40 

649 

Simullidae 

90 

1 

0 

91 

Ceratopogonidae 

271 

256 

606 

1133 

Psychodidae 

73 

242 

495 

810 

TOTALS 

434 

499 

1101 

2034 

GRAND  TOTALS 

899 

649 

1141 

2683 

X PER  COLLECTION 

11.73 

14.7 

31.45 

19.2 

/zcm. 


1314 


TABLE  5.  Insects  from  125  15-min  Landing  Collections  Conducted  Within  10  m 
of  the  House  at  Gleba  18  Lote  04  on  the  Transamazon  Highway  Near 
Altamira,  Brazil,  January  1975-May  1976. 


0930- 

1855- 

1955- 

2215- 

TOTALS 

0945 

1910 

2010 

2230 

Cul icidae 

Ae.  (Och.)  scapularis 

0 

21 

0 

0 

21 

An.  (Ano. ) mattoqrossensis 

0 

2 

5 

0 

7 

An.  (Nys . ) nuneztovari 

0 

4 

2 

0 

6 

An.  (Nys.j  triannulatus 

0 

8 

0 

0 

8 

Cx.  (Cux.)  coronator 

0 

1 

0 

0 

1 

Cx.  (Mel.)  spissipes 
Ma.  tltillans 

0 

0 

1 

1846 

0 

224 

0 

94 

1 

2164 

Anopheles  spp. 

0 

37 

1 

0 

38 

TOTALS 

0 

1920 

232 

94 

2246 

Simuliidae 

118 

38 

49 

0 

205 

Ceratopogonidae 

0 

0 

5 

7 

12 

Psychodidae 

0 

0 

0 

1 

1 

TOTALS 

118 

38 

54 

8 

218 

GRAND  TOTALS 

118 

1958 

286 

102 

2464 

X PER  COLLECTION 

6.94 

52.9 

7.73 

2.76 

19.25 

/zcm. 


1315 


TABLE  6. 


Insects  from  53  1-hr  Landing  Collections  Conducted  in  the  Forest 
Canopy  at  Gleba  18  Lote  4 on  the  Transamazon  Highway  in  the 
Altamira  Jurisdiction,  Brazil,  January  1975-May  1976. 


1000- 

1100 

1400- 

1500 

TOTALS 

Cul icidae 

An.  (Nys.l  oswaldoi 
An.  (Nys. ) triannulatus 

0 

2 

2 

0 

1 

1 

Hg.  capricornii 

2 

33 

35 

Hq.  leucocelaenus 

4 

3 

7 

Ma.  titillans 

18 

54 

72 

Ps.  albipes 

3 

3 

6 

Sa.  belisarioi 

2 

9 

11 

Sa.  chloropterus 

1 

24 

25 

Sa.  cyaneus 

0 

1 

1 

Sa.  qlaucodaemon 

8 

14 

22 

Wy.  aporonoma 

0 

1 

1 

Haemaqoqus  spp. 

11 

85 

96 

Chaqasia  spp. 

0 

1 

1 

Sabethes  spp. 

0 

1 

1 

Wyeomyia  spp. 

2 

1 

3 

TOTALS 

51 

233 

284 

Simuliidae 

216 

482 

698 

Ceratopogonidae 

3 

16 

19 

Psychodidae 

0 

1 

1 

TOTALS 

219 

499 

718 

GRAND  TOTALS 

270 

732 

1002 

X PER  COLLECTION 

15.9 

20.3 

18.' 

/zcm. 


1316 


TABLE  7.  Mean  Numbers  Collected  per  15  min.  Landing  Collection,  by  Time 
and  Habitat,  for  4 Species.3  The  Collections  were  Conducted  at 
Gleba  18.  Lote  4 on  the  Transamazon  Highway  in  the  Altamira 
Jurisdiction,  Para  January  1975-May  1976.  s 


NUMBERS  COLLECTED  PER  COLLECTION 

TIME  AND  PLACE  NUMBER  OF  

OF  COLLECTIONS  COLLECTIONS  An.  (Nys . ) An.  (Nys.)  An.  (Nys.)  Ma. 

triannulatus  nuneztovari  oswaldoi  titillans 


Tree  Canopy 


1000-1100 

17 

0 

0 

0 

1.06 

1400-1500 

36 

0 

0 

0.12 

1.5 

Secondary  Shrub 

1200-1215 

32 

0.09 

0.13 

0.03 

0.06 

1530-1545 

36 

0.22 

0.31 

0.14 

0.67 

Peridomiciliary 

0930-0945 

17 

0 

0 

0 

0 

1855-1910 

37 

0.22 

0.11 

0 

49.9 

1955-2010 

37 

0 

0 

0.05 

6.05 

2215-2230 

37 

0 

0 

0 

2.54 

Forest-ground  level 

0900-0915 

17 

0.17 

0.17 

0.05 

0.29 

1230-1245 

37 

0.05 

0.22 

0.16 

1.05 

1600-1615 

36 

0.22 

0.08 

0.36 

0.58 

1830-1845 

37 

0.86 

0.81 

1.54 

4.81 

1925-1940 

34 

1.59 

0.47 

0 

0.94 

2145-2200 

35 

0.31 

0.20 

0.09 

0.29 

3 These  data  represent  a total  of  222.5  man-hr  of  collecting  time. 


/zcm. 


1317 


TABLE  8.  Species  and  Family  Representation  In  Shannon  Trap,  and  CDC  Light 
Trap  Collections.  All  Collections  were  Hade  In  the  Forest  of 
Gleba  18  Lote  4 In  the  Altamlra  Jurisdiction,  Para,  Brazil  from 
January  1975-May  1976. 


CULICIDAE 


SHANNON 


fulvus 

scapuTarls 

serratus 

ma  ttogrossensl  S 

mediopunctatus 

nuneztovarl 


trlannulatus 


Cg.  arrlbalzagaTa 
Cg.  venezuelensls 
Cx.  TCux.l coronator 
Cx . ( Cux . ) declarator 
Cx.  (Lut.j  blgotl 
Jx.  (MeT.)  spi snipes 
Cx.  (MeT. ) taenlopus 
Cx.  (MeT. ) vomer Ifer 
Cx.  sp  8419 
Cx.  sp  BI22 
Ma.  tltlllans 
Ps.  (Jan.)  alblpes 
£s.  (Jan.)  ferox 
Ur.  caTosomata 
Ur.  geometric? 
Anopheles  spp. 

Culex  spp. 

(Jranotaenla  spp. 
Trlchoprosopon  spp. 

TOTALS 

Slmullldae 

Ceratopogonldae 

Psychodldae 

TOTALS 

GRAND  TOTALS 
NUMBER  GENERA 
NUMBER  SPECIES 


0 

2758 
female  372 
male  2600 


* Each  value  Is  taken  from  36  trap  hours  of  collecting, 
fe  Each  value  Is  taken  from  73  trap  nights  of  operation. 


0 

319 

female  112 
male  362 


73  trap 
nights 


* 


B.  Culicoides  Taxonomy  and  Behavior 


Cullcoides  are  a cosmopolitan  pest  in  the  Amazon  basin,  breeding  in  a 
diversity  of  habitats,  i.e.,  tree  holes,  decaying  plant  material, 
impoundments,  and  river  edges.  Large  numbers  of  culicoides  have  been 
collected  in  all  study  sites  along  the  Transamazon  highway  in  the  Maraba 
and  Altamira  areas  (TABLE  1).  In  the  developmental  stages  of  the 
entomology  surveillance  program,  culicoides  were  only  being  processed  for 
virus  isolation  test;  however,  within  recent  months  taxonomic  capabilities 
have  been  established  for  this  group  of  insects.  As  with  any  disease- 
vector  program,  taxonomic  capabilities  are  an  essential  part  of  any 
epidemiological  investigation  where  the  disease  agent  may  be  vector  borne. 

Routine  slide  preparations  and  preliminary  identification  efforts  are 
performed  in  the  Belem  laboratory.  Representative  specimens  of  the  various 
species  are  also  forwarded  to  authorities  at  the  Smithsonian  Institute  in 
Washington,  D.C.  for  confirmation  of  identified  species  and  for  identifying 
species  beyond  the  taxonomic  capabilities  of  this  unit.  A preliminary  list 
of  species  identified  to  date  is  listed  in  TABLE  2. 

The  enumeration  of  culicoide  species  will  be  increased  as  the  taxonomic 
efforts  of  this  group  are  expanded. 

In  addition  to  identifying  the  species  present  during  the  routine  capture 
program,  considerable  progress  is  being  made  in  monitoring  the  daily  and 
seasonal  biting  activities  of  biting  midges. 

As  with  most  species  of  insects  in  the  Amazon  basin,  the  population  of 
culicoides  is  greatly  influenced  by  seasonal  variations.  The  data  in 
FIGURES  1 and  2 is  an  example  of  the  seasonal  activities  as  determined  by 
numerous  man-biting  and  Shannon  trap  collections.  Even  though  only  evening 
time  biting  collection  are  shown  in  FIGURES  1 and  2,  certain  species  of 
culicoides  are  also  abundant  and  very  active  during  the  day.  Their 
seasonal  prevalence  varies  with  the  locality,  but  it  is  usually  highest 
from  January  to  May  with  a peak  in  the  months  of  January,  February  and 
March.  The  rainy  season  for  our  study  areas  normally  starts  in  December 
and  terminates  in  April. 

The  breeding  sites  for  the  conmon  species  found  in  our  study  sites  have  not 
be  studied;  however,  it  would  seem  logical  that  the  majority  of  culicoides 
species  are  breeding  in  those  areas  which  require  a high  moisture  content 
(decaying  plant  material)  or  frequent  replenishment  of  water  (tree  holes, 
plant  axials). 

COMMENTS;  Emphasis  will  continue  to  be  placed  on  collecting  adult 
culicoides  along  the  Transamazon  highway  and  in  the  municipalities. 
Particular  areas  of  interest  will  be  those  of  daily  and  seasonal  activities. 
Taxonomic  capabilites  of  the  unit  will  be  further  developed  and  emphasis 
will  be  placed  on  recognizing  morphological  characteristics  whicn  may  lead 
to  the  recognition  of  new  species.  A reference  collection  of  known  species 
is  being  established  at  the  USAMRU-Belem  laboratory  for  future  training  and 
research  efforts.  Since  this  group  of  insects  is  thought  to  be  important 
in  transmission  of  human  and  animal  pathogens,  e.g.,  viruses  and  filariasis, 
the  monitoring  of  culicoides  for  virus  isolations  will  be  continued. 


1319 


MILITARY  IMPORTANCE:  Culicoides  are  a cosmopolitan  group  of  insects  found 

in  a diversity  of  habitats  throughout  the  world.  In  some  geographical 
areas,  these  minute  insects  exist  in  such  high  densities  that  they  may 
render  an  area  uninhabitable.  Although  individuals  vary  considerably  in 
their  reactions  to  insect  bites,  this  group  of  insects  normally  causes 
considerable  irritation  and  itching.  Debilitating  allergic  reaction  to  the 
toxic  feeding  secretion  of  culicoides  is  not  uncommon.  In  addition  to 
their  annoyance  capabilities,  several  species  of  culicoides  are  involved  in 
the  transmission  of  human  filarial  diseases,  Acanthocheilonema  perstans, 
Acanthocheilonema  streptocerca,  Mansonella  ozzardi,  and  viruses.  The 
medical  importance  of  this  group  of  insects  is  continuously  being  renewed 
as  new  diseases  transmitted  by  culicoides  are  discovered. 


1320a 


FIGURE  1.  Seasonal  distribution  of  Culicoides  at  Gleba  18  Lote  4 in  Altamira,  Para,  Brazil,  1975-1976 
Data  obtained  from  man-biting  collections  in  the  forest  during  the  evening  hrs. 


nary  Observations  on  the  Distribution  of  Ceratopogonidae  Species  (Cul icoides)  by  Study 
the  Amazon  Basin,  Para,  Brazil,  1975-1976. 


N 

<0 

C- 

CQ 


»0 

C- 

lO 

Q_ 


<0 

CO 

c 

0 

N 

(0 

1 

QJ 


in 

■o 

o 

JZ 

4-> 

£ 

o. 

<o 

t- 


£ 

■M 

U 

QJ 


O 

CJ 

in 

0) 

■r 

U 

0) 

Q- 

l/) 

QJ 

fO 

T3 


o 

o> 

o 

Q. 

o 

+J 

L. 

QJ  • 

CJ  VO 

r*. 

v*-  0\ 

O r- 
I 

«P  IT) 

in 

•r  0> 


00 

< 


00 

Q 

O 


PI 


o 

cj 


>- 

CL 

O 

z 
z < 


CL 

< 

oc 


DC 

cd 


CJ 

c 


o 

t—t 

h~ 

CJ 


; o 
! cj 


o 

DC 

CD 


< 

X 

CO 


X X 


X X X X 


XXX 


xxxxxxxxxxxx 


00 

LU 


o. 

00 


in 

m 

3 

3 

C) 

4-> 

•r 

lO 

i— 

in 

cj  io  in 

O 

•r“  Q. 

in 

in  i—  3 

in  .o 

o.  in 

I 

•r 

3 3 U 

m 3 id 

r— 

Q. 

<*-  C 0)  to  'r- 

•»-  4->  •*- 

in  in  ns  <o 

i! 

C QJ  <4—  m-  o 

in  fO  “O 

3 *r-  Q.t- 

10 

QJ  > *f-  *r-  C «r- 

C 3 O 

r—  *r-  >> 

CL 

•r  t-  m u o>  O •«“ 

0)  CO 

wi »—  (0  i—  E 

•r  *r— 

U > QJ  10  •»-  <0  N 

10  *p-  3 

<0  *r-  O.T-  o 

in  x 

D flUr-  lO  CO 

L-  in  qj 

r-  Irtr-  u a 

3 O 

r0  »—  <0  •»“  C C7>  3 

10  c m 

>>  3 (0  4)  -1- 

• 

v*-  «♦- 

cm-  «q  c-  *f- 

tl*r-  Q.  JZ  Ou  Q-“0  O 

E I 

s- 

u 

• • 

• • • 

• • • • o 

N 

UUUOUUOUUUUUUUUUli.  1 

'v-»  '4 

1323 


C.  Black  Flies 


BACKGROUND:  Seasonally,  the  recurrent  black  fly  population  occurs  in  the 

Amazon  basin  shortly  following  the  beginning  of  the  rainy  season  in 
December-April . In  numerous  areas  throughout  the  Amazon  basin,  the  black 
fly  population  attains  sufficient  numbers  to  be  considered  a major  public 
health  problem.  As  more  people  migrate  to  the  interior  of  the  Amazon  basin, 
there  undoubtedly  will  be  more  health  problems  related  to  this  hematophagous 
insect.  Symptomatic  reactions  of  persons  exposed  to  the  voracious  biting 
attacks  of  the  black  fly  varies  due  to  the  number  of  bites  received  and 
immunologic  response  of  the  victim.  Some  people  appear  to  be  only  slightly 
annoyed  by  this  insect's  bite,  while  other  persons  exhibit  debilitating 
reactions.  The  initial  biting  process  itself  may  be  painless;  however, 
after  a short  interim  of  feeding,  there  is  usually  pain,  swelling  and 
general  local  discomfort.  Intense  discomfort  of  the  afflicted  areas  of  the 
body  often  occurs  for  days  after  the  initial  bite(s).  Lesions  may  develop 
resulting  in  secondary  bacterial  infections.  The  more  serious  infections 
usually  result  in  permanent  scarring  and  discoloration  of  the  tissue. 
Sometimes,  persons  who  are  exposed  to  repeated  bites  develop  allergic 
manifestations  referred  to  as  the  "hemorrhagic  syndrome  of  Altamira".  In 
addition  to  the  physiological  reaction  of  the  host  to  black  fly  toxic 
feeding  secretions,  the  black  fly  is  also  noted  as  an  important  vector  of 
Mansonella  ozzardi  and  Onchocerca  volvulus  in  some  areas  of  the  Amazon 
basin. 


GENERAL  REMARKS  ABOUT  THE  BLACK  FLY:  The  various  members  of  the  black  fly 

taxonomic  family  (Simuliidae)  are  small  (2-3  mm  in  length),  robust,  and 
dark  in  coloration  with  short  piercing  mouth  parts.  They  are  popularly 
referred  to  as  black  flies,  turkey  gnats  or  buffalo  gnats.  The  females 
normally  only  seek  their  host  during  the  day,  particularly  in  the  morning 
and  evening  hours.  However,  the  peak  feeding  activity  of  black  flies  may 
vary  according  to  species  and  weather  conditions.  The  preferred  breeding 
grounds  range  small  streams  to  large  rivers  with  rapid  to  a moderate 
current.  Although  the  black  fly  population  usually  abounds  near  its 
breeding  sites,  a large  population  may  exist  at  a considerable  distance 
from  these  areas. 


PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  Field  evaluation  of  repellent  impregnated  mesh  jackets 

and  aerosol  spray  skin  repellents  was  conducted  at  the  "Ponta  da  Terra" 
ranch  approximately  38  Km  northwest  of  Maraba,  Para,  Brazil.  Testing  was 
conducted  from  18  May  to  26  May  1976.  The  cotton-nylon  mesh  jackets  were 
provided  by  S.C.  Johnson  and  Son,  Inc.  and  the  U.S.  Navy. 


Two  pre-treated  jackets  used  in  the  test  were  impregnated  with  deet 
(N-N-diethyl-meta-toluamide)  and  "R69”  (3-Acetyl-2-  (2,6-dimethyl-5- 
heptenyl )-oxazol idine)  at  23%  by  weight  of  active  ingredients  or  0.302  gm. 
of  actives  per  gram  of  fabric  "test  material  provided  by  S.C.  Johnson  and 
Son,  Inc." 


Additional  repellents  evaluated  were  "R-ll"  (2,3:4,  5-Bis  (2  butylene) 
tetrahydro-2-furaldehyde)and  "MGK264"  (N-octyl  bicycloheptene  dicarboximide) 
which  were  impregnated  into  one  jacket.  These  repellents  were  formulated 
at  0.5  gr  of  50%  "R-ll"  and  50%  MGK264"/gm  weight  of  jacket. 


The  fourth  test  jacket  contained  chemicals  "R-326  (Di-n-propyl  isocin- 


£*&&**# 


3R. •*-  * if 


■ 


chomeronate)  and  "MGK264"  (N-octyl  bicyc  ohepvne  dicarboximide)  formulated 
at  0.5  gm  of  50%  "R-ll"  and  50%  "MGK-264"/gm  weight  of  jacket. 

Non-pretreated  cotton-nylon  mesh  jackets  were  prepared  for  testing  in  the 
following  manner.  Test  repellents  were  formulated  on  a ratio  of  chemical 
weight  co  weight  of  jacket  basis.  The  repellent  mixtures  were  then  added 
to  a 2000  ml  beaker  containing  250  ml  of  absolute  ethanol.  Test  jackets 
were  then  placed  in  containers  and  sealed  for  24  hours.  After  the  jackets 
were  impregnated  they  were  allowed  to  dry  for  6 hours  and  resealed  in  a 
plastic  sack  to  await  testing.  After  each  test  trial,  the  jackets  were 
resealed  in  their  original  plastic  sacks. 

The  repellent  mesh  jackets  were  tested  and  evaluated  in  conjunction  with 
two  types  of  controls:  1)  non-treated  control  mesh  jacket  and  2)  one  test 
subject  without  a mesh  jacket.  The  second  control  method  was  selected  to 
determine  the  influence  of  a control  mesh  jacket  on  the  landing  and  biting 
rates  of  black  fl ies. 

Field  evaluation  of  the  test  repellent  mesh  jackets  were  conducted  as 
follows:  1)  Each  test  subject  was  required  to  wear  protective  boots  and 
trousers  2)  The  test  jacket  was  the  only  clothing  item  worn  on  the  torso 
and  3)  Test  subjects  were  randomly  spaced  (10-15  meters)  apart.  Each  test 
was  divided  into  3 time  periods  with  a 2-5  minute  rest  interim  between  each 
testing  period.  The  test  subjects  wearing  repellent  impregnated  jackets 
would  count  all  black  fly  landings  and/or  bites  received  during  each  10 
(ten)  minute  test  period.  During  the  2-5  minute  rest  interim,  the  test 
subjects  would  leave  the  test  area  and  then  return  to  continue  the  testing 
sequence  until  three  10  minute  (30  minute  testing  time)  test  periods  were 
completed. 

The  same  testing  method  was  also  performed  with  the  controls;  however,  the 
actual  testing  time  was  reduced  to  5 minutes  per  test  period  (15  minutes 
total  testing  time)  due  to  the  discomfort  caused  by  the  biting  black  flies. 
After  each  complete  test,  the  test  subjects  would  wear  a different  repellent 
mesh  jacket  to  negate  differential  host  attractions.  Biting  rates  were 
recorded  for  3 areas  of  the  body:  1)  the  number  of  bites  received  on  the 

face  2)  the  number  of  bites  received  on  the  hands,  and  3)  the  number  of 
bites  received  through  the  mesh  jacket.  An  accountable  bite  for  this  field 
test  was  described  as  one  in  which  the  black  fly  makes  rc«ntact  with  the 
skin  or  the  black  fly  entered  the  mesh  of  the  jacket  or  the  black  fly  was 
actually  feeding.  Those  black  flies  landing  on  the  outside  of  the  jacket 
were  not  recorded. 

The  temperature  and  relative  humidity  were  monitored  for  each  test. 

Skin  repellents  were  also  tested  to  determine  their  effectiveness  as  a 
personal  protective  measure  against  black  flies.  Three  aerosol  skin 
repellents  and  control  were  evaluated  for  1,  2,  3,  hours  of  testing  time. 
The  repellents  tested  were  1)  deet  (N,N-Diethyl -Meta-toluamide) , 71,25%, 
Standard  Army  Stock  Number  6840-864-5432  2)  Twenty  and  Five  (N,N-Diethyl- 
meta-toluamide,  20%,  and  3-Acetyl-2-(2,6-dimethyl-5-heptenyl-oxozolidine, 
5%),  and  3)  Ten  and  Five  (N,N-Diethyl-meta-toluamide) , 10%  and  3-Acetyl- 
2-(2,6-dimethyl-5-heptenyl-oxozolidine,  5%).  The  last  two  chemicals  were 
provided  by  S.C.  Johnson  and  Son,  Inc. 


1325 


| 


T^rr 


The  arms  of  each  test  subject  were  sprayed  with  one  of  the  candidate 
repellents  from  the  elbow  to  the  finger  tips.  A different  compound  was 
applied  to  each  arm  of  a test  subject.  All  persons  performing  the  test 
were  wearing  protective  clothing  and  head  nets  to  restrict  biting  activity 
to  the  exposed  body  areas.  Only  those  bites  received  between  the  elbow  and 
wrist  were  recorded.  For  this  test  a cite  was  defined  as  one  in  which  the 
black  fly's  mouth  parts  were  penentrating  into  the  skin.  In  order  to 
confirm  a bite  for  a particular  repellent,  the  subject  must  receive  two 
bites  on  the  same  arm  within  a 30  minute  time  period.  The  protection  time 
of  a repellent  is  calculated  from  the  treatment  time  until  the  first  bite 
of  a confirmed  bite  pair.  The  biting  pressure  of  the  black  flies  was 
monitored  by  the  control  by  making  periodic  5 minute  biting  counts.  Each 
arm  tested  was  considered  to  be  1 replication.  The  control  did  not  receive 
a repellent  on  either  arm.  Assuming  the  black  fly  population  was  randomly 
distributed,  the  test  subjects  were  positioned  in  a circular  pattern 
approximately  10  meters  apart. 

RESULTS:  TABLE  1 shows  the  results  obtained  with  2 types  of  controls  and 

4 candidate  repellents  which  were  replicated  8 times.  The  reason  for 
having  two  types  of  controls  was  to  compare  the  biting  pressures  received 
by  a subject  not  wearing  a jacket  with  one  in  which  the  person  has  a non- 
treated  mesh  jacket. 

The  results  show  that  there  was  an  approximate  50%  reduction  in  total 
bites/min  when  a non-treated  jacket  was  worn.  However,  when  comparing 
biting  rates  for  similar  areas  of  the  body  (BITES/MIN,  JACKET)  for  the  two 
control  treatments,  there  was  generally  a 3-fold  decrease  in  the  biting 
rate  for  the  control  mesh  jacket  treatment.  This  reduction  in  biting 
rate  is  believed  to  be  due  to  a reduction  in  exposed  body  area  and 
behavioral  characteristics  of  the  black  flies  rather  than  a repellent 
factors  of  the  non-treated  cotton-nylon  mesh  fabrics. 

The  results  in  TABLE  1 and  TABLE  2 show  that  deet  and  R-ll  plus  MGK  264 
were  the  most  effective  repellents.  When  comparing  the  total  number  of 
bites  received  by  those  subjects  wearing  the  deet  jacket  and  R-ll  plus  MGK 
264  jacket,  the  number  of  bites  received  were  the  same  (16  bites), 
however;  deet  offered  more  protection  to  the  exposed  areas  of  the  body 
(hands  and  face)  than  R-ll  plus  MGK  264  treated  jackets. 

Repellents  R-326  plus  MGK  264  and  R-69  gave  a 96%  and  90%  reduction  of 
black  fly  bites  respectively  when  compared  to  the  control  jacket  but  failed 
to  give  above  an  80%  reduction  in  total  cumulative  bites  (TABLE  2). 

The  data  in  TABLE  3 shows  the  total  number  of  bites  received  per  body  area. 
As  the  data  indicates,  a large  portion  of  the  biting  activity  occurred  on 
the  exposed  areas  of  the  face  for  both  the  repellent  and  control  groups. 

The  large  number  of  bites  received  in  this  area  tends  to  support  the 
hypothesis  that  hematophagous  insects  are  attracted  by  CO2  expelled  by 
their  host  animals. 

The  results  of  the  skin  repellents  for  black  flies  are  listed  in  TABLt  4. 
Some  formulation  of  deet  was  incorporated  into  all  of  the  repellents  used 
in  the  test.  Each  repellent  exhibited  the  same  protection  time  except  for 
1 replication  with  Ten  and  Five,  which  had  a confirmed  hit®  after  2+21  hre 
of  protection  time.  It  was  felt  that  longer  testing  periods  will  be 


1326 


necessary  to  demonstrate  a difference  in  protection  time  offered  by  the 
skin  repellents. 


MILITARY  IMPORTANCE:  Due  to  the  ubiquitions  breeding  areas  and  flight 

range  capabilities  of  black  flies  in  the  Amazon  basin,  chemical  control 
measures  would  normally  prove  to  be  ineffective  and  economically  unfeasible. 
When  personnel  are  required  to  operate  in  areas  where  disease-vector 
control  techniques  are  prohibitive  or  impractical,  effective  personal 
protective  chemicals  would  provide  the  most  flexible  and  economical  system 
available. 

Previous  studies  performed  by  other  researchers  in  the  laboratory  and  under 
field  conditions  have  shown  that  personal  skin  repellents  and  chemically- 
treated  jackets  are  effective  in  reducing  the  number  of  bites  from  black 
flies  and  other  blood  feeding  pest.  However,  extensive  research  still 
needs  to  be  conducted  to  evaluate  the  effectiveness  of  black  fly  repellents 
under  different  geographical  and  climatological  conditions.  Other  factors 
which  must  be  evaluated  are  comparative  test  with  different  species  groups 
and  population  densities. 

Preliminary  observation  in  the  field  by  some  workers  observed  that  deet 
failed  to  give  satisfactory  personal  protection  when  working  in  the 
Altamira  area.  It  is  this  same  area  where  black  flies  are  known  to  cause 
the  "hemorragic  syndrome  of  Altamira".  Future  test  are  planned  in  this 
area  to  determine  the  effectiveness  of  new  repellents.  Candidate  test 
repellents  will  be  routinely  evaluated  for  black  flies  and  other  medically 
important  insect  groups. 


1 


■i 

! 


-■  m uv  "-1. 1 '^'v-  iv"  k 


_i  on 

o o r*^  to  co 

o on  to  o n o 

m n n m ro  vo 

< UJ  • 

cm  cm  o cm  ro 

on  oo  o un  to  oo 

NCOOlfir-tO 

1-  (-  z 

• • ■ • • 

<U 

O 

on  to  o 

cvi  oo  i—  un 

to  LO  00  LO 

x: 

t-  co  z: 

r— 

t— 

i — r— 

4-> 

C 

•i“ 

z 

1— i 

to 

z:  i- 

O O N m N 

o n oo  o on  o 

ro  vo  o o 

0) 

\ LlJ 

o o i— 

<r>  co  un  oo  vo  i — 

to  oo  **  «— 

•r- 

on  ^ 

• • • • 

r— 

UJ  o 

co  on  o 

o oo 

ON  00  O ro  r-  o 

u_ 

l—  < 

CO 

u 

to 

r-“ 

00 

z 

►— < 

V*- 

z:  <40 

o o oo  on  oo 

N N VO  O 0O  O 

rvcocnmro 

o 

on  an  o o r- 

O O CNJ  ^ CM  (\J 

vo  ro  o lo 

on  z 

• • • « • 

to 

UJ  < 

o 

r—  f— 

r-  r-  O 

OJ 

1-  X 

4-> 

►—1 

*3 

CO 

o: 

on 

c 

z 

•r— 

* — 4 

4-> 

z:  lu 

•r— 

O O NOOO 

O O VO  OO  o 

fnvrooovo 

CO 

00  <£ 

oo  on  cm  o 

OO  ^ CVJ  r— 

LO  to  O VO  vo  vo 

UJ  LU 

• • • • • 

• ••••• 

<u 

h- 

OO  C\J  o 

r-  OO  r—  CVJ  o 

■tf-  vo  ro  ro 

.c 

►— < 

4-> 

00 

CO 

c 

•r* 

—i  on 

C 

< LU 

coroo^tooo 

LT>  CVJ  LD  0^  ON 

ID  00  Osi  l£>  «J-  O 

•r- 

(—  h- 

ON  CTi  »—  r— 

co  cvj  on  un  on 

ro  ro  lo  un  cvj 

g 

o 

CO 

r— 

CVJ 

ro 

CVJ  cvj  CVJ  r- 

OJ 

4J 

<D 

o* 

o* 

o • 

o 

\ 

z 

z 

z 

on 

u 

LU 

H 

o 

h-  LU 

OD 

L0 

on 

*4- 

hh  5^ 

UJ 

O r-  O csj  i—  UO 

LU 

OO  CO  VO  OD  ON  00 

UJ 

ro  ro  O cvj  ro  o 

CO  <_> 

h- 

OO  LT> 

i — 

VOID*-  f— 

b- 

*3  ro  o oo 

to 

c 

r— 

f—  j—  p— 

4-> 

o • o 

OJ 

z 

-* 

u 

r 0 

-3 

\ 

on 

x: 

lu  on 

to 

• — Q 

<u 

M Z 

fOCOOr-r-«J- 

CV1  VO  CO  CVJ  o*-  vo 

inuiF-iono 

z: 

oo  < 

r— 

r-  r—  0O 

CM  «d*  r- 

:n 

+->  • 

o • 

C VO 
0)  r** 
r—  on 

z 

r—  f— “ 

<u 

\ 

Q.  * 

on 

CD  r- 

UJ  UJ 

o:  -r- 

l-  <_> 

N 

*— « C 

in^Or-^Dr- 

ON  r—  CO  r—  O 

03  O 1—  00  00  o 

*3  'O 

CO  Lu 

un  ro  r— 

»—  un  ro  oo 

VO  o O O CM 

C C- 
(0  00 

o- 

r-  r-  r- 

z 

CO  * 
»—  CO 

o u 
i-  m 

UJ  «■’"*» 

■m  a. 

z:  to 

c 

►— « LU 

o * 

t- 1- 

o c 

ZD 

imnoooo 

lo  un  o o o o 

LO  LO  o o o o 

•r- 

h-  Z 

r-  1—  CO  oo  ro  oo 

r—  r—  ro  ro  ro  ro 

f—  f—  ro  ro  co  oo 

<+-  in 

on  *— « 

O (0 

lu  z: 

CO 

i- 

to 

4->  C 
r-  O 

«3- 

*1- 

3 IM 

f>+j  to  to 

4J  VO  VO 

U U vo  vo 

to  fO 

OJ  CD  CVJ  cvj 

OJ  QJ  CVJ  CVJ 

<D  QJ  CM  CM 

2-f 

u u ^ ^ 

u u ^ ^ 

u u ^ ^ 

ro  aj  CD  CO 

*3  ’"n  r 51 

fXJ  (O  CD  CD 

a <0  o to 

h- 

z:  z: 

-o-o  z z: 

• 

z 

IJ-i 

4->  f—  ofloB 

4->  oC  oC 

4-J  »—  o0  oG 

—1 

3 O 

3 O 

3 O 

LU 

u 

o u to 

o u to 

O U VO 

— J 

LU 

XT  4->  4->  ON  CM  r- 

x:  4->  4->  ON  CVI  f— 

X <P  UOV  CMr- 

CO 

CL 

4->  C QJlOrOr- 

4J  c CJ  VO  ro  r— 

4->  C 0)  vo  on  r- 

< 

UJ 

•r  O 3J  1 1 1 

•r-  O 0J  I I 1 

•r  o ai  1 1 1 

1 — 

a: 

3u-Daaa: 

3UT3aaa: 

3c  o *o  Q£  ac  oc 

TABLE  1.  Results  of  Controls  and  Repellent  Mesh  Jackets  for  Determining  the  Biting  Rates  of  Black  Flies  in  the 
Amazon  Basin,  Para,  Brazil,  1976.  (Cont.) 


c\j  co  oo  oo 


tnoONro 
a\  cm  »—  oo  cr» 


o ' ►— « 

hCO£ 


O CO 

*—  o 


to  to  o 

CM 


C0O1  o 
CM 


CO  O O f"*-  o 


CO  VO  fO  CO  N o 
r-  CM  CO  VO  LO  00 


CM  CO  i—  CO  VO 
f—  in  CM  Lf)  CM 
LO  r- 


o>  CO  CO  VO  00  O 
VON  CM  CM 
ID  CM 


CM  VO  O CO  O f— 

oo  <y> 
co 


CM  CO  O VO  to  o 
CM  ** 

»— 


00  00  O O I — 


CM  CO  CO  LO  CO  O 
vO 


CM  Ol  r-OlO«t 
CM  r—  VO  CM 


lO  i>>«  o LO  o o 

VO  r-  CM 


to  LO  o o o o 
J—  r—  CO  co  CO  co 


to  LO  o o o o 

r—  r—  CO  CO  CO  CO 


ss 

^ *3" 

4->  4-> 

+j  4-) 

to  VO 

CD  <D 

CM  CM 

0)  CD 

CM  CM 

u u 

u u 

CO  CO 

O CD 

«3  (O 

CD  CD 

1— 

*"D  r> 

z z 

z:  z: 

z 

UJ 

4~>  f— 

08  oO 

+J  »— 

os  08 

_J 

3 O 

3 O 

_l 

o u 

VO 

0 u 

VO 

UJ 

x:  4-> 

4->  C71  C\J  r- 

X -p 

4->  <T>  CM  r- 

Q. 

•M  c 

01  VO  CO  r- 

4-»  C 

0)  LO  CO  »— 

UJ 

•*-  o 

0>  1 t 1 

•r-  O 

CD 

1 1 1 

an 

30130:0:0' 

3UT5Q:0:0: 

■3T9 SB's? 


TABLE  1. 


r~%  co  o in.  rN  co 

OU1r-ni»l<f 


NONono 
« ooo»t  r*) 


O o co  o co  o 
<f  p-  n o in 


o co  o o 

cm 


CM  00  O O 
CM 


o o in.  r 

CO  CO  I—OO 


mV  Or- 

CM 


Mfinsno 

fnmonoN 


co  o co 

CM  cm  co 


I—  I—  o i— 


ro  co  co 
CO  CO  o 


O co  Cn  o O o 

CM  CM  o O CM  I— 


o o r-~  o o 

NOomcMoi 


OrsroMnco 

CM  i—  *1-  VO  *3- 
LO  CO  i—  CM 


■ — co  co  i — i — ro 
co  «d-  «3-  o 

CO  r—  r- 


LD  i—  CM  <!*■  CO  CTl 

*1-  O co  io  co 

•S-  CM 


LO 

VO 

00 

LU  K- 

o« 

z 

o- 

z 

o« 

z 

h-  LU 
*— • ^ 
CD  O 
< 
O*  -3 

1— 
00 
LU 
1 — 

CONOOcfct 
O Oc 
co 

f— 

00 

LU 

00  O'*  O O r—  CM 
CO  CM 
00  »— 

h— 

LU 

h- 

>—  co  rv  »—  un 

IM  CM  OOOlr- 

«— 


ctOOCOCMi 
CO  IM  CO 
CO 


Ol  IN  o MO  o 

CM  CM 


CO  (N  O O O 


CD  i—  CM  O CO  CO 
'S’  CO  Oi  CO 


co  in  cm  in  co  cn 
cn  «s-  in  co  in 


■ — CTl  M"  *3"  CT>  CO 
CD  *3  *}•  Cn  , — 


LD  LO  O O O O 
I—  r-  ro  CO  CO  CO 


CO  Lf>  o o o o 

I—  i—  CO  CO  CO  CO 


LO  to  o o o o 
r—  i—  CO  CO  CO  CO 


M r—  oO  o O 

3 O 

OS-  CO 

-C  M +J  CTl  CM  i— 
M C <V  CO  CO  r— 

r o in  i i i 
3 o -o  oc  a:  a 


Mr—  oO  <>C 

3 O 

OS-  CO 

-C  M M CTl  CM  i— 
M C 01  CO  CO  r- 
•i—  O 01  I I I 

3U  T)  QC  GC  ac 


Ml—  oO  oO 

3 O 

OS-  CO 

■C  M 4J  CTl  CM  r— 
M C 0)  CO  CO  I— 

•I-  o 0)  I I I 
3UTja;a:a: 


■i. 


ro 

S- 

rO 

CL 


l/> 

<D 

Q. 


</> 
\ z 
LU  O 


CO  O 


4-> 

c 

CD 

5 

ra 

QJ 

fc. 


uj 

ca 


■(-> 

0) 

o 

<o 

-o 


co 


+j 

c 

0) 

s- 

0) 


co  ^ 
o 
-J  c 
< n 


Q 

<u 


s- 

o 

4- 


to 

vz 

LU  O 


>> 

o 

IO 

u 


CO  <_> 


4- 

4- 


o 

»«  LU 

oe 


CTl 

O) 


<T> 

tyt 


to 

CTl 


o 

CTl 


JO 

'S' 

LO 

LO 


VO 


VO 


LO 

VO 


to 

VO 


a 


00 


VO 

rv. 


CO 


t0 


o 

</> 


4-> 

CD 

a 

to 


o 

u 

4-> 


O 

U 


CD 


0) 


S- 

u 

o 

rO 

4- 

•r-> 

T> 

JC 

(U  • 

</> 

TO  S- 

01 

I-  O 

E 

O -M 

o o 

“D 

0)  (0 

C 

t-  4- 

ra 

S-  0) 

</) 

o>  b 

■O 

JO  -r- 

c 

E 

to 

3 

JZ 

C i— 

<0 

» 

r—  3 

a> 

(O  cr 

o 

3 <u 

<a 

4-* 

4- 

U c 

fO  (0 

J- 

o 

0)  c 

4— 

-c  o 

+j 

TJ 

o> 

x“8 

-a 

CVJ  L. 

j- 

10 

o 

to  cl 

CJ 

4->  E 

<D 

C O 

S- 

04  <J 

to 

01 

a>  aj 

S-  J0 

*f~ 

Q. 

JO 

04  TO 

fc-  r— 

r- 

3 

r— 

to  O 

<0 

<D  U 

i- 

If) 

3 to 

+J 

CT>4-> 

- .,^-L-h--  -»  .;;j..-/.,aLV..g. 


- '---  -*-■  — -- 


TABLE  4.  Results  of  Selected  Skin  Repellents  for  Determining  the  Protection  Time  Against  Black  Fly  Speci 
in  the  Amazon  Basin,  Para,  Brazil,  1976. 


i co  <o  co 


C\J  C\J  C\J  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CO  CO  CO  CO 


CM  CM  Kf 


CM  CM  ^ ^ CM  CM  *1*  CM  CM  *0" 


ro 

-C 

L) 

■r 

o 

r— 

Q- 

<D 

CM 

S- 

ro 

5 

0) 

-Q 

C 

o 

O 

•f— 

■M 

4-J 

lO 

X3 

u 

Q) 

*r- 

t- 

r— 

0) 

CL 

TJ 

0) 

&- 

</> 

C 

<u 

o 

c 

o 

o 

t/> 

s- 

•f— 

o 

M- 

-o 

a> 

OJ 

■M 

E 

<o 

Q) 

■M 

U 

h- 

Z 

UJ 

0)  Lu 
> 

•i-  o5 

Lu 

r— 

•r- 

0)  Li. 
> 

■r-  oB 
U 

r— 

cu  u. 
> 

•r  oQ 
U. 

a>  u. 
> 

•r-  O0 

Lu 

4-> 

ro 

ction 

Z 

o 

o 

>> 

O 

>> 

O 

>> 

OJ 

h- 

L- 

oO  -M 

s- 

oO  -M 

u 

o0  -U> 

w 

o0  U> 

-C 

+J 

4-> 

C 

+->  4-> 

r“ 

4->  4-> 

C 

«M  -U> 

C 

U 

o 

UJ 

c a) 

C QJ 

C 0) 

c 53 

r a> 

c a> 

C 0) 

c a» 

ro 

u 

oc 

o <u 

aj  5 

O 0) 

aj  5 

o a> 

0)  2 

O 0) 

OJ  2 

Lii 

Q_ 

Uuhr 

O Q h-  I— 

O Q 1-  1- 

U Q h h || 

& 

(FIELD  FORM:  REPELLENT-JACKET) 


Repellent 


START  FINISH 


TEST  NO. 


LOCATION 


TRIAL  NO.  1 (5-10  Min.) 


No.  bites/mi n. 


TRIAL  NO.  2 (5-10  Min.) 


No.  bites/mi n. 


TRIAL  NO.  3 (5-10  Min.) 


No  bites/min. 


VI.  MAMALIAN  ECOLOGY 


A.  Surveillance  Program 

BACKGROUND:  Reported  mammalian  studies  in  the  Amazon  region  have  been 
mainly  taxonomic  and  conducted  in  riverine  ecology.  Little  work  has  been 
reported  on  the  influence  of  seasonal  changes  in  climate  and  vegetation  on 
animal  populations.  The  opening  of  the  Transamazon  highway  has  permitted 
access  to  a variety  of  ecologically  different  areas.  The  great  diversity  of 
tropical  habitats  and  mammalian  species  will  require  that  studies  be  made  in 
a variety  of  sites.  The  extremely  rapid  ecological  changes  caused  by  human 
perturbation  of  forests  in  the  American  tropics  also  necessitate  studies 
over  a sufficient  period  of  time  to  understand  corresponding  changes  in 
manmal  communities  and  abundance.  The  mammalian  ecology  program  has  been 
developed  to  monitor  the  changes  in  animal  populations  along  the  Transamazon 
as  man  changes  the  habitat  from  forest  to  cropland  and  pasture. 

Many  arboviruses  and  leishmaniasis  have  been  described  in  the  Transamazon 
area.  Brucellosis,  schistosomiasis,  leptospirosis  and  Chagas1  disease  have 
been  described  elsewhere  in  Brazil  with  both  sylvatic  and  domestic  mammals 
implicated  in  their  transmission  cycles.  Information  concerning  the  kinds  of 
mammalian  species  present  and  their  relative  abundance  in  various  habitats 
throughout  the  year  when  compared  with  simultaneous  epidemiological  and 
entomological  data  from  the  same  areas  assists  in  better  understanding  vector 
reservoir  interactions  and  the  present  and  potential  disease  risk  to  humans 
from  zoonoses. 

PROGRAM  DESCRIPTION:  The  trapping  program  compares  the  relative  abundance  of 

various  animals  in  different  habitats  over  time.  As  the  mammals  in  the 
Transamazon  region  are  highly  diversified,  small  changes  in  the  habitats  may 
cause  changes  in  the  types  and  relative  numbers  of  species  found  in  each. 
Seasonal,  climatic,  and  vegetation  changes  play  an  important  role  in  the 
reproductive  cycles  and  numbers  of  mammals  present  in  a population  during  any 
one  period  of  the  year. 

Trapping  in  the  two  sites  in  the  Maraba  area  and  the  two  in  the  Altamira  area 
which  were  selected  for  intensive  surveillance  last  year  has  been  continued. 
These  sites  were  selected  on  the  basis  of  obtaining  a representative  sample 
of  mammals  from  as  many  habitat  sites  as  possible.  Epidemiological  and 
entomological  data  have  been  collected  from  the  same  areas  in  order  to 
observe  the  disease  agents  present  in  humans  and  insects  as  well  as  in 
mammals.  Because  of  the  importance  of  different  habitats,  traps  were 
dispersed  in  cropland,  orchards,  and  in  as  many  forest  types  as  possible. 

The  edge  between  forest  and  cleared  areas  was  similary  covered.  Trapping  was 
carried  out  for  two  weeks  of  every  month  in  each  of  four  sites  in  the  Maraba 
and  Altamira  study  areas.  Wooden  live  traps  (155  x 175  x 450  mm)  and  Rinker 
live  traps  (80  x 80  x 255  mm)  were  placed  30  m apart  along  grids  both  in  the 
forest  and  agricultural  areas.  Because  some  mammals  are  essentially  arboreal, 
the  Rinker  traps  were  also  placed  in  trees  and  on  lianas.  Traps  were  also 
placed  in  colonists  houses  to  sample  the  manmals  living  there.  A mixture  of 
corn  and  bananas  was  the  most  common  trap  bait  used.  Larger  mammals  were 
hunted  to  obtain  necessary  specimens  for  evidence  of  disease  agents.  The 
general  forest  type  in  this  area  ranges  from  a tropical  moist  to  a tropical 
wet  forest  formation  as  described  by  Holdridge  (1947).  Richards  (1952) 
considers  almost  all  of  the  Amazon  basin  as  a tropical  rain  forest, 


1336 


disagreeing  with  Beard  (1944)  whose  classification  ranges  from  evergreen 
seasonal  to  semi -evergreen  seasonal  tropical  forests. 

The  trapping  site  in  Gleba  5 lote  5 (FIGURE  1)  was  located  26  Km  north  and 
30  Km  west  of  Maraba  near  Itupiranga  (5°  06'  S,  49°  24'  W).  Three  tyDes  of 
forest  were  sampled  on  this  site:  lowland  sidehill,  low  flatland,  and  upland 

forest.  A detailed  description  of  this  trapping  site  was  included  in  the 
1975  annual  report.  Traps  were  also  placed  in  secondary  scrub;  and  corn, 
rice,  and  cassava  fields. 

The  trapping  site  in  Gleba  29  lote  06  (FIGURE  2)  was  located  73  Km  north  and 
45  Km  west  of  Maraba  near  Jatobal  (4°  41 'S,  and  49°  32'  W).  Three  types  of 
forest  were  sampled  in  this  site:  lowland,  lowland  but  not  inundated,  and 

upland  forest.  See  the  1975  annual  report  for  a detailed  description.  Traps 
were  also  placed  in  secondary  scrub  and  agricultural  areas. 

The  trapping  site  in  Agrovila  da  Unilo  (FIGURE  3)  was  located  19  Km  south  and 
18  Km  west  of  Altamira  (3°  22'  S,  52°  23 1 W).  Four  types  of  forest  were 
sampled  in  this  site;  acai  swamp,  lowland,  sidehill,  and  upland  forest.  The 
1975  annual  report  also  contain  a detailed  description  if  this  site.  Traps 
were  also  placed  in  a tall  secondary  scrub  forest  which  had  been  cleared  4 
years  earlier,  and  in  agricultural  areas. 

The  trapping  site  in  Gleba  61  lote  02  (FIGURE  4)  was  located  54  Km  south  and 
150  Km  west  of  Altamira  (3°  41'  S,  53°  45'W).  Two  types  of  terrain  were 
sampled,  lowland  and  sidehill,  although  both  types  of  forest  appeared  similar. 
This  site  is  also  described  in  detail  in  the  1975  report.  Traps  were  also 
placed  in  secondary  scrub  and  in  agricultural  areas. 

Every  trap  location  in  each  trapping  site  has  a permanent  number  enabling  the 
exact  location  of  where  the  mammal  was  trapped  to  be  noted.  Thus,  the  exact 
location  where  a potential  zoonoses  may  exist  and  also  the  preferred  habitat 
type  of  a certain  species  can  be  determined.  This  information  is  invaluable 
in  combatting  future  disease  problems  in  which  animals  from  a similar  habitat 
are  involved. 

The  traps  were  checked  early  in  the  morning  to  reduce  the  number  of  animals 
dying.  Thi  captured  mammals  were  transferred  to  cloth  bags,  and  taken  to  the 
field  laboratory  for  processing.  At  the  field  laboratory,  located  near  the 
trapping  site,  each  mammal  was  given  a collection  number  which  corresponded 
to  the  date  and  area  (example:  M-01 0675-01 , which  is  decoded  as  M-Maraba, 
010675-  1 June  1975,  01  - first  specimen  processed  on  this  date).  All 
specimens  taken  from  one  animal  were  labelled  with  the  same  number.  The 
mammal  was  exsanguinated,  lcc  whole  blood  preserved  in  liquid  nitrogen  for 
virus  isolation  attempts,  a thick  and  a thin  smear  for  blood  parasite 
examination,  and  the  remainder  centrifuged  and  serum  preserved  in  liquid 
nitrogen.  After  the  animal  was  exsanguinated,  it  was  placed  in  a paper  bag 
with  chloroform,  and  the  ectoparasites  removed.  A representative  sample  of 
these  was  preserved  for  later  identification,  and  the  remainder  placed  in 
liquid  nitrogen  to  be  examined  for  pathogens.  The  standard  measurements 
(total  length,  tail  length,  hind  foot  length,  ear  length,  and  weight)  were 
recorded.  Organs  were  removed  and  preserved  both  in  liquid  nitrogen  for 
isolation  attempts,  and  in  10%  formalin  for  pathological  studies. 
Endoparasites  were  preserved  in  10%  formalin  also.  The  preserved  specimens 
were  sent  to  the  base  laboratory  in  Belem  for  processing  or  transhipment  to 


1337 


WRAIR.  Each  mammal  specimen  was  preserved  either  as  skin  and  skull, 
skull  only,  or  in  formalin  and  shipped  to  Belem  for  tentative  identification, 
and  later  to  taxonomists  specializing  in  South  American  mammals  for 
confirmation.  All  the  information  was  recorded  on  field  forms  which  were 
described  in  the  1975  annual  report. 

PROGRESS  TO  DATE:  From  November  1974  through  June  1976  2,249  mammals  had 

been  collected  by  trapping  and  hunting.  A panel  of  sera  from  291  mammals 
collected  along  the  Transamazon  highway  were  sent  to  Walter  Reed  Army 
Institute  of  Research  and  have  been  tested  for  plague  and  tularemia 
antibodies.  Sera  from  372  mammals  have  been  screened  for  Chagas' disease, 
toxoplasmosis,  leptospirosis,  brucellosis,  and  schistosomiasis  in  the  Belem 
laboratory.  Blood  smears  from  1,213  mammals  have  been  examined  for  anthrax, 
microfilariae,  trypanosomes,  and  malaria  in  Belem.  The  results  of  the 
laboratory  examination  will  be  discussed  in  the  following  section  of  this 
report.  The  changes  in  habitat  preferences  and  reproduction  of  sylvatic 
mammals  during  the  year  are  reported  in  the  respective  sections  of  this 
report  also. 


longitude  49°  24 


tlHAViUUUL'lM’.i'UUlvi 


B.  Laboratory  Test  Results  for  Mammal  Blood  and  Tissue 

BACKGROUND:  The  wild  maimals  collected  either  by  hunting  or  by  live  trapping 

in  the  four  trapping  sites,  described  in  the  surveillance  section  of  this 
report,  were  taken  to  a field  laboratory  to  be  processed.  The  animals  were 
exsanguinated,  whole  blood,  sera,  blood  slides,  and  organ  specimens  were 
preserved  and  shipped  to  the  main  laboratory  in  Belem.  The  sera  were  tested 
for  Chagas  disease,  toxoplasmosis,  leptospirosis,  brucellosis,  and 
schistosomiasis  antibodies  in  Belem  and  for  plague  and  tularemia  antibodies 
at  the  Division  of  Hazardous  Microorganisms,  WRAIR.  The  blood  slides  wero 
examined  microscopically  for  evidence  of  anthrax,  microfalariae,  trypanosomes, 
and  malaria.  The  organs  preserved  in  10%  formalin  were  sent  to  the 
Department  of  Veterinary  Pathology,  WRAIR  for  examination. 

RESULTS:  Sufficient  blood  serum  for  te-.ting  was  collected  from  372  manmals 

(TABLE  1).  The  rodents  with  299  serum  specimens  accounted  for  most.  The 
results  of  the  agglutination  test  for  the  determination  of  antibodies  against 
Trypanosoma  cruzi  (TABLE  2)  indicated  45%  of  the  rodent  sera  tested  in  Gleba 
61  Lote  02  West  of  Altamira  were  positive.  This  is  significantly  (x^  p<  0.99) 
more  than  the  rodent  sera  of  the  other  trapping  sites.  All  mammal  groups 
tested  from  each  trapping  site  included  at  least  some  sera  which  reacted 
positively  to  T.  cruzi  antigen  using  this  test.  Antibodies  to  Toxoplasma 
gondii  were  found  in  the  sera  of  only  five  of  the  308  mammals  tested  (TABLE  3). 
A titer  of  1:256  and  higher  was  considered  positive  for  infection. 
Leptospirosis  was  found  in  the  sera  of  10  of  the  80  rodents  from  trapping 
area  29-03  (TABLE  4).  Remaining  sera  were  rarely  positive.  The  slide 
agglutination  test  for  brucellosis  indicated  four  of  59  sera  in  trapping  site 
05-05  and  four  of  69  sera  in  29-03  were  positive  (TABLE  5).  Both  of  these 
sites  are  located  in  the  Maraba  area.  The  IHA  test  for  schistosomiasis 
produced  low  titers  in  a number  of  mammal  sera,  but  only  one  rodent  sera 
produced  a titer  as  high  as  1:256  (TABLE  6). 

Blood  specimens  from  1,213  mammals  were  examined  microscopically  for  presence 
of  anthrax,  microfilariae,  trypanosomes,  and  malaria.  Microfilariae  were 
found  in  11  slides,  and  seven  slides  contained  trypanosomes  (TABLE  7). 

Neither  anthrax  nor  malaria  were  observed. 

A panel  of  sera  from  291  mammals  was  sent  to  the  Division  of  Hazardous 
Microorganisms,  WRAIR,  to  be  tested  for  plague,  tularemia,  and  rickettsia. 

No  plague  antibodies  were  found  using  the  indirect  hemagglutination  test. 

The  test  for  opsonizing  antibody  indicated  one  rodent  sera  was  positive  for 
tularemia.  The  results  have  not  been  received  on  the  rickettial  antibody 
test. 

Pathological  specimens  of  lung,  liver,  heart,  kidney,  spleen,  stomach,  large 
intestine,  and  small  intestine  preserved  in  10%  formalin  were  sent  to  the 
Department  of  Veterinary  Pathology,  WRAIR  to  be  examined,  but  the  results 
from  the  600  cases  are  not  available  as  yet. 

Few  mammal  sera  of  blood  slides  were  positive  for  pathogenic  organisms.  The 
high  percentage  of  rodent  sera  containing  antibodies  which  reacted  in  the 
Trypanosoma  cruzi  agglutination  test  was  significantly  higher  in  trapping 
site  61-02  than  in  the  other  three.  More  tests  will  be  conducted  next  year 
to  determine  if  T.  cruzi  is  actually  present,  or  if  other  antibodies  are 
cross  reacting  wTth  this  antigen.  There  are  very  few  livestock  along  the 


1343 


Transamazon  highway  at  the  present  time,  but  cattle  are  being  brought  from 
the  south  Brucellosis  may  become  more  common  in  the  future.  Continued 
surveillance  will  be  necessary  to  discover  what  changes  in  the  disease 
picture  will  take  place  in  the  future  as  more  livestock  are  introduced  and 
more  stable  agricultural  practices  are  utilized. 


1344 


i 


TABLE  1.  Numbers  of  Blood  Sera  Collected  from  Mammals. 


SPECIES 


Rodents 


Marsupials 


ALTAMIRA 


Edentates 


Carnivores 


TABLE  2.  Results  of  the  Agglutination  Test  for  the  Determination  of 
Antibodies  Against  Trypanosoma  cruzi . 


SPECIES 

Marsupials 

Monkeys 

Edentates 

Rodents 

Carnivores 

TOTAL 


3 5 

1 2 


■02  05- 

05 

29-0 

3 

TOTAL 

TOT  POS 

TOT 

POS 

TOT 

POS 

TOT 

22  9 

17 

2 

9 

18 

53 

- 

- 

- 

- 

3 

5 

- 

- 

- 

- 

1 

2 

67  6 

34 

6 

53 

50 

199 

1 

- 

- 

- 

1 

1 

90  15 

51 

8 

62 

73 

260 

, -yr;,.-.  — - 


I 


j: 

TABLE  3. 


Results  of  the  Indirect  Hemagglutination  Test  for  Antibodies  to 
Toxoplasma  gondii 


SPECIES 

3/5 

61 

1 

-02 

05- 

■05 

29-03 

TOTAL 

POS 

TOT 

POS 

TOT 

POS 

TOT 

POS 

T0T 

| POS 

TOT 

Marsupials 

0 

6 

164 

23 

14096 

17 

0 

10 

r 

56 

Monkeys 

o i 

5 

- 

■ 

- 

■ 

■ 

- 

0 

5 

Edentates 

0 

2 

- 

- 

1 

1 

- 

0 

2 

Rodents 

0 

61 

1512 

80 

164 

1512 

1:1024 

42 

★ 

1 

61 

1 

244 

Carnivores 

- 

- 

0 

1 

- 

- 

- 

- 

m 

1 

TOTAL 

0 

74 

★ 

1 

104 

3* 

59 

■ 

71 

5* 

308 

* A titer  of  1:256  was  considered  positive, 
/zcm. 


1347 


1 


i 


I 

i 


£ 


61-02 


29-03 


TOTAL 


SPECIES 


POS  TOT  POS  TOT  POS  TOT  POS  TOT  POS  TOT 


Marsupials  | 0 


5 18(5)  23  18(7)  18  18(2)  10  0 56 

1:16(5)  1:16(3)  1:16(2) 

132(3) 


18(1)  5 

1:128(1) 


Edentates  I 0 


0 5 


0 2 


Rodents  18(4)  52 

132(3) 
1256(1) 


18(3)  73  18(4)  40  18(6)  57 

1:16(6)  1:16(4)  1:16(2) 

132(4)  132(1)  132(3) 

164(5)  164(1) 

1:128(3) 


Carnivores 


0 1 


TOTAL  II 


58  0 


A titer  of  1:256  was  considered  positive 


X? J ~ - ? -**»**• 


Edentates 


Rodents 

Carnivores 


TOTAL 


^7 


C.  Habitat  Preference  and  Relative  Abundance  of  Mammals 

BACKGROUND:  As  most  studies  of  neotropical  mammals  have  mainly  been 

concerned  with  taxonomy,  few  data  are  available  on  population  and  habitat 
preference.  A certain  species  may  exist  in  a given  habitat  in  insufficient 
numbers  to  be  considered  an  economic  or  a medical  problem.  As  man  enters 
and  alters  this  habitat,  clearing  the  forest  and  planting  crops  for  example, 
the  population  density  of  this  species  may  rise  drastically,  providing  an 
efficient  host  for  a number  of  pathogens  which  were  never  a problem  in  the 
area  before. 

OBSERVATIONS:  Traps  were  placed  at  intervals  of  30  m in  the  forest, 

secondary  scrub,  and  cropland  in  the  four  trapping  sites  described  in  the 
mammalian  surveillance  section  of  this  report.  Monkeys,  large  rodents  and 
other  mammals  which  do  not  readily  enter  traps  were  hunted  both  during  the 
day  and  the  night.  As  the  manmals  were  captured,  the  type  of  habitat  in 
which  each  was  collected  was  recorded.  The  total  number  of  trap  nights  (one 
trap  set  out  for  one  night  equals  one  trap  night)  for  each  habitat  type  was 
also  recorded. 

During  the  mammal  surveillance  program,  a total  of  2,243  mammals  were 
collected.  Forty  one  were  collect’d  by  hunting,  and  the  remaining  2,202  were 
trapped  in  a total  of  31,722  trap  nights.  This  gave  a trapping  success  of 
6.94  mammals  per  100  trap  nights  (TABLE  1).  The  highest  trapping  success  was 
in  the  secondary  scrub  with  11.86  mammals  per  100  trap  nights.  The  cropland 
with  5.18  mammals  per  100  trap  nights  had  the  lowest  success.  The  trapping 
success  in  the  four  trapping  sites  ranged  from  4.74  to  9.81  trap  nights  per 
mammal.  The  number  and  species  of  mammals  collected  by  hunting  are  presented 
in  TABLE  2.  All  except  the  rabbit  (Sylvilagus  brasi 1 iensis) , which  was  shot 
in  a grass  clearing,  were  collected  in  the  forest. 

The  data  demonstrate  a preference  of  certain  species  to  certain  habitats 
(TABLE  3,  TABLE  4).  Of  the  marsupials,  only  Monodelphis  brevicaudata 
preferred  the  secondary  scrub  and  cropland  to  the  forest.  The  other 
marsupials  tended  to  prefer  the  forest  habitat.  Rodents  such  as  Oryzomys 
capito,  0.  macconnel  1 i , ..'■acomys  guianae  and  Proechimys  definitely  preferred 
the  forest  habitat.  Oryzomys  delicatus,  Zygodontomys  lasiurus  and  Oxymycterus 
sp.  preferred  the  secondary  scrub  and  cropland  habitats  over  the  forest. 

Most  of  the  species  were  found  in  all  four  trapping  sites  (TABLE  4),  although 
Oryzomys  bicolor,  0.  delicatus  and  Holochilus  brasiliensis  were  only 
collected  in  the  Maraba  sites.  Zygodontomys  lasiurus  was  collected  only  in 
the  forest  in  small  numbers  in  one  Altamira  site  while  it  was  definitely  most 
plentiful  in  the  secondary  scrub  and  cropland  in  the  Maraba  sites. 

Oxymycterus  sp.  was  one  of  the  most  commonly  collected  species  in  the  cropland 
and  secondary  scrub  in  the  Altamira  sites,  but  was  rarely  taken  in  the  Maraba 
sites.  The  three  species  which  appeared  to  undergo  a distinct  population 
increase  when  the  forest  was  cleared,  crops  planted,  and  the  land  allowed  to 
revert  to  secondary  scrub  must  be  observed  closely.  The  possibility  of  it 
becoming  a host  to  pathogens  which  may  lead  to  an  enzootic  and  later  to  an 
epidemic  when  the  human  population  becomes  involved  is  always  present  when  a 
mammalian  population  increases  rapidly. 

The  relative  abundance  of  mammals  during  the  various  months  of  the  year  plays 
an  important  role  in  some  disease  cycles.  The  monthly  mammalian  density  in 
the  forest  appears  to  be  more  stable  than  either  the  secondary  scrub  or  the 

1352 


cropland  {FIGS.  1-3).  In  the  Altamira  trapping  sites  (FIG.  1)  the  trapping 
success  in  the  secondary  scrub  was  lower  when  the  trapping  success  in  the 
cropland  was  higher,  and  was  higher  when  the  trapping  success  in  the  cropland 
was  lower.  This  suggests  a migration  of  the  small  mammals  between  the 
secondary  scrub  and  cropland  which  depends  on  the  food  availability  in  each. 
Very  little  correlation  between  the  trapping  success  in  the  secondary  scrub 
and  cropland  in  trapping  sites  05-05  (FIG.  2)  and  29-03  (FIG.  3)  in  the 
Maraba  area  is  evident.  The  monthly  fluctuations  are  much  higher  in  the 
Maraba  area  than  in  the  Altamira  area.  The  species  of  mammals  which  prefer 
the  secondary  scrub  are  also  common  in  the  cropland  habitat  (TABLE  4).  The 
forest  preferring  species  tended  to  remain  in  the  forest  and  were 
infrequently  found  in  the  other  two  habitats. 


I 


TABLE  1.  Total  Mammals  Trapped  per  Habitat  in  the  Four  Trapping  Sites  per 
100  Trap  Nights. 


TRAP  SITE 

FOREST 

SCRUB 

CROP 

TOTAL 

3/5 

4.56 

6.83 

4.06 

4.74 

61-02 

5.86 

10.41 

5.70 

6.67 

05-05 

5.43 

17.92 

3.46 

6.71 

29-03 

10.06 

10.90 

8.10 

9.81 

TOTAL 

6.32 

11.86 

5.18 

6.94 

/zcm. 


All  the  Mammals  Except  Syl vilagus  brasiliensis  Which  was  Collected  in  a 
Clearing  were  Collected  in  the  Forest. 


~ r.  SM 


T 


\ 


I 

[ 


■ 

■■ 


i 

i 


] 


TABLE  3.  Species  Collected  per  10,000  Trap  Nights  in  Three  Habitat  Types. 


SPECIES 

FOREST 

SCRUB 

CROPLAND 

TOTAL 

Marsupial ia 

Caluromys  philander 

3.5 

— 

1.5 

2.5 

Monodelphis  brevicaudata 

5.5 

62.8 

44.2 

22.7 

Marmosa  cinerea 

13.0 

— 

-- 

8.2 

M.  murina 

3.0 

2.0 

1.5 

2.5 

M.  parvidens 

1.0 

— 

-- 

0.6 

Philander  opossum 

28.5 

-- 

-- 

18.0 

Metachirus  nudicaudatus 

7.0 

ro 

O 

— 

4.7 

Di del  phis  marsupialTs 

36.5 

-- 

— 

23.0 

Rodentia 

Oryzomys  bicolor 

9.0 

6.1 

2.9 

7.2 

0.  capito 

209.6 

44.5 

63.3 

152.6 

0.  concolor 

19.0 

14.2 

7.4 

15.8 

5.  delicatus 

1.5 

116.0 

73.6 

42.6 

0.  macconnelli 

26.0 

6.1 

4.4 

18.3 

Neacomys  quianae 

39.5 

8.1 

8.8 

28.0 

N.  spinosus 

12.5 

34.4 

20.6 

17.6 

Nectomys  squamipes 

12.0 

14.2 

19.2 

13.9 

Zyqodontomys  lasiurus 

3.5 

502.0 

135.5 

109.4 

Oxymycterus  sp. 
Holochilus  brasiliensis 

0.5 

0.5 

220.6 

4.0 

72.2 

50.1 

0.9 

Rattus  rattus 

2.0 

-- 

5.9 

2.5 

Proechimvs  spp. 

194.0 

99.2 

56.0 

149.7 

Mesomys  nispidus 

4.0 

• * 

2.5 

-fS 


3 

\ 


CO  r — CT*  VO  O lf>  O 

CM  UO  r—  f-.  CO 


i cm  «3-  r-*.  cm  . 

I • • • • 10 

(VJ«tCVjCvJ  g 
O 


l 00 

» CO 

1 1 1 1 CM  1 1 1 

« 1 o 

o 

o 

o 

CO 

Osl 

CVJ 

o 

CO 

CO 

vo  vo  <y» 

1 00  CD  VO 

r-  VO  Os 

; to  CM 

1 coco  1 

1 00 

CO  CO  f— 
CM 

r-  LDfON 

as  o f— 

CM  CM 
CM 

in  as 

r—  r>- 

r“ 

lO  o> 

1 * • 1 1 1 1 1 

1 (MO  1 

i i in  oo 

l *3-  1 

1 *3"  I 

o 

■ 

1 t£)N  1 I 1 1 1 

1 • • » 

i » • ■ 

l • 1 

00 

1 • 1 

in 

r-N.  f— 

cm  in 

CO 

o *— 

r~ 

CM 

in 

CO 

o 

h~ 

LO 

r^voco^rvcrta^o 

1 i—  CO 

i tomtn^CMN  i 

\ in  vo 

a 

LU  , 

I • • 



i • • 

cc 

•-COOMr-tOtO*- 

*3-  o 

oo  in  in  co  in  »— 

CM  00 

u> 

o 

*—  00 

00  r- 

r“  r* 

CO 

ir> 

u. 

r— 

C > 

<T3  0)10, 
*—  ^ <D 
•»—  -Q I S- 
•C  . <V 
oj  </>  c 


E »—  <T3 

O <1)  CO 

u-o  o 

3 O E 


</>  Q. 
C O 
0) 

03  *0  l- 

C ♦«-  0> 

•*"  > *o 
t-  i-  c 
3 (O  (0 
E Qjr- 


8 £12 


O »— 

O to  »— 

•r-  S-  3 0> 
-O  O U->  C 
, O »—  I 03  C 
CO UJ  OIU  O 

>J-f-  u *r-  U 

E I a.  c «—  o 


•*“  O 03  O 0)  03 

-♦-»  n ol  oral  El 


► lololol: 





P 


I 


D.  Annual  Reproduction  in  Five  Common  Rodents 

BACKGROUND:  Information  on  reproduction  in  neotropical  mammals  is  scant, 

and  the  few  published  studies  are  from  localities  north  of  the  equator. 

Litter  sizes  and  seasons  during  which  the  mammals  produce  young  are  two 
important  factors  in  the  epidemiologic  studies  of  zoonotic  diseases. 
Transmission  cycles  of  pathogens  require  susceptible  individuals,  and  young 
mammals  are  able  to  fill  this  need.  Studies  in  Panama  (Fleming,  1970,  Tesh, 
1970)  indicated  that  most  rodents  bred  year-round,  but  the  sample  sizes  were 
too  small  to  show  meaningful  differences  between  seasons.  In  northern 
Colombia,  although  breeding  was  observed  throughout  the  year,  the  highest 
percentage  of  reproductively  active  females  was  found  from  January  through 
March  (unpublished  manuscript). 

OBSERVATIONS:  During  the  present  study  the  mammals  collected  in  the  mammal 

surveillance  program  in  the  two  trapping  sites  in  Maraba  and  the  two  trapping 
sites  in  Altamira  were  examined  for  evidence  of  being  reproductively  active. 
Temperature  and  rainfall  data  compiled  during  this  same  period  indicated  that 
73%  of  the  total  annual  precipitation  fell  during  the  5 month  ra’ny  season 
from  December  through  April,  and  the  remaining  27%  fell  during  the  7 month 
dry  season.  The  wet  season  was  somewhat  cooler  than  the  dry  season.  The 
monthly  average  high  temperature  ranged  from  29°C  to  32°C  and  the  monthly 
average  low  ranged  from  24°C  to  25°C  throughout  the  year.  Although  the 
rainfall  varied  greatly  between  the  wet  season  and  dry  season,  the 
temperature  varied  slightly. 

Females  of  Oryzomys  capito,  Neacomys , Zygodontomys,  Oxymycterus  and 
Proechimys  were  collected  during  this  period.  The  pregnant  or  lactating 
individuals  were  considered  reproductively  active. 

FIGURE  1 shows  the  annual  reproductive  activity  of  Oryzomys  capito  and 
Proechimys  per  2 month  running  means.  Females  of  Oryzomys  capito  and 
Proechimys  were  reproductively  active  during  all  months  of  the  year.  A much 
higher  proportion  of  Oryzomys  capito  was  reproductively  active  just  before 
and  during  the  wet  season,  and  least  active  during  the  first  part  of  the  dry 
season.  Proechimys  females  tended  to  follow  the  seasons  more  closely  showing 
very  little  reproductive  evidence  during  the  dry  season,  and  a high 
percentage  during  the  rainy  season. 

FIGURE  2 shows  the  annual  reproductive  activity  of  Neacomys  and  Oxymycterus 
per  two  month  running  means.  The  females  of  Neacomys  were  reproductively 
active  during  all  the  months  of  the  year,  although  more  evidence  of 
reproduction  occurred  during  the  rainy  season  than  during  the  dry  season.  They 
became  more  active  shortly  before  the  start  of  the  dry  season.  The 
Oxymycterus  females  were  reproductively  active  during  the  rainy  season,  but 
during  the  driest  months  of  July  through  October,  the  22  adult  females 
collected  showed  no  signs  of  being  pregnant  or  lactating. 

FIGURE  3 shows  the  annual  reproductive  activity  of  adult  Zygodontomys  females 
per  2 month  running  means.  Female  Zygodontomys  were  reproductively  active 
throughout  the  year  and  at  least  50%  of  the  females  were  active  during  most 
months  of  the  year.  During  the  rainy  season  months  of  March,  April  and  May, 

36  of  the  37  adult  females  collected  were  either  pregnant  or  lactating. 

Of  the  five  rodents,  all  except  Oxymycterus  females  showed  some  reproductive 

1361 


I 


activity  throughout  the  year.  The  Oryzomys , Proechimys , Neacomys  and 
Oxymycterus  females  were  much  more  active  during  the  rainy  season  than  during 
the  dry  season.  Only  Zyqodontomys  reproduced  in  high  numbers  throughout  the 
year.  Allowing  sufficient  time  for  the  young  mammals  to  terminate  nursing 
and  to  lose  any  maternal  antibodies  they  may  have,  the  highest  numbers  of  new 
potential  hosts  would  be  available  during  the  second  half  of  the  rairy  season 
and  the  first  part  of  the  dry  season.  Data  compiled  from  the  insect 
surveillance  program  conducted  in  the  same  sites  in  which  the  mammals  were 
captured  indicated  the  insect  populations  were  high  during  the  rainy  season 
and  the  first  half  of  the  dry  season  (see  Entomology).  A high  density  of  new 
susceptible  hosts  during  the  same  period  when  the  insect  vectors  are  also  at 
a high  density  is  an  ideal  situation  for  the  transmission  of  pathogens. 


KTftJfr 


MONTHS 


Oryzomys  18  34  27  23  34  40  41  25  15  19  15 

Proechimya  21  17  15  II  22  33  20  13  8 8 7 


FIGURE  1. 


The  annual  reproductive  activity  of  female  Oryzomys  caoito  and 
Proechimys.  The  upper  graph  shows  the  average  rainfaTl  per  2 
month  running  means,  the  lower  graph  demonstrates  the  percent 
of  adult  females  either  pregnant  or  lactuting  per  2 month  running 
means,  and  the  numbers  below  indicate  the  sample  size  of  adult 
females. 


- -iitfr-mM,  r* 5V 


vt-t 


^'Vr  ■ -’t-  U,  jt, 


400 

200 

0 


Njccorays  14  IS  2 3 8 12  II  6 8 10  5 4 

Qxyrr.yctcrus  75  536  18  15  77  086 

FIGURE  2.  The  annual  reproductive  activity  of  female  Neacomys  and 

Oxymycterus.  The  upper  graph  shows  the  average  rainfall  per  2 
montn  running  means,  the  lower  graph  demonstrates  the  percent  of 
adult  females  either  pregnant  or  lactating  per  2 month  running 
means,  and  the  numbers  below  indicate  the  sample  size  of  adult 
females. 


1364 


K'M  OF  RAINFALL 


fcMO 


Mu 

■1 

■1 

IH] 

IH 

H mk 

■ i^m 

HI 

f-  ; 

i 

£ \ 

^1 

II 

II 

* H mg- 

H 1 
HE  ■ 

Mm  < 

II 

III 

■■ 

HH 

|| 

. ■■■ 

■■■ 

III 

IBs 

Id  1 

1 M,'  ; 

MONTHS 


Zyqodontom 
FIGURE  3.  TI 


16  28  30 


22  29  20  18 


The  annual  reproductive  activity  of  female  Zygodontomys.  The 
upper  graph  shows  the  average  rainfall  per  2 month  running  means, 
the  lower  graph  demonstrates  the  percent  of  adult  females  either 
pregnant  or  lactating  per  2 month  running  means,  and  the  numbers 
below  indicate  the  sample  size  of  adult  females. 


INFALL 


E.  Photographic  Documentation  Program 


BACKGROUND:  Little  information  is  presently  available  on  the  ecology  of 

Amazonian  plant  formations.  The  effects  of  the  wet  and  dry  seasons  on  leaf 
fall,  flowering,  and  fruiting  are  largely  unknown.  The  length  of  time  for 
agricultural  crops  to  grow  and  produce  fruit  in  the  many  different  soil  types, 
and  how  many  crops  may  be  planted  and  harvested  before  the  soil  becomes 
exhausted  has  not  been  recorded.  After  the  agricultural  plots  are  abandoned 
the  secondary  scrub  takes  over.  The  rate  of  this  secondary  succession  and 
the  make  up  of  plant  species  play  an  important  role  in  the  mammalian  and 
insect  populations.  Through  photographic  documentation  the  types  of  forest, 
secondary  scrub  and  cropland  in  which  wild  mammal  surveillance,  entomological 
and  epidemiological  programs  are  being  conducted  are  being  recorded.  The 
seasonal  changes  in  vegetation  and  water  levels  throughout  the  year  are  also 
documented. 

PROGRAM  DESCRIPTIONS:  A series  of  photographic  stations  are  located  along 

the  traplines  in  trapping  area  3/5,  west  of  Altamira,  and  also  in  trapping 
area  29-03,  west  of  Maraba.  Photographs  are  taken  at  each  area  every  2 
months.  Each  photographic  station  contains  a permanent  mount  for  the  camera, 
and  a target  at  which  the  camera  is  aimed.  The  photograph  number  is  recorded 
on  a form  (FIGS.  1-4)  for  future  reference  to  compare  the  series  of 
photographs  from  each  photographic  station  for  monthly  changes  in  vegetation. 
The  photographic  stations  are  located  in  agricultural  areas  as  well  as  in  the 
forest  to  document  the  influx  of  mammals  as  the  crops  produce  fruit.  The 
seasonal  changes  in  the  water  level  of  swamps,  and  the  inundation  of  lowland 
forests  are  also  recorded  in  this  manner.  These  photographs  will  be  shown  to 
botanists  and  tropical  plant  ecologists  for  identification  of  specific  plants 
and  vegetation  types. 


1 


[ 


i 


\ 


OBSERVATIONS:  The  changes  in  the  vegetation  between  the  wet  season  and  dry 

season  vary  slightly  in  the  forest  habitat.  Even  though  the  water  levels 
change  drastically  in  the  streams  flowing  through  the  lowland  forests. the 
overall  vegetation  changes  little.  The  secondary  scrub  and  cropland  habitats 
undergo  a very  noticeable  change  between  the  wet  and  dry  seasons  as  they  have 
no  overhead  canopy  to  limit  the  effects  of  the  sun  and  wind.  Corn  and  rice 
grow  quickly;  they  may  be  harvested  3 months  or  less  after  planting.  Corn, 
rice,  and  cassava  are  normally  planted  together.  The  corn  is  harvested  first, 
the  rice  shortly  after,  and  the  cassava  much  later.  When  the  land  is 
abandoned  to  secondary  succession  its  grows  '•■•ickly  and  becomes  impenetrable 
within  a few  months. 


/zcm. 


Photographic  SL;.  lions  at  Caeba  5/5.  Lote  4G,  West  of  Altamira 


Pat  ot 


Boll  numbers; 


Station  number 


(Palm  tree  nr  rd  in  field) 


FIGURE  1.  Front  of  Photographic  Form  Used  for  Trapping  Site  3/5. 


FIGURE  3 


Front  of  photographic  Form  Used  for  Trapping  Site  29-02 


1369 


Photographic  Stations  at  Gleba  29.  Lote  03.  Weat  of  Maraba 


Date: 


Station  number 


1  (tree)  122° 


2  (stump)  90° 


3  (palm) 


4  (palm) 


5  (tree) 


6  (tree)  230c 


7  (tree) 


8  (tree) 


9  (tree) 


10  (tree)  118° 


11  (tree) 


12  (palm) 


13  (tree) 


14  (tree)  112c 


15  (palm) 


16  (culvert)  270° 


Roll  numbers: 


17  T-rd  east  to  Jatobal,  aimed  at  emergent  on  ridge  at  300° 


FIGURE  4.  Back  of  Photographic  Form  Used  for  Trapping  Area  29-02. 


PROJECT  3A762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  073  Disease  transmission  in  tropical  populations 
Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Beard,  J.S.:  Climax  vegetation  in  tropical  America.  Ecology  25: 
127-158,  1944. 

2.  Cuadrado,  R.  R.  and  I.  G.  Kagan:  The  prevalence  of  antibodies  to 
parasite  diseases  in  sera  of  young  army  recruits  from  the  United  States  and 
Brazil.  Am.  J.  Epid.  86;  330-340,  1967. 

3.  Fleming,  T.  H.:  Notes  on  the  rodent  faunas  of  two  Panamanian 
forests.  J.  Mammal.  51_:  473-490,  1970. 

4.  Forattini,  0.  P.:  Some  data  on  the  domesticity  of  Aedes  scapularis 
(Rondani)  in  Sao  Paulo,  Brazil.  Mosquito  News  21_:  295-296,  1961. 

5.  Healy,  G.  R.,  I.  G.  Kagan,  and  N.  N.  Gleason:  Use  of  the  indirect 
hemagglutination  test  in  some  studies  of  seroepidemiology  in  the  western 
hemisphere.  Health  Lab.  Science  7_:  109-116,  1970. 

6.  Holdridge,  L.  R.:  Determination  of  world  plant  formations  from 
simple  climatic  data.  Science  105:  367-368,  1947. 

7.  Lacaz  C.  da  Silva,  R.  G.  Baruzzi,  and  W.  Siqueira,  Jr.:  Introduqao 
a Geografia  M6dica  do  Brasil.  Editora  Blucher  Ltda.,  Sao  Paulo,  1972. 

8.  Reinert,  J.  F.:  Mosquito  generic  and  subgeneric  abbreviations 
(Diptera:  Culicidae).  Mosquito  Systematics  7 : 105-110,  1975. 

9.  Richards,  P.  W.:  The  Tropical  Rain  Forest.  University  Press, 
Cambridge,  1952. 

10.  Tesh,  R.  B.:  Notes  on  the  reproduction,  growth  and  development  of 
echimyid  rodents  in  Panama.  J.  Mammal.  51^:  199-202,  1970. 


/zcm. 


1373 


mmrnmrmMmrm 


mm* 


IB  M40URCI4  IITIMATI 

A MNOMMtOMAL  HAN  TR* 

k f UN  OR  (7"  A«m«*) 

k NUMBER 

RISC  AL 

76 

10.0 

1.160 

C TYM:  4 AMOUNT: 

TlAB 

77 

9 

56  u 

• • REIRONllBLI  OOO  ORBANIIATlON  | | 

IB  RlftPOMMMQ  OHBAMIlA 

ION  | 

l 

«*•**  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
wnu‘  Washington,  DC  20012 

US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
•»»•»*  Bangkok,  Thailand 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


A.  o * T C RREV  *UM*RV 

75  07  01 


4 KINO  or  4UMMART 


D.  Change 


10  MO  COOft.*  PROGRAM  ( L(M|N  T 

S2759A 


fc.  CONTRIBUTING 


CARDS  11UF 


U 


• BOR^ICUMTt* 

u 


RNO-ICT  NUMHR 


3A762759AS3T 


' A*i*C^CC«MIO^ 

DA  PC  61*65 


RE  BRA  CRN  0* 

NA 


76  07  01 


k (Mr*  INITR'N 

HL 


TASK  ARC  A NUMBER 


00 


WMWOWT  COM  TWO L trwWOL 

DD DR*ErAR)6S6 


U aricine  oata  - 
contractor  Acccaa 

Dw  □ wo 


a livcl  or  tow 


WOWK  UNIT  MUNICH 


"oTT 


I YlTLR  (P<H*N  rntm  (•cwrirr  cir*»tUt*Um  C*M» j* 

(U)  Tropical  and  Subtropical  Diseases  in  Military  Medicine 


1 IClIN  TIP  lC  ANO  TfCHNOLOOIC  AL  A 


MM* 


010100  Microbiology  002600  Biolo, 


'll  tT.HT  BTTi 

72  08 


3CT 

llriMArfo  comAlit' 

CONT 


If  SPOKlI*.!  IMOlVIOUAi. 

*“l  JOY,  R.  J.  T.  COL 

T«L»>.Q..:  ?L-t?_S7^-  ^-iS^  1 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

n mnB  iksisx  na  sir  Ban;  asaiac  Tap 

Disease 


I A PUNDlNO  ASINCV 


DA 


ta  mrpormanci  m«V*»oo  ‘ 

C.  In-House 


NftlMClBAL  IN  Vli  T IG  A TOR  (?<*•»•*  MAR  I#  V < AuPmIi  tmtlltrnHmm) 

»•» BEACH,  D.J.  , COL 

▼BLirNONi  2817776  

IOCIAL  aiCURITT  ACCOUNT  NUMICR 
AUOClATf  IH  VI  ATI  BA  TORI 

"*“■  BANCROFT,  W.  H.,  LTC 
■ ami:  SCOTT,  R.  M.  , Lfc 


(U)Infectious  Diseases;  (U)Virus  Diseases:  (U)Bacterial 
(U)rarasitic  Diseases:  (U)Veterinarv  Medicine;  (U)Hepatitis ; (U)Dengue  fever 


> TECHNICAL  OBJECTi  VI.  14  APPROACH,  14  RROORCM  (?>*"!•*  IMtrfAtfl  H*»PApA*  IBvulftetf  *r  "iMn  PN«*N  Nil  •»  M«t  It  t~lty  C«N  > 

23.  (U)  To  define  the  ecology  and  basic  biology  of  causal  agents  of  tropical  diseases, 
and  to  study  environmental  variables  that  may  affect  the  performance  of  U.S.  servicemen 
in  tropical  areas. 

24.  (U)  Routine  diagnostic,  epidemiological,  serological,  biochemical,  microbiological, 
and  entomological  methods  are  being  utilized.  Field  studies  are  emphasized  and  are 
supplemented  by  appropriate  laboratory  investigations. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Dengue  and  hepatitis  virus  infections  in  nan  were  investigated 
with  emphasis  on  epidemiological  and  clinical  aspects.  Primary  dengue  infections  with 
shock  were  clearl / documented  but  occurred  rarely  in  Bangkok.  Hepatitis  B virus  was 
found  to  be  transmitted  during  the  first  six  months  of  life  to  60$  of  infants  of  mothers 
who  were  hepatitis  B carriers.  Mothers  whose  older  children  were  hepatitis  B carriers, 
or  who  had  e-antigen  and/or  high  complement  fixation  titers  of  hepatitis  B surface 
antiger.  in  their  blood  were  at  the  highest  risk  of  transmitting  hepatitis  B to  their 
offspring.  Only  a minority  of  adult  carriers  in  the  Thai  population  could  be  accounted 
for  by  mother-'-;  ild  transmission.  Saliva  was  shown  to  be  a vehicle  of  hepatitis  B 
transmission.  Studies  of  mosquito  parasites  in  Thailand  have  identified  25  host- 
parasite  aC'Oclat ions.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75-30  Jun  76. 

Support  in  the  amount,  of  $290,000  from  FY  7T  funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  i Jui- 
30  dep  76. 


0D,:°.VJ498 


*1W 


Project  3A762759A331  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  074  Tropical  and  Subtropical  Disease  in  military 
medicine 

Investigators 

Principals:  COL  Douglas  J.  Beach,  MSC;  LTC  William  H.  Bancroft, 

MC;  LTC  David  E.  Davidson,  VC;  LTC  Eliot  J. 

Pearlman,  MC;  LTC  Robert  M.  Scott,  MC;  Douglas  J. 

Gould,  Ph.D.;  Joe  T.  Marshall,  Ph.D.;  MAJ  John  L. 

Brown,  VC,  MAJ  Garrett  S.Dill,  Jr.,  VC;  MAJ  William 
T.  Watson,  VC,  MAJ  Stephen  C.  Hembree,  MSC;  CPT 
Richard  G.  Andre  , MSC,  CPT  Charles  L.  Bailey,  MSC; 

CPT  Gary  D.  Phillips,  MSC;  CPT  Robert  J.  Schneider, 

MSC;  Chiraphun  Duangmani,  M.D.;  Ananda  Nisalak, 

M.D.;  Kwanyuen  Lawhaswcsdi,  DVM;  Santi  Haoupara, 

M.D.;  Rapin  Snitbhan,  M.D.;  Pramool  Sukwatana,M.D. ; 
Prayot  Tanticharoenyos,  DVM;  Markpol  Tingpalapong , 

DVM;  MSGT  Robert  E.  Weaver,  Jr.;  SFC  William  K. 

Andrews;  SP6  Jerome  Karwacki; 

Associate:  Aree  Boriharnvanakett , M.T. ; Chalam  Chantarasri, 

B.Sc.j  Sitipantu  Chaiyanunta,  B.Sc.;  LTC  Edward  B. 
Dcberstyn,  MC,  Pairatana  Gunakasem,  M.D.;  MAJ 
Gilbert  R.  Irwin,  MC;  Suchart  Jatanasen,  M.D.; 

Yeepu  Keokarn,  R.N.;  Nonglak  Khananuraksa,  B.Sc.; 
Kenneth  L.  Knight,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Pralong  La-or  Nguen, 

DVM , RTA ; Chumpun  Manomuth , B.Sc.;  Kol  Mongkolpanya ; 
Sumitda  Narupiti,  B.Sc.;  Suchitra  Nimmanitya,  M.D.; 
Naowayubul  Nutkumhang,  B.Sc.;  Nathada  Plavuth,  R.N.; 

COL  Suchai  Premabutra,  DVM,  RTA;  Rampa  Rattanarithikul ; 
Miodrag  Ristic,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Edward  H.  Stephenson,  VC; 
Chumduen  Satavuthi,  B.Sc.;  Surapee  Siridhoranakul , 

M.D.;  Pinit  Simasathien,  M.D.,  Suleela  Srimachaibovorn , 
B.Sc.;  Sommai  Sringarm , M.D.;  Suranga  Srimarut;  Panor 
Srisongkram,  B.Sc.;  MAJ  Vanich  Vanapruks , MC,  RTA; 
Suwana  Vitanomsat,  B.Sc.;  Suwatana  Vongpradist 


1375 


I.  VIRUS  DISEASES  OF  MAN  AND  ANIMALS 


A.  DENGUE  HEMORRHAGIC  FEVER 

1.  Shock  Syndrome  in  Primary  Dengue  Infections 

OBJECTIVE : To  document  by  intensive  laboratory  investigation 

primary  dengue  infection  associated  with  dengue  shock  syndrome 
(DSS ) • 

BACKGROUND : During  the  year  1974  five  patients  presented  at  the 

Bangkok  Children's  Hospital  (BCH)  with  shock  and  preliminary 
laboratory  findings  suggestive  of  primary  dengue  infections.  This 
report  summarizes  the  clinical  histories  of  these  patients  and 
reviews  laboratory  findings , establishing  them  as  primary  dengue 
infections  with  shock. 

DESCRIPTION:  The  detection  of  patients  for  this  study  has  been 

previously  described,  (SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual 
Report  1974-1975).  Briefly,  patients  with  a hospital  admission 
diagnosis  compatible  with  dengue  infection  were  studied.  Clinical 
diagnosis  of  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever  and  grading  of  the  severity 
of  disease  followed  criteria  previously  reported  (SEATO  Medical 
Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1974-1975).  Virus  isolation 
used  a direct  and  delayed  plaque  technique  on  LLC-MK2  cells. 

Isolates  were  identified  by  plaque  reduction  neutralization  tests. 
Serum  obtained  from  each  individual  was  tested  for  antibodies  by 
hemagglutination  inhibition  (HI),  and  plaque  reduction  neutralization 
(PRNT),  Primary  dengue  infections  were  tentatively  identified 
as  patients  with  convalescent  HI  titers  of  less  than  1:640. 

Final  classification  of  primary  infections  was  based  on  classical 
characteristics,  i.e.  , absent  or  low  titered  antibodies  in  the 
acute  serum  and  the  development  of  IgM  during  convalescence.  IgM 
was  separated  from  serum  proteins  by  sucrose  gradient  ultracentri- 
fugation. Fractions  were  tested  for  content  of  IgM  by  radial 
immuno-dif fusion  and  for  antibody  activity  by  HI.  Antibody 
activity  was  proved  to  be  associated  with  IgM  by  a significant 
reduction  in  HI  titer  following  treatment  of  the  fraction  with  2- 
mer capt oe  thano 1 . 

Previous  investigation  of  shock  associated  with  secondary  dengue 
infections  have  indicated  a fall  in  Blc/Bla  concentrations  in  acute 
serum  related  to  the  severity  of  disease.  Blc/Bla  levels  were 
determined  in  primary  patients  using  commercially  prepared  radial 
diffusion  plates  (Hyland  Laboratories). 


1376 


Three  patients  with  shock  met  the  preliminary  criteria  for  primary 
dengue.  Clinical  and  Laboratory  findings  on  these  patients  are 
presented. 


Patient  77,  a four  year  old  Thai  f emale , had  a five  day  history 
of  fever,  anorexia  and  vomiting.  On  the  day  of  admission,  she 
had  a cough,  a rash  on  both  arms,  and  became  increasingly  lethargic. 
Physical  examination  revealed  an  axillary  temperature  of  38.5°C, 
a pulse  of  116  and  a blood  pressure  (B?)  of  120/80  mm  Hg  (pulse 
pressure  40  mm  Hg).  There  were  petechiae  >n  both  arms.  The 
tourniquet  test  was  positive.  Her  posterior  cervical  lymph  nodes 
were  enlarged  and  her  liver  was  palpated  at  the  right  costal 
margin.  Her  hematocrit  was  42%,  WBC,  6,900  per  mm3;  and  platelet 
count,  186,000  per  mm3. 

Despite  the  administration  of  intravenous  fluids , vascular  collapse 
developed  (Figure  la).  Plasma  was  administered  intravenously  with 
satisfactory  improvement  and  the  patient  was  discharged  from  the 
hospital  on  the  ninth  day  of  disease. 

Patient  91,  a 12  year  old  Thai  female , had  a five  day  history  of 
fever,  headache  and  abdominal  pain.  On  the  day  of  admission  a 
rash  developed  and  the  child  became  increasingly  obtunded.  Physical 
examination  revealed  mild  dehydration,  an  axillary  temperature  of 
37°C , and  a pulse  of  100.  A light  macular  rash  was  present  over 
her  entire  body  and  petechiae  were  on  her  face  and  arms.  The 
tourniquet  test  was  positive.  Her  .liver  was  palpable  below  the 
right  costal  margin.  The  patient  was  in  shock  with  cold,  clammy 
extremities;  a weak,  thready  pulse;  and  a BP  of  110/90  mm  Hg 
(pulse  pressure  20  mm  Hg).  Her  hematocrit  was  47%;  WBC,  6,400 
per  mm3;  and  platelet  count,  42,000  per  mm3. 

Intravenous  fluids  led  to  improvement  (Figure  lb).  During  the 
first  12  hours  in  hospital,  the  patient  passed  a black  tarry  stool 
and  the  petechiae  became  more  widespread.  The  patient  was  dis- 
charged on  the  eighth  day  of  disease. 

Patient  103,  an  eight  year  old  Thai  female,  had  a four  day  history 
of  fever  and  vomiting.  On  admission,  she  had  a temperature  of 
38°C;  a pulse  of  124  and  a BP  of  90/80  mm  Hg  (pulse  pressure  10 
mm  Hg).  Her  tonsils  were  injected  and  her  liver  was  palpable  3 
cm  below  the  right  costal  margin.  No  petechiae  were  noted; 
however,  the  tourniquet  test  was  positive.  Her  hematocrit  was  47%, 
WBC,  3,300  cells  per  mm^;  and  platelet  count,  146,000  per  mm3. 


I 

i 

i 


i 

J 

i 


■i 


Intravenous  fluid  was  administered  and  the 
at  100/60  mm  Hg  (Figure  1 c).  The  patient 
seventh  day  of  disease. 


blood  pressure  stabilized 
was  discharged  on  the 


*4-  a* v — * 


1377 


PATIENT  77(o) 


BLOOD  PRESSURE 

mm  H<j  00' 


- ^MC O 

&£££  ! 


PATIENT  91  lb) 


BLOOD  PRESSURE 
mm  Mq 

to< 


TEMPERATURE  4 

•c  srJ 


' Ur. 


TEMPERATURE 


HEMATOCRIT  X 


PLATELET 

COUNT  K 10*  W 


PATIENT  103(C) 

SHOCK 

'*>1  i 


i i W 


oat  op  0<tCAlC 


3 t 7 #7 

DAY  OP  DISEASE 


100  A 

BLOOO  pressure  \ 

mm  Hg  00-1 


39 

TEMPERATURE 

*C  37 


HEMATOCRIT  % 


totflE  i 


MTCNT  • (d) 


no 

■LOOO  MtSMI 
»«i  ao 


TIMPtftATUaC 

•c 


tCIMTOCWT  % **• 

to- 


n>  ioo  H 


day  of  discase 


5 i 7 S ZO 
MY  Of  OISE  ASF 


Figure  I Diogroms  of  the  clinicol  course*  of  primory  dengue  potient*  (o)  77,  (b)  91  ond  (c) 
103,  showing  the  relationship  of  several  clinicol  ond  laboratory  voriables  to  the  onset 
of  shoo.  A secondary  dengue  patient,  (d)  6 is  diagramed  for  comparison 


The  above  three  primary  infections  may  be  compared  to  the  following 
patient  with  a secondary  infection  and  shock. 

Patient  6 , a seven  year  old  Thai  female,  was  admitted  with  a five 
day  history  of  fever,  drowsiness  and  abdominal  pain.  On  the  day 
of  admission  she  became  increasingly  lethargic  and  manifested 
clinical  signs  of  shock.  Her  temperature  was  35.5°C,  her  pulse 
was  120  and  her  BP  was  80/60  mm  Hg  (pulse  pressure  20  mm  Hg).  Her 
liver  was  palpable  1 cm  below  the  right  costal  margin.  Petechiae 
were  noted  on  both  upper  extremities;  the  tourniquet  test  was 
positive.  Her  hematocrit  was  48%;  WBC , 5,600  per  mm^;  and  platelet 
count,  85,000  per  mm3. 

During  the  first  six  hours  in  the  hospital,  the  pulse  pressure  fell 
to  10  mm  Hg  (BP  80/70  mm  Hg),  the  pui.se  rate  rose  to  130,  and  the 
hematocrit  rose  to  52%.  Administration  of  intravenous  fluid  led 
to  recovery  and  the  patient  was  discharged  on  the  eighth  day  of 
illness  (Figure  Id). 

Laboratory  Studies : 

A strain  of  D3  virus  was  isolated  from  the  acute  serum  of  Patient 
103.  The  other  two  patients  with  primary  dengue  infections  did 
not  yield  virus  isolates;  however,  D1  virus  was  isolated  from  two 
siblings  of  Patient  77  with  undifferentiated  fevers. 

HI  tests  of  sequential  serum  specimens  showed  a broadly  reactive 
antibody  response  (Table  1).  PRNT  antibody  gave  the  best  indica- 
tion of  the  infecting  virus  type,  since  they  were  nearly  mono- 
specific;  Patients  77  and  91  had  D1  and  Patient  103  had  D3. 

Low  titers  of  PRNT  antibody  were  found  in  the  convalescent  sera 
of  Patient  77  to  D2 , D3 , D4  and  chikungunya.  Unlike  the  others, 
Patient  77  had  received  plasma  infusions.  The  plasma  administered 
was  not  tested  for  antibodies;  however,  nearly  100%  of  adults  in 
Bangkok  have  antibodies  to  dengue  and  chikungunya  viruses.  The 
low  titers  cf  antibodies  found  in  this  patient  may  have  been 
acquired  from  the  plasma  transfused.  The  HI  and  PRNT  titers  of 
Patients  77,  91  and  1C3  may  be  compared  with  those  of  Patient  6 
in  whom  high  titered  cross  reacting  antibodies  were  found. 

Using  sucrose  gradient  ultracentrifugation,  immunoglobulin  separa- 
tions were  performed  on  sera  collected  early  and  late  in  the  course 
of  infection  (Table  2).  IgM  was  found  in  fractions  two  to  five 
while  IgG  was  found  in  fractions  six  to  twelve.  In  the  early  sera, 
the  IgM  fractions  contained  higher  HI  titers  of  anti-dengue 
immunoglobulin  :han  did  the  IgG  fractions.  Convalescent  sera 


1379 


NT  = Not  tested 

Dengue  3 virus  isolated  from  this  patient 


The  sucrose  adient  fraction  with  the  highest  concentration  of  IgM  or  IgG  is  shown. 


contained  predominantly  IgG  antibody.  Although  IgM  antibody  was 
often  present  against  more  than  one  type  of  dengue,  the  titer  to 
the  infecting  virus  type  appeared  to  be  higher  and  to  last  longer. 
Immunoglobulin  separations  on  early  convalescent  sera  from  Patient 
77  showed  only  IgG  antibodies  to  chikungunya.  Thxs  strengthened 
the  impression  that  antibodies  to  this  agent  were  passively 
acquired  through  transfusion. 

Concentrations  of  Blc/Bla  were  determined  on  sequential  sera  from 
the  presumptive  primary  dengue  patients  (Figure  2).  The  concentra- 
tions of  these  proteins  were  found  to  be  subnormal  in  the  acute 
sera  from  each  case.  By  the  time  convalescent  sera  were  obtained, 
the  levels  had  risen  to  the  normal  range.  These  findings  were 
similar  to  those  previously  reported  in  secondary  dengue  infections 
and  were  also  seen  in  Patient  6. 

Fatal  Cases: 

There  were  five  fatal  cases  studied  xn  1974.  Of  the  fatal  cases, 
two  (Patients  16  and  112)  did  not  have  detectable  HI  antibody  in 
their  acute  sera.  Since  convalescent  sera  were  unavailable, 
sequential  studies  of  antibody  titers  and  complement  levels  could 
not  be  performed.  These  two  patients  are  presented  here  as 
possible  primary  dengue  infections. 

Patient  16 , a 12  year  old  Thai  female , had  a five  day  history  of 
fever,  myalgia  and  lethargy.  Two  days  prior  to  admission  she 
developed  anorexia  and  abdominal  distention.  On  admission,  a 
physical  examination  revealed  an  obtunded  child  with  an  axillary 
temperature  of  38.5°C.  Petechiae  were  present  in  the  axilla  and 
subclavicular  areas  and  the  tourniquet  test  was  positive.  Her 
axillary  and  right  submandibular  lymph  nodes  were  enlarged,  her 
abdomen  was  distended  and  her  liver  was  not  palpable.  The  patient 
was  in  shock  with  pallor,  cold  extremities,  restlessness  and 
tachypnea.  Her  pulse  was  120  and  BP  was  90/80  mm  Hg  (pulse 
pressure  10  mm  Hg).  Her  hematocrit  was  54%,  WBC , 6,800  per  mm3. 

Rapid  administration  of  plasma  led  to  a fall  in  the  hematocrit  to 
40%;  however,  neither  the  pulse  pressure  nor  the  blood  pressure 
improved.  Intravascular  coagulation  and  acidosis  developed.  Despite 
treatment  with  plasma,  sodium  bicarbonate  and  heparin,  the  patient 
died  eight  hours  after  admission  to  the  hospital. 

Patient  112,  a seven  year  old  Chinese  male,  had  a four 'day  history 
of  fever,  anorexia  and  abdominal  pain.  One  day  prior  to  admission 
he  developed  diaphoresis,  cold  extremities  and  lethargy.  A rash 
was  noted  on  his  arms  and  legs.  On  admission  he  was  lethargic  with 


1382 


DAY  OF  DISEASE 

Figure  2.  Sequential  pic/Bla  concentrations 
from  patients  with  primary  and 
secondary  dengue  infections. 


138» 


an  axillary  temperature  of  39.5°C.  His  pulse  rate  was  102  and  BP 
was  110/90  mm  Hg  (pulse  pressure  20  mm  Hg).  His  hematocrit  was 
44%;  WBC,  4,150  per  mm^ ; and  platelet  count,  110,000  per  mm3. 

Intravenous  fluid  administration  led  to  a transient  improvement 
in  clinical  status  and  a rise  in  pulse  pressure  to  30  mm  Hg. 
However,  after  three  hours  the  child  became  restless  and  vomited 
copious  amounts  of  fresh  blood.  The  pulse  pressure  fell  to  10  mm 
Hg  (BP  110/100  mm  Hg)  and  shock  reappeared.  Plasma  and  fresh 
whole  blood  were  administered,  but  the  hematemesis  continued. 
Despite  volume  replacement,  there  was  no  improvement  and  the  child 
died  12  hours  after  admission. 

Laboratory  Studies : 

Dengue  type  2 was  isolated  from  the  blood  of  Patient  16  and  type 
DE  from  Patient  112.  Although  there  were  no  detectable  HI  anti- 
bodies, the  PRNT  on  the  acute  sera  revealed  low  titers  of  antibody 
against  the  infecting  virus  in  both  patients.  Immunoglobulin 
separations  on  the  acute  specimens  were  not  informative  as  the 
concentrations  of  dengue  antibodies  were  too  low  to  be  detected. 
From  Patient  112  a second  serum  was  obtained  after  death.  HI 
antibody  determinations  on  this  serum  showed  low  titer  IgG  anti- 
bodies against  Dl-4,  JE  and  chikungunya.  These  antibodies  were 
probably  passively  introduced  by  transfusion.  The  fatal  cases 
also  had  markedly  depressed  concentrations  of  Blc/Bla. 

DISCUSSION : The  development  of  dengue  shock  syndrome  in  older 

children  has  been  associated  epidemiologically  with  secondary 
dengue  infections  (1).  It  was  suggested  that  anamnestic  antibody 
in  the  presence  of  dengue  antigens  triggered  an  immunologic 
mechanism  (2).  Three  patients  described  here,  however,  had  no 
evidence  of  prior  dengue  infections.  They  demonstrate  that 
primary  dengue  infections  can  cause  the  dengue  shock  syndrome  in 
older  children.  Furthermore,  in  two  fatal  dengue  infections, 
the  absence  of  HI  antibodies  and  the  low  titered  PRNT  antibodies 
against  the  isolated  virus  types  in  acute  sera  are  also  consistent 
with  primary  infections.  Although  not  substantiated  by  studies 
on  convalescent  sera,  these  data  suggest  that  primary  dengue  may 
alsj  be  associated  with  fatalities. 

DSS  presenting  in  primary  dengue  infections  had  similar  clinical 
and  laboratory  courses  to  those  previously  reported  for  secondary 
infections  (3).  The  demonstration  of  a depletion  in  complement 
factor  three  in  primary  infections  supports  an  immunological 
mechanism  for  shock.  The  development  of  immune  complexes  may  be 
related  to  viral  and  host  factors  as  yet  unknown.  Immune  complexes 
may  be  more  likely  in  secondary  dengue  infections  because  of  the 


t i - \ 
ml*.*  ^*mt**.t*  Jtlr.  ■ 


1384 


anamnestic  antibody  response  during  the  time  when  viral  antigens 
are  circulating.  Conceivably, immune  complexes  may  occur  in  primary 
dengue  infections  in  patients  who  produce  the  appropriate  amount 
and  type  of  antibody  at  the  appropriate  time. 

In  Bangkok,  primary  dengue  with  shock  is  infrequently  recognized. 

It  occurred  in  less  than  5%  of  the  DHF  patients  admitted  to  the 
BCH  in  1974.  Dengue  is  endemic  in  Bangkok.  The  true  incidence  of 
primary  dengue  with  shock  could  not  be  caluclated  as  no  information 
was  available  on  the  number  of  individuals  infected  or  at  risk. 
However,  each  secondary  dengue  infection  must  be  preceded  by  a 
primary  infection.  If  the  severe  manifestations  of  dengue  occurred 
as  commonly  in  primary  infections  as  they  do  in  secondary,  the 
number  of  patients  hospitalized  with  primary  infections  should  be 
similar  to  the  number  hospitalized  for  secondary  infections. 

Further  studies  are  required  to  elucidate  both  the  mechanism  and 
epidemiology  of  DSS  in  primary  and  secondary  infections. 

SUMMARY : During  1974,  114  patients  with  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever 

were  studied  at  the  Bangkok  Children's  Hospital.  Over  40%  of  the 
patients  had  dengue  shock  syndrome.  Five  fatal  cases  were  included 
in  the  study.  Primary  dengue  infections  were  identified  by  absent 
or  low  titered  antibodies  in  acute  sera  and  the  development  of 
IgM  antibodies  during  convalescence.  Three  patients,  age  4,  8 and 
12  years  had  primary  dengue  infections  with  shock.  Although  no 
convalescent  sera  could  be  tested,  two  other  patients  with  fatal 
disease,  age  7 and  12  years,  also  appeared  to  have  primary  infec- 
tions. At  the  time  of  shock,  patients  with  primary  infections 
had  subnormal  concentrations  of  complement  factor  3.  The  data 
show  that  in  older  children  dengue  shock  syndrome  associated  with 
complement  depression  can  occur  during  primary  as  well  as  secondary 
infections . 

2.  Detection  of  Dengue  Infected  Mosquitoes  by  Direct 
Fluorescent  Antibody  Microscopy 

OBJECTIVE : To  detect  the  presence  of  dengue  virus  in  human  serum 

using  the  mosquito  inoculation  technique. 

BACKGROUND:  This  is  a continuation  of  work  previously  reported 

(4 For  the  identification  of  dengue  antigens  in  mosquitoes  a 
direct  fluorescent  antibody  (DFA)  technique  was  added  to  the 
plaque  isolation  technique.  This  report  reviews  the  experience 
with  both  techniques  for  the  identification  of  dengue  infections 
in  patients  seen  at  the  Bangkok  Children's  Hospital  (BCH)  in  1975. 

DESCRIPTION : To  the  previously  described  standard  plaque  assay  in 

LLC-MK2  tissue  culture  (TC)  and  the  mosquito  amplification  technique, 


1385 


inoculation  to  A_.  aegypti  followed  by  the  standard  plaque  assay 
(MI/TC),  was  added  an  immuno fluorescent  technique  similar  to  that 
used  at  the  Pacific  Research  Section  of  the  National  Institute  of 
Allergy  and  Infectious  Disease,  Hawaii  (5). 

Anti-dengue  fluorescent  antibody  conjugate  was  made  from  immune 
high-titered  human  sera.  The  globulin  in  immune  sera  was  pre- 
cipitated using  50%  ammonium  sulfate.  The  precipxtate  which 
contained  gamma  globulin  and  traces  of  albumin  was  dissolved  in 
0.01  M phosphate  buffer  pH  7.5  (P.B.)  to  a final  volume  approxi- 
mately equal  to  that  of  the  original  serum  sample , and  then 
dialyzed  against  PB  overnight. 

After  determining  the  total  amount  of  protein  present,  the  globulin 
solution  was  diluted  with  PB  to  a final  concentration  of  10  mg 
protein/ml  and  chilled  in  an  ice  bath.  A freshly  made  carbonate- 
bicarbonate  buffer  (0.5  M,  pH  9.0),  was  added  to  the  chilled  globulin 
in  an  amount  equal  to  10%  by  volume  of  diluted  globulin.  To  the 
chilled  globulin  0.0125  mg  FITC/mg  protein  was  added  slowly  with 
constant  stirring.  The  solution  was  stirred  overnight  in  the  cold 
(12-18  hrs.),  then  dialyzed  against  PB  to  remove  any  unbound 
fluorescein  dye.  Merthiolate  1:10,000  was  added  as  a preservative 
and  the  conjugate  was  frozen  in  aliquots. 

The  heads  of  infected  mosquitoes  were  squashed  under  a coverslip 
(16  heads  per  slide)  and  stained  with  fluorescein  conjugated  anti- 
body by  a direct  method.  In  early  experiments  each  individual 
mosquito  body  was  ground  and  tested  by  micro  plaque  assay.  Later, 
pooled  mosquito  bodies  were  tested  by  a standard  plaque  assay. 

Control  mosquitoes  consisted  of  non-infected  mosquitoes,  and 
mosquitoes  infected  with  Dl,  2,  3 and  4 reference  suckling  mouse 
brain  strains. 

Each  reading  was  made  by  two  observers:  S.V.  and  W.H.B.  or  S.V. 

and  A.N. 

PROGRESS : A comparison  of  the  results  of  virus  isolation  using 

the  standard  plaque  isolation  technique  with  and  without  mosquito 
amplif ication  is  shown  in  Table  1.  Using  the  mosquito  isolation 
step  five  strains  of  dengue  were  identified  beyond  those  found  by 
plaque  isolation  alone.  Only  one  strain  was  isolated  using  the 
plaque  isolation  technique  without  mosquito  amplification.  The 
five  additional  strains  isolated  using  the  mosquito  amplification 
step  came  from  sera  with  titers  of  1:2560,  1:640,  1:40  and  1:20. 

For  the  DFA  technique,  test  sensitivity  and  specificity  was 
determined  after  arraying  the  results  in  a "decision  matrix"  and 


1386 


Table  1.  Isolation  of  Dengue  Viruses  from  Patients'  Plasma 
by  Standard  and  Mosquito  Amplification  Techniques 


HI  Titer 


Number 


Isolation 


Standard  TC 

MI/TC 

£20 

23 

9 (39)* 

10  (43) 

40 

4 

0 (0) 

1 (25) 

80 

5 

2 (40) 

1 (20) 

160 

19 

1 (5) 

1 (5) 

320 

20 

2 (10) 

2 (10) 

640 

27 

0 (0) 

2 (7) 

1280 

39 

0 (0) 

0 (0) 

2560 

32 

0 (0) 

1 (3) 

5120 

17 

0 (0) 

0 (0) 

10240 

7 

0 (0) 

0 (0) 

Total 

193 

14  (7.2) 

18  (9.3) 

* Percent  of  number  tested  at  each  titer. 


calculating  the  "conditional  probability"  of  true  positive  results 
(sensitivity)  and  true  negative  results  (specificity)  (3).  Each 
decision  matrix  was  built  by  comparing  DFA  test  results  to  some 
"either  - or"  characteristic  of  the  test  materials,  e.g.,  successful 
isolation  of  virus  from  individual  mosquitoes  or  from  individual 
patients.  Separate  determinations  were  made  for  each  observer, 

S.V. , W.H.B.  and  A.N.  Each  matrix  was  constructed  as  follows: 


Infection  + 

Infection  - 

DFA+ 

a 

c 

DFA- 

b 

d 

True  positive  (TP) 
True  negative  (TN) 


a+b 

d 

c+d 


Each  ratio  gives  the  conditional  probability. 

DFA  ability  to  detect  dengue  in  control  mosquitoes  was  shown  in 
the  following  matrices. 


S.V. 


Dengue  1 


TP 

TN 


0.83 

0.40 


W.H.B. 

Dengue  1 


TC+ 

TC- 

TC+ 

TC- 

DFA+ 

0 

5 

DFA+ 

0 

5 

DFA- 

1 

7 

DFA- 

1 

7 

TP  = 

0.0 

TP  = 0. 

0 

TN  = 

0.  58 

TN  = 0. 

58 

Dengue  2 

Dengue  2 

TC+ 

TC- 

TC+ 

TC- 

DFA+ 

10 

3 = 

DFA+ 

4 

2 

DFA- 

2 

2 

DFA- 

6 

3 

TP 

TN 


0.40 

0.60 


1388 


Dengue  3 


Dengue  3 


TC+ 

TO 

DFA+ 

0 

4 

DFA- 

0 

12 

TP  = unknown 
TN  = 0.75 


TC+ 

TC- 

DFA+ 

0 

0 

DFA- 

0 

14 

4 

TP  = unknown 
TN  = 1.00 


Dengue  4 


TC+ 

TC- 

DFA+ 

1 

u 

DFA- 

6 

6 

TP  = 0.14 

Dengue  4 


TC+ 

TC- 

DFA+ 

0 

0 

DFA- 

6 

TN  = 0.60 


TP  = 0.0 
TN  = 1.0 


All  negative  controls  were  arbitrarily  considered  to  be  DFA 
negative  by  both  observers  and  ncne  yielded  a virus  isolate. 

The  plaque  isolation  technique  did  not  appear  to  be  capable  of 
isolating  virus  from  all  mosquitoes  inoculated  with  suckling  mouse 
brain  strains.  This  suggests  that  either  the  tissue  culture  or  the 
mosquito  was  not  very  sensitive  to  mouse  adapted  dengue  strains. 

The  results  of  DFA  for  mosquitoes  inoculated  with  plasma  of  DHF 
patients  are  summarized  in  Table  2.  There  was  a correlation 
between  the  DFA  readings  of  the  pair  observers.  Separate 
determination  of  matrices  were  made  for  each  observer,  S.V., 

W.H.B.  and  A.N.  as  follows: 


W.H.B. 


TC+ 

TC- 

DFA+ 

7 

28 

DFA- 

3 

62 

— TO 

TO 

9 

8 

1 

82 

n = 100 

P = 0.9 

N - 0.9 

Table  2.  Detection  of  Dengue  Antigen  in  Mosquitoes 
by  Direct  Fluorescent  Antibody 

(Performance  of  Two  Observers,  S.V.  and  W.H.B.  or  S.V.  and  A.N.) 


I 


s.v. 


and 


A.N. 


TC+  TC- 


n = 80 
TP  = 1.0 

TI,T  = 0.55 


n = 80 
TP  = 0.6 

TN  = 0.56 


DISCUSSION  AND  SUMMARY : As  has  been  found  previously;  the 

mosquito  amplification  step  gave  a greater  number  of  virus  isola- 
tions than  the  standard  plaque  assay  alone.  The  DFA  test  as 
performed  in  this  laboratory  is  difficult  to  interpret.  Although 
it  appears  to  be  relatively  sensitive  in  some  cases  it  showed  a 
very  poor  specificity.  In  the  absence  of  a second  test  capable 
of  detecting  dengue  antigens  per  se  it  is  difficult  to  determine 
the  usefulness  of  the  DFA  test. 

3 . Surveillance  of  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever  Cases 
in  Thailand,  1975 

OBJECTIVE:  To  provide  laboratory  confirmation  of  clinically 

diagnosed  arbovirus  infections  reported  to  the  Ministry  of  Health. 

BACKGROUND : In  the  Kingdom  of  Thailand  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever 

(DHF ) remains  the  greatest  identifiable  cause  of  hospitalization 
and  death  among  children  under  the  age  of  15  years.  Control  of 
this  mosquito  borne  virus  infection  will  require  a knowledge  of 
its  prevalence  and  distribution.  In  1973  a laboratory  based 
serological  surveillance  program  for  DHF  was  initiated  by  the 
Ministry  of  Health  to  confirm  reported  clinically  diagnosed 
Hemorrhagic  Fever  (HF).  Adequate  collection  of  blood  samples  was 
achieved  in  1974.  An  earlier  report  contains  the  results  from 
laboratory  surveillance  of  DHF  in  1973  and  1974  (4).  The  present 
report  compares  the  results  of  laboratory  surveillance  over  the 
years  1974  and  1975.  In  addition  to  surveillance  for  dengue 
infections,  the  program  allowed  for  the  serological  confirmation 
of  other  infections  such  as  Japanese  encephalitis  (JE). 

DESCRIPTION : The  filter  paper  disc  collection  method  and  Hemagglu- 

tination Inhibition  (HI)  testing  have  been  previously  described  (7). 
In  1973  acute  and  convalescent  bloods  from  clinically  diagnosed 
DHF  patients  were  submitted  for  serological  testing  from  sixty 


4-  Hr  5C 


provincial  hospitals  throughout  the  Kingdom.  Blood  was  submitted 
from  an  additional  ten  hospitals  in  3974  and  1975  (Figure  1). 
Although  the  blood  samples  collected  were  rather  unsatisfactory 
in  1973,  good  blood  samples  were  obtained  from  all  hospitals  in 
1974  and  1975. 

FROGRESS : In  1975,  4,682  pairs  of  acute  and  convalescent  dried 

blood  spots  on  filter  paper  discs  were  submitted  from  provincial 
hospitals  for  DHF  serological  evaluation  (Table  1).  This  represents 
an  increase  of  164%  over  the  2,850  pairs  submitted  in  1974.  During 
the  same  periods,  however,  the  number  of  cases  of  clinically 
diagnosed  HF  reported  to  the  Ministry  of  Health  rose  215%  from 
8,160  cases  in  1974  to  17,573  in  1975.  The  increased  specimens 
received  by  the  serological  laboratory  in  1975  probably  reflected 
an  increased  incidence  of  disease  and  an  increased  participation 
in  the  surveillance  program.  Regional  participation  for  1975  is 
shown  in  Table  1. 

Table  1.  Cases  Submitted  for  Laboratory  Confirmation 
for  Dengue  Infection  from  Provincial  Hospital,  1975 


Clinical  Diagnosis  of  Submitted  Cases 


Diagnosis 


Total 

Cases 


Dengue  virus  infections  were  confirmed  in  2,362  of  the  4,682 
patients  or  55%  of  those  studied  in  1975.  This  is  an  increase 
from  the  37%  confirmation  seen  in  1974.  The  frequencies  of 
confirmation  are  similar  for  the  four  regions  of  Thailand  indicating 
similar  clinical  criteria  for  diagnosis  of  DHF  in  all  areas  (Table  2). 
The  distribution  of  the  cases  submitted  and  confirmed  throughout 
the  year  peaked  during  the  epidemic  season  from  May  through 
September  similar  to  that  seen  in  1974.  The  proportion  of 
laboratory  confirmed  cases  of  DHF  for  each  month  was  essentially 
similar,  indicating  that  the  clinical  diagnosis  was  not  influenced 
by  the  time  of  year  (Figure  2). 


1392 


F AND  JE  INFECT 


I 


Table  2.  Result  of  HI  Tests  for  Dengue  Infection  in  HF 

Patients  Submitted  from  Provincial  Hospitals,  1975  (By  Region) 


Region 


North 


Northeast 


Central 


South 


Thailand 


Number  of  Cases 
Submitted  for 
Blood  Test 


Cases  with  Recent 
Dengue  Infection 

Number 

Percent 

270 

58 

944 

53 

867 

58 

281 

50 

2862 

55 

Laboratory  confirmed  dengue  infections 
the  four  regions  of  Thailand  (Figure  3) 
infecrion  for  patients  tested  from  the 
years.  There  was  little  difference  in 
four  regions.  A similar  median  age  of 
hospitals  was  found  in  1974  and  for  cli 
in  Bangkok  between  1971  and  1973  (8). 
epidemiologic  factors  influence  attack 
Thailand  as  a whole. 


were  compared  by  age  for 
. The  median  age  of 
whole  Kingdom  was  six 
the  median  age  for  the 
infection  from  70  provincial 
nically  diagnosed  patients 
This  suggested  that  similar 
rates  in  Bangkok  and  in 


DHF  was  mis-diagnosed  more  often  in  the  age  group  less  than  three 
years  old  (Figure  4).  This  may  reflect  the  difficulty  of  precise 
diagnosis  or  perhaps  a higher  frequency  of  primary  dengue  infec- 
tions in  this  age  group.  Primary  dengue  infections  might  not  be 
identified  by  the  testing  method  employed.  Laboratory  confirma- 
tion of  clinical  diagnosis  for  age  groups  greater  than  three  years 
is  significantly  higher  in  1975  than  in  1974  indicating  either  a 
better  understanding  of  the  criteria  for  diagnosis  of  DHF  by  the 
hospital  physician  or  possibly  improved  case  selection  because 
of  increased  numbers  of  patients. 

The  incidence  of  HF  may  be  calculated  using  the  figures  reported 
to  the  Ministry  of  Health.  The  incidence  of  confirmed  DHF  may  be 


.i 


iy  r 


CM  00 
<D  h. 
CM 

<f  CM 

I 2 

.2  ,2 


r — 

8* 

-2 

5>  s 

.ro 

in  m 
<g  m 

-CM 

184 

87 

■ — 

in  io 
m o 

CVl  — 

. o 

288 

154 

-0> 

372 

154 

-00 

468 

184 

-N 

m I- 
ro  ro 
m cm 

-10 

«m  jC 

in  cm 

-in 

M C- 

«r  n 

<T  CM 

-<fr 

r-  n 
id  m 

IO  CM 

-rO 

o CM 

as 

-CM 

CM  IO 
Is-  o 
— CM 

- — 

177 

205 

O 

tf> 


o 

<r 


"o' 

ro 


O 

CM 


m 


O N 


S3SV0  Q31033NI  309N3Q  30  iN30H3d 


<■ 

N 

, 22 

o -g 

£ - - 

0> 

O' 

< 


S c 

E 5 
iS. 


m 

LU 

in 

< 

o 

o 


o 

z 

< 

< 

X 


2 “ 
< (/) 

%< 

8 t 

tr  o. 
o in 

ui° 

o x 

< 

X 
o 
< 

UJ 


<J 

o: 

ui 

in 

< 

o 

o 

UJ 

b~ 

O 

UI 


UJ 

3 

o 

z 

Ui 

Q 


it 

UJ 


S2 

u 


1397 


SUBMITTED  FOR  TEST  FROM  PROVINCIAL 
1974  AND  1975. 


estimated  using  these  figures  and  those  developed  by  the  laboratory 
surveillance  program.  The  ratio  of  confirmed  cases  to  clinically 
diagnosed  cases  rose  in  1975  compared  to  1974  (Table  3). 


Table  3.  Hemorrhagic  Fever,  Incidence  Rate  and  DHF  Specific 
Case  Rate  from  Regions  of  Thailand,  1975 


Region 

Reported 
Incidence  Case 
Rate  Per  100,000 
Age  15  Years 

DHF  Specific 
Case  Rate  Per 
100,000 
Age  15  Years 

DHF  Specific  Case  Rate 
Per  Incidence  Rate 

1974 

1975 

North 

66.3 

38.5 

1:2.2 

1:1.7 

Northeast 

90.0 

47.8 

1:2.5 

1:1.8 

Central 

141.0 

82.2 

1:2.4 

1:1.7 

South 

45.3 

23.0 

1:2.4 

1:1.9 

Thailand 

90.5 

50.4 

1:2.4 

1:1.7 

The  methods  employed  for  the  laboratory  confirmation  of  dengue 
infections  were  applied  to  the  serological  confirmation  of  JE  cases. 
Acute  and  convalescent  bloods  were  submitted  on  349  clinically 
diagnosed  cases  of  encephalitis  seen  in  all  regions  of  Thailand 
(Table  4).  Forty  percent  or  129  cases  were  serologically  confirmee 
as  JE  infections.  The  JE  infections  were  found  in  all  four  regions 
of  Thailand  and  occurred  in  all  but  the  first  two  months  of  1975. 

DISCUSSION : A long-term  surveillance  of  infection  is  one  of  the 

prerequisites  for  decision  making  in  any  control  program.  Such  a 
program  for  DHF  is  presently  active  in  Thailand  and  has  confirmed 
approximately  50%  of  the  reported  cases  of  HF  as  due  to  dengue 
infection.  Such  a program  will  allow  for  the  identification  of  the 
factors  which  influence  epidemiologic  patterns  and  allow  for  rapid 
implementation  of  control  measures. 


1398 


Til 


Table  4.  Japanese  Encephalitis  Infection  in  Clinical 

Encephalitis  Cases  from  4 Regions  of  Thailand,  1975 
(70  Provinces) 


Region 


North 


Northeast 


Central 


South 


Thailand 


Total  Case 

Number  of  JE 

Infection 

Tested 

Number 

Percent 

116 

27 

23 

137 

45 

33 

92 

57 

62 

4 

0 

0 

349 

129 

40 

4.  Radio-immuno  Assays  for  the  Rapid  Detection  of  Dengue 
Antigens 

OBJECTIVE : To  develop  a system  to  detect  dengue  antigen. 

BACKGROUND : It  has  been  hypothesized  that  antigen-antibody  com- 

plexes form  in  the  blood  of  Dengue  Hemorrhatic  Fever  (DHF)  patients. 
These  are  thought  to  trigger  an  immunologic  mechanism  which  leads 
ultimately  to  the  development  of  shock.  This  hypothesis  is 
supported  by  a great  deal  of  indirect  evidence.  Until  recently, 
however,  the  technology  has  not  been  available  to  investigate 
this  point  directly. 

Studies  at  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  have  indicated 
that  antibody  to  structural  and  nonstructural  dengue  antigens  can 
be  measured  independently  by  radio-immune  assays  (RIA).  Using 
these  techniques  it  may  be  possible  to  detect  dengue  antigens  in 
patient's  sera  as  well  as  in  mosquitoes  inoculated  with  patient's 
sera  and  in  wild-caught  mosquitoes. 

DESCRIPTION : Immunoglobulin  G was  prepared  from  pooled  human  sera 

with  high  titered  dengue  antibody  and  without  hepatitis  B antigen 
or  antibody.  The  globulin  in  pooled  serum  was  precipitated  with 
50%  ammonium  sulfate.  Adjustment  of  the  pH  of  an  aliquot  of 
saturated  (NH4)  SO4  to  about  pH  7.8  was  done  by  addition  of  2N 
NaOH  just  prior  to  precipitation  of  the  gamma  globulin.  The  pre- 
cipitate was  dissolved  in  0.01  M phosphate  buffer  pH  7.5,  and 


1399 


dialyzed  overnight  (approximately  18  hours)  at  4°C  against  0.01 
M phosphate  buffer,  pH  7.5.  The  dialyzed  protein  was  chromato- 
graphed on  a diethylaminoethy 1-cellulose  column  (0.9  x 15  cm) 
equilibrated  with  0.01  K phosphate  buffer  pH  7.5.  The  first  peak 
(IgG)  was  concentrated  to  original  volume  in  an  amicon  filtration 
unit  over  a XK  50  membrane.  The  IgG  preparations  were  stored  at 
4°C. 

IgG  was  labeled  with  125  j by  a modification  of  the  method  of 
Hunter  and  Greenwood  (9).  The  following  reagents  were  added  in 
order  to  a small  beaker:  20  microliters  of  0.25  M phosphate 

buffer,  pH  7.3;  200  yCi  of  high-specific  activity  (in  q to  2 

microliters  of  a solution  of  chloramine  T (3.5  ug/microliter) ; 20 
microliters  of  a solution  of  sodium  metabisulfate  (4.8  ug/micro- 
liters);  and  20  microliters  of  a solution  of  sucrose  (22.5%), 
potassium  iodide  (2  mg/ml),  and  aqueous  phenol  red  (0.025%). 

After  the  addition  of  chloramine  T,  the  reaction  was  allowed  to 
proceed  for  15  seconds  before  being  terminated  by  the  addition 
of  sodium  metabisulfate.  The  mixture  was  applied  to  the  top  of 
a column  (made  from  a 5 ml  syringe)  packed  with  sephadex  G-50 
and  equilibrated  with  phosphate  buffered  saline,  pH  7.4.  The 
protein  was  eluted  with  the  same  buffer;  fractions  containing  the 
first  peak  of  radioactivity  were  pooled  and  diluted  with  an  equal 
volume  of  calf  serum.  This  stock  mix-ure  was  stored  at  4°C  and 
diluted  1:2  with  calf  serum  just  before  use. 

Polyvinyl  U-bottom  microtiter  plates  (Cooke  Engineering)  served  as 
the  solid  phase  for  the  radio-immuno  assay.  The  wells  were  coated 
with  a 1:10  dilution  of  dengue  antibody  containing  material 
(convalescent  serum  or  purified  IgG)  in  normal  saline  solution 
with  0.1%  sodium  azide.  After  four  hours  incubation  at  4°C,  the 
wells  were  washed  and  secondarily  coated  overnight  with  1%  bovine 
serum  albumin  in  saline.  Following  a second  wash  with  normal 
saline  solution  25  microliters  of  the  sample  to  be  tested  for  the 
presence  of  antigen  was  put  into  the  wells  and  the  plates  were 
incubated  at  'r°C  for  approximately  40  hours.  After  incubation 
the  plates  were  washed  and  50  microliters  of  125j  labeled  IgG 
were  added  to  the  wells.  Plates  were  again  incubated  at  37°C  for 
4 to  6 hours,  washed  and  cut  apart  with  scissors.  The  wells  were 
transferred  to  individual  gamma  counting  tubes  for  quantification 
of  residual  radioactivity  in  a gamma  spectrometer. 

PROGRESS : Preliminary  tests  of  this  technique  of  radioimmune  assay 

with  antigen  containing  samples  of  20%  dengue  2 infected  suckling 
mouse  brain  or  dengue  2 infected  tissue  culture  fluids  failed  to 
demonstrate  specific  antigens.  Two  areas  of  possible  failure  were 
identified.  Questions  of  whether  the  IgG,  used  to  identify  the 


1400 


presence  of  antigen,  was  actually  labeled  by  the  125j  and/or 
whether  the  initial  high  titer  dengue  antibody  was  binding  to  the 
plastic  plate,  are  being  investigated  further. 

5.  Predisposition  to  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever:  The  Role 

of  Glucose-6-Phosphate  Dehydrogenase  Defieiency  and 
Abnormal  Hemoglobins 

BACKGROUND:  Erythocyte  glucose  6 phosphate  dehydrogenase  (G-6- 

PD)  deficiency  affects  an  average  of  14%  of  the  Thai  population. 
G-6-PD  deficiency  has  been  found  more  frequently  in  bacterial 
infections  such  as  leprosy,  typhoid  or  pneumococcal  pneumonia 
than  in  non-infected  controls  (10).  Of  the  viral  diseases, 
hepatitis  has  been  associated  wit  a G-6-PD  deficiency  (11).  Both 
G-G-PD  deficiency  and  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever  occur  frequently 
in  Thailand.  This  report  summarizes  studies  of  the  relationship 
of  G-6-PD  deficiency  with  the  occurrence  and  the  severity  of 
dengue  hemorrhagic  fever.  An  additional  investigation  of  the  role 
of  abnormal  hemoglobins  in  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever  is  also 
reported. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS:  Children  hospitalized  at  the  Bangkok 

Children's  Hospital~TBCH)  with  laboratory  diagnosed  dengue  in- 
fections were  studied  for  G-6-PD  deficiency  and  hemoglobin  type. 
Two  milliliters  of  blood  were  obtained  using  Acid  Citrate 
Dextrose  (ACD)  solution  as  an  anticoagulant.  G-6-PD  was  examined 
using  the  methemoglobin  technique  of  Gall  (1°)  by  which  the 
genotype  of  the  patient  could  be  determined.  Hemoglobin  typing 
was  performed  using  hemoglobin  electrophoresis. 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION:  Forty-seven  patients  with  serologically 

proved  dengue  infections  were  studied  and  the  frequency  of  G-6-PD 
deficiency  in  these  patients  was  compared  to  those  found  in  131 
control  patients  collected  in  the  Well  Baby  Clinic  of  the  BCH 
(Table  1). 

Abnormal  hemoglobins  were  also  studied  in  47  dengue  infections 
and  were  compared  to  those  found  in  31  control  patients  collected 
in  the  Well  Baby  Clinic.  (Table  2) 

The  dengue  infections  were  graded  for  severity  according  to 
criteria  previously  established  by  one  of  us  (S.N.). 

Neither  abnormal  hemoglobin  nor  G-6-PD  deficiency  appeared  to  be 
associated  with  the  severity  of  dengue  infection  (Tables  3 and  4). 


1401 


1 


Table  1.  Glucose -6-Phosphate  Dehydrogenase  Deficiency 
in  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever  Patients  and 
Control  Study 


Patients  No. 


Control**  131 


Chi  square  = 1.6076  p > 0.157 


*Includes  all  individuals,  hemozygous,  hemizygous , or 
heterozygous  for  G-6-PD  deficiency 

**100  of  the  controls  were  previously  reported  by 
Lampe  et  al.  (11) 


Table  2.  HB  Type  in  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever  Patients 


Patients 


Percent 


Control  Study  j 31  6 

Chi  square  = 0.0594  p > 0.317 


17.02 

19.35 


■-ZZ  ~ : TT-  I T >>^  SB-;  f I'B** 


Table  3.  Glucose  6 Phosphate  Dehydrogenase  Deficiency 
and  the  Severity  of  Dengue  Infections 


Dengue  Patients 

Total 

Shock 

No. 

Percent 

G-6-PD  deficient* 

8 

6 

75 

G-6-PD  normal 

39 

23 

59 

Total 

47 

29 

61.5 

Chi  square  = 0.2025  p > 0.6 


Table  4.  Abnormal  Hemoglobin  and  the  Severity  of 
Dengue  Infections 


Dengue  Patients 

Total 

Shock 

No. 

Percent 

HbE  trait  (AE) 

8 

3 

37.5 

Normal  Hb  (A) 

39 

26 

66.6 

Total 

47 

29 

61.7 

Chi  square  = 1.3147  p > 0.2 

SUMMARY : Forty-seven  patients  with  serologically  documented  DHF 

were  studied  for  G-6-PD  deficiency  and  abnormal  hemoglobin.  The 
data  reported  shows  no  significant  relationship  between  presence 
or  the  severity  of  dengue  infections  and  the  presence  of  either 
G-b-PD  deficiency  or  abnormal  hemoglobins. 

HEPATITIS  B VIRUS 

Hepatitis  B Virus  in  Bangkok  families . 3tudy  Sample  and 
Analysis  of  Infections 

i 


| B. 

I 

I 


1403 


OBJECTIVE : To  determine  when  urban  Thai  children  are  first  exposed 

to  hepatitis  B virus  (HBV)  and  to  search  for  the  factors  that 
influence  transmission  to  infants  during  the  first  year  of  life. 

BACKGROUND : This  is  a report  of  the  long-term  follow-up  of  the 

offspring  of  mothers  who  have  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen  (HBsAg), 
antibody  to  HBsAg  (anti-HBs),  or  are  negative  for  both. 

DESCRIPTION : The  study  design  was  described  earlier  (4).  To  the 

basic  tests  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  was  added  an  immunooif fusion 
test  of  serum  for  e-antigen  and  antibody  (13).  Antibody  to 
Hepatitis  B core  Antigen  (anti-HBc)  was  determined  on  selected 
mothers'  sera  by  radioimmune  assay  at  WRAIR.  The  family  follow- 
up period  was  extended  to  24  months  in  order  to  detect  HBV  in- 
fections of  infants  during  the  second  year  of  life. 

PROGRESS : From  1 February  1974  to  31  January  1975,  there  were 

2450  live  births  at  Phra  Mongkutklao  Hospital;  1040  mothers 
(42.4%)  were  interviewed  and  bled.  In  order  to  describe  the 
overall  population  of  mothers  who  delivered  babies  at  Phra  Mong- 
kutklao Hospital,  all  mothers  with  study  numbers  ending  with  0, 

3 , 5 and  6 were  tested  for  HBsAg  by  counterimmunoelectrophoresis 
and  RIA  and  anti-HBs  by  PHA.  The  results  of  these  tests  were 
compared  to  females  of  similar  age  from  Huay  Khwang  who  were 
(previously)  tested  with  these  methods  (14).  In  general,  the 
prevalence  of  HBsAg  was  similar  to  that  of  Huay  Khwang  but  anti- 
body was  less  frequently  found  (Table  1). 

Study  Sample 

Although  the  intention  was  to  follow  the  infants  of  30  mothers 
with  HBsAg,  30  with  anti-HBs  and  60  negatives,  this  was  not 
possible  due  to  mistaken  original  classifications  and  study  dropouts. 
Several  mothers  who  were  negative  for  anti-HBs  by  P.IAI  and  PHA 
were  later  found  to  have  anti-HBs  at  the  time  of  delivery  by  AUSAB 
RIA.  In  addition,  of  154  families  selected  for  follow-up,  22  (14%) 
could  not  be  adequately  followed.  The  final  study  group  consisted 
of  31  mothers  with  HBsAg,  52  with  anti-HBs  and  49  negatives.  The 
final  distribution  was  not  considered  detrimental  to  the  inter- 
pretation of  the  results. 

HBV  Infections  of  Infants 

During  the  first  12  months  of  follow-up,  only  infants  of  HBsAg 
positive  mothers  became  infected.  Of  the  31  infants  with  anti- 
genemic  mothers,  15  (48%)  developed  HBsAg  and/or  anti-HBs  by  the 
age  of  nine  months  (Figure  1).  Two  infants  had  high  concentrations 


1404 


nrffTr* 


TahJo  1 frequency  of  HBsAg  and  Aiiti-11BS 
.in  Bangkok  females 


Age 

Group 


15-19 
20-29 
30-39 
40-  19 


Total 


15-19 

20-29 

30-39 

40-49 


Total 


HBsAg 


R1A  + 


Anti-HBS 
No . PHA  + 


sted 

No. 

% 

Tested 

1 

No. 

96 

6 

6.3 

59 

20 

282 

17 

6.0 

206 

66 

23 

0 

0.0 

20 

7 

402 

23 

5.7 

286 

93 

32.5 

54 

3 

5.6 

52 

21 

40.4 

71 

4 

5.6 

67 

28 

41.8 

53 

4 

7.5 

51 

31 

60.8 

56 

3 

5.4 

52 

33 

63.5 

234 

14 

6.0 

222 

113 

50.9 

1 Data  abstracted  from  Grossman,  ct  al. 
Amer.  J.  Epidemiol.  101:144-159,  1975 


r-  V *-•  * 


of  HBsAg  in  their  umbilical  cord  serum  and  remained  persistently 
positive  thereafter.  Seven  and  five  other  infants  were  infected 
by  ages  three  and  six  months,  respectively.  Nine  of  the  infected 
infants  (60%)  developed  persistent  antigenemia.  None  of  the 
infected  infants  developed  overt  signs  of  acute  hepatitis. 

Of  the  52  infants  of  mothers  with  anti-HBs , all  but  one  had 
detectable  antibody  in  the  cord  blood.  The  frequency  of  anti-HBs 
declined  steadily  throughout  the  12  month  period  (Figure  1).  None 
of  these  infants  had  detectable  HBsAg  or  had  lost  and  regained 
anti-HBs  during  the  first  year.  Similarly,  none  of  the  49  infants 
of  negative  mothers  showed  evidence  of  infection  with  HBV. 

At  the  beginning  of  the  study,  the  mothers  were  divided  into  three 
groups  on  the  basis  of  their  serological  test  results.  After  the 
period  of  follow-up,  four  groups  were  differentiated:  HBsAg 

positive  mothers  with  infected  infants  (15);  HBsAg  positive 
mothers  with  non-inf ected  infants  (16);  anti-HBs  positive  mothers 
(52);  and  negative  mothers  (49).  Analysis  of  factors  influencing 
HBV  transmission  was  based  on  these  four  study  groups. 

HBV  Infections  of  Other  Family  Members 

HBV  infections  among  the  family  contacts  of  the  infants  included 
persons  infected  before,  during,  and  after  the  birth  of  the  infant 
(Table  2).  Family  contacts  included  anyone  living  in  the  home, 
such  as  relatives,  maids  or  friends.  Persons  having  no  detectable 
HBsAg  or  anti-HBs  at  the  time  of  the  infant's  birth  were  considered 
susceptible  to  infection.  The  greatest  frequency  of  antigen 
carriers  and  fewest  susceptible  contacts  were  found  in  the  families 
of  the  infants  infected. 

New  infections  of  family  contacts  were  infrequent  and  only  occurred 
in  four  members  of  two  families  (Table  3).  In  one  family  (No.  97) 
there  were  10  members.  The  mother  had  anti-HBs  at  delivery  and  for 
12  months;  the  infant  had  anti-HBs  until  age  39  weeks.  At  the 
time  of  the  infants  birth,  an  uncle  was  antigenemic  and  had  elevated 
serum  transaminase  values.  During  the  following  12  months,  a 7 
year-old  sister  and  a 2 year-old  brother  developtd  anti-HBs.  A 
22  year-old  sister-in-law  developed  acute  hepatitis  with  HBsAg  and 
elevated  serum  transaminase  values. 

In  another  family  (No.  89),  with  five  members,  the  mother  and 
infant  were  negative  for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs.  A 3 year-old  brother 
had  persistent  asymptomatic  antigenemia.  Another  brother  sero- 
converted  at  the  age  of  2 years.  Although  the  only  infants  to  be 
infected  in  this  study  had  antigenemic  mothers , older  siblings  were 
sometimes  infected  when  other  persons  in  the  family  had  HBsAg.  Thus, 
horizontal  transmission  of  HBV  occurred  occasionally  in  older  siblings. 


1407 


Table  2.  Frequency  of  HBsAg  and  Anti-HBs  in 
Family  Contacts  of  Study  Infants 


Mother's 

Category 

No. 

Families 

Family  Members 

No. 

Mean 

HBsAg 
No.  {%) 

Anti-HBS 
No.  (%) 

Negative 
No.  (%) 

HBsAg-1 * 

15 

42 

2.8 

25 

(60) 

15  (36) 

2 (4.8) 

HBsAg 

16 

47 

2.9 

21 

(45) 

10  (21) 

16(34) 

Anti-HBs 

52 

166 

3.2 

21 

(13) 

99  (60) 

46(28) 

Negative 

49 

157 

3.2 

4 

(2.5) 

58  (37) 

100(64) 

Total 

132 

412 

3.1 

71 

(17) 

177  (43) 

164(40) 

* HBsAg  carrier  mothers  who  transmitted  to  their  infants 
Table  3.  New  HBV  Infections  in  Family  Contacts 


Family 

No. 

Mother's 

Person 

Infected 

Time 

of 

Anti- 

SGOT* 

Number 

Members 

Category 

(Age) 

Followup 

HBsAg 

HBS 

SGPT 

97 

10 

Anti-HBS 

Uncle 

At  birth 

Yes 

NF** 

305/95 

(35) 

Sister 

28  weeks 

No 

Yes 

39/15 

(7) 

Brother 

56  weeks 

No 

Yes 

29/10 

(2) 

Sister-in-law 

56  weeks 

Yes 

Yes 

402/294 

(22) 

89 

5 

Negative 

Brother 

At  birth 

Yes 

No 

107/28 

(3) 

Brother 

52  weeks 

No 

Yes 

49/18 

(1) 

* Transaminase  values  at  time  seroconversion  noted 
**  NF  - not  followed 


1408 


-JTTSWs!  ~ 


Environmental  Factors 


The  132  families  lived  in  homes  scattered  widely  throughout  the 
city  in  a distribution  that  was  more  representative  of  the 
maternity  patients  of  the  hospital  than  of  the  total  population  of 
Bangkok  (Figure  2).  Eighty  two  percent  of  the  families  lived  in 
houses,  17%  in  apartment  buildings  (Table  4).  Seventy  one  percent 
of  the  homes  had  one  or  two  rooms , 27%  had  three  or  four  rooms. 
Houses  were  usually  wooden  and  had  one  or  two  floors  and  no 
basements.  Apartments  tended  to  be  less  than  five  stories  high 
and  were  made  of  concrete  block  construction  and  wood. 

No  statistical  differences  were  found  between  the  groups  with 
regard  to  the  use  of  electricity,  bottled  gas,  charcoal  cooking 
fuel,  source  of  drinking  water,  storage  and  preparation  of 
drinking  water,  the  number  of  indoor  toilets  and  the  type  of  sewage 
disposal.  In  addition  there  were  no  apparent  differences  in  the 
method  of  food  preparation,  or  cleaning  of  eating  utensils.  The 
most  typical  household  description  was  as  follows:  The  family 

lived  in  a house  (82%)  with  less  than  three  floors  (71%)  that  had 
electricity  (61%),  bottled  gas  (31%),  and  cooked  over  charcoal 
(70%).  City  tap  water  was  used  for  drinking  (83%)  and  was  boiled 
before  consumption  (96%).  The  families  had  an  indoor  toilet  (92%). 
The  mother  prepared  the  food  (81%)  and  washed  vegetables  with  tap 
water  (77%).  The  mother  washed  the  dishes  (84%)  with  tap  water 
which  was  not  previously  treated  (98%). 

The  mother  provided  the  principal  care  for  the  baby  in  83%  of  all 
families  and  93%  of  the  babies  that  were  infected.  Nearly  all  of 
the  mothers  (95)  indicated  an  intent  to  breast  feed  their  babies. 
Antigenemic  mothers  were  more  apt  to  breast  feed  for  shorter 
periods  and  less  frequently  per  day  than  those  without  antigenemia 
(Table  5).  By  the  age  of  six  weeks,  most  infants  received 
supplemental  baby  food  (51%),  liquid  formula  (60%),  and  drank 
boiled  water  (94%). 

None  of  the  characteristics  studied  of  the  physical  home  environment 
were  associated  with  HBV  infections  of  infants. 

Personal  Contacts  of  Infants 


Although  the  families  were  nearly  equal  in  size,  there  were 
striking  differences  in  the  frequencies  of  HBsAg  carriers  (Table  6). 
In  families  of  infants  who  were  infected,  60%  of  the  household 
contacts  were  antigenemic.  In  families  where  the  mother  had 
antigen  but  the  infant  was  not  infected,  only  45%  of  the  household 
contacts  had  antigen.  The  difference  was  due  to  a larger  number 
of  antigenemic  siblings  in  the  first  group. 


1409 


Table  5.  Diet  of  Infants  at  Age  6 Weeks 


Questionnaire 

HBSAG- I 

HBsAg 

Anti-HBS 

Negative 

Number  of  Infants 

15 

16 

52 

49 

Intent  to  Breast  Feed 
Yes 

87% 

94% 

96% 

96% 

Duration  Breast  Feeding 
(0  or  6 wk ) 

46% 

50% 

31% 

31% 

No.  Breast  Feedings 
per  day 

1-5 

51% 

62% 

43% 

49% 

6 or  more 

47% 

38% 

58% 

52% 

No.  Formula  Feedings 
per  day 

None 

27% 

25% 

37% 

29% 

1-5 

20% 

25% 

25% 

30% 

6 or  more 

46% 

50% 

38% 

40% 

Other  Baby  Food 
Yes 

47 

32 

60 

49 

No 

53 

69 

40 

51 

1412 


r.  - s 


A 


I 


Table  6.  Household  Contacts  of  132  Infants 


Mother ' s 
Category 

No:  of 
Families 

Household 

No. 

Contacts 

Mean 

HBsAg+ 

No. 

Contacts 

(%) 

HBsAg-(i) 

15 

42 

2.8 

25 

(60) 

HB;,Ag 

16 

47 

2.9 

21 

(45) 

Ani  II3S 

52 

165 

3.2 

21 

(13) 

•.egative 

49 

157 

3.2 

4 

(3) 

Combined 

132 

411 

3.1 

71 

(17) 

Table  7.  Frequency  of  Infant  HBV  Infections 
Related  to  Family  Contacts 


Family  Member 
with  HBsAg 

Infants 
at  Risk* 

Infants 

No. 

Infected 

(%) 

Father 

8 

2 

(25) 

Mother 

31 

15 

(48) 

Sibling 

6 

4 

(67) 

Mother  and  Sibling 

5 

4 

(80) 

* Infants  with  maternal  antibody  are  excluded 


] 

i 


I 


1413 


■<r  ' 


In  families  of  mothers  with  anti-HBs,  antigen  carriers  were  four 
times  as  frequent  as  in  the  families  of  negative  mothers.  This 
difference  suggests  that  children  born  with  maternal  antibody  nay 
be  at  greater  risk  of  infection  after  they  lose  the  antibody  than 
children  of  negative  mothers. 

The  study  was  based  on  the  assumption  that,  regarding  infection 
of  infants'  with  HBV,  the  mother  was  the  most  important  contact 
for  the  infant.  This  assumption  was  supported  by  the  relative 
frequency  of  infant  infections  when  individual  relatives  were 
considered  (Table  7).  The  results  suggest  that  an  antigenemic 
mother  is  more  important  than  an  antigenemic  father  and  that 
antigenemic  siblings  may  indicate  the  infants  at  greatest  risk. 

Mothers  with  HBgAg 

Sixteen  mothers  with  HBsAg  were  tested  for  anti-HBc;  all  were 
positive  (Table  8).  In  addition,  one  of  12  negative  mothers  had 
anti-HBc.  The  infant  of  the  HBsAg  negative  mother  with  anti-HBc 
did  not  become  infected. 

Twenty-eight  mothers  with  HBsAg  were  tested  for  e-antigen  (Table  9). 
e-Antigen  was  more  frequently  found  in  mothers  with  infected 
infants , although  two  mothers  with  e-antigen  did  not  have  infected 
infants.  The  mother's  serum  CF  titer  of  HBsAg  at  the  time  of 
delivery  was  closely  associated  with  infection  of  the  infant 
(Table  10). 

Predictability  of  HBV  Infection  in  Infants 

The  following  factors  are  associated  with  HBV  infection  during 
the  first  nine  months  of  life : 


1.  Mothers  with  HBsAg 

2.  Mothers  with  Serum  titers  of  HBsAg  1:64 

3.  Mothers  with  detectable  e-antigen 

4.  HBsAg  positive  siblings 

5.  Concentrations  of  HBsAg  in  the  umbilical  cord  blood 
detectable  by  counterimmunoelectrophoresis. 

Impact  of  Infant  Infections  on  the  Adult  Carrier  Population 

Any  estimate  of  the  contribution  of  infant  infections  to  the  adult 
carrier  population  must  be  based  on  three  assumptions.  First, 


**  V ^ 


Table  8.  Frequency  of  Hepatitis  B Core 
Antibody*  in  Mothers 


Mother' s 
Category 


No. 

Tested 

Anti- 

No. 

■HBC 

% 

9 

9 

(100) 

5 

5 

(100) 

1 

0 

(0) 

12 

1** 

(8) 

* Tests  performed  by  Dr.  G.R.  Irwin, 
WRAIR,  Washington,  D.C. 

**  Infant  did  not  become  infected 


Table  9.  Frequency  of  e Antigen 
in  Mothers  with  HBsAg 


e Antigen 


Mothers  Infected  Infants 


No. 

No. 

C%) 

Positive 

8 

6 

(75) 

Negative 

20 

8 

(40) 

Total 

28 

14 

(50) 

Table  10.  Complement  Fixation  Titers 
of  HBsAg  Positive  Mothers 


Scrum  HBgAg 
CF  Titer* 

Mothers 

No. 

Infected 

No. 

Infants 

(50 

£ 1:32 

15 

2 

(13) 

> 1:64 

13 

12 

(92) 

Total 

28 

14 

(50) 

* At  time  of  delivery  of  infant 
Chi  square  = 14.35 

p <.001 

Table  11.  Estimation  of  the  Proportion  of  Adult  HBsAg  Carriers 
that  are  Due  to  Infection  During  Infancy 


Frequency  of  HBsAg  + mothers  at  PMKH 

Frequency  of  HBV  infection  in  infants 

Frequency  of  infected  infants 
becoming  chronic  carriers 

Prevalence  of  chronic  HBsAg  carriers  among 
children  of  mothers  delivering  at  PMKH: 

5.7%  x.  .48  x .60 

Proportion  of  adult  HBsAg  carriers  caused 
by  infant  infections 


5.7% 

48% 


in.  *v**+*3*k*": 


that  over  the  period  of  at  least  one  generation  (approximately 
the  next  25  years)  the  factors  affecting  the  transmission  of 
HBV  within  the  Bangkok  population  will  remain  constant,  so  that 
the  prevalence  of  adult  carriers  of  HBsAg  will  remain  the  same. 
Secondly,  all  infants  who  become  chronic  carriers  will  remain 
antigenemic  until  they  reach  child-bearing  age.  Thirdly,  the 
mortality  rates  of  children  and  young  adults  with  HBsAg  are  the 
same  as  for  those  without  antigen. 

Using  these  assumptions  and  the  observations  from  this  study,  it 
is  apparent  that  HBV  infections  during  the  first  year  of  life 
cannot  account  for  more  than  28%  of  the  adult  carriers  (Table  11). 
Conversely,  up  to  72%  of  the  adult  carriers  in  Bangkok  are  due  to 
infections  after  the  age  of  one  year.  Infections  after  the  age 
of  one  year  may  be  prevented  by  an  effective  vaccination  program 
in  the  future. 

SUMMARY : An  analysis  has  been  completed  of  the  effect  of  HBV 

infections  on  infants  and  the  factors  influencing  infection  during 
the  first  year  of  life.  All  of  the  infected  infants  were 
asymptomatic  and  60%  developed  persistent  antigenemia.  The  factors 
most  closely  associated  with  infant  infection  were:  an  antigenemic 

mother;  antigenemic  siblings;  e-antigen  in  the  mother’s  serum; 
and  a high  CF  titer  of  HBsAg  in  the  mother's  serum.  Evidence  was 
found  of  horizontal  HBV  transmission  among  members  of  two  families 
in  which  neither  the  mother  nor  the  infant  were  infected.  Only  a 
minority  of  adult  female  antigen  carriers  can  be  accounted  for  by 
infant  infections.  The  family  follow-up  period  has  been  extended 
to  two  years  to  more  clearly  determine  the  frequency  of  HBV  infec- 
tions in  youngsters. 

2.  Hepatitis  B Virus  Infection  Among  Americans  Residing 
in  Southeast  Asia 


OBJECTIVE:  To  determine  the  incidence  of  Hepatitis  B virus  (HBV) 

infections  in  Americans  exposed  to  a population  with  endemic 
hepatitis  and  a high  prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen 
(HBsAg)  carriers. 

BACKGROUND : Until  recently  only  clinical  evidence  was  available 

to  document  infection  with  agents  causing  viral  b'.patitis.  Over 
the  past  several  years,  however,  the  development  of  new  serological 
tests  has  allowed  for  the  detection  of  past  infection  with  HBV. 

Data  has  been  accumulated  on  the  prevalence  of  HBV  infections  in 
various  populations.  Epidemiological  investigations  in  Bangkok, 
Thailand,  showed  that  almost  ton  percent  of  an  urban  Thai  popula- 
tion were  carriers  of  riBcAg  and  that  almost  50%  had  evidence  of 
HBV  infections  at  some  time  in  the  past.  Age  specific  prevalence 


1417 


of  infection  with  HBV  in  this  population  increased  until  the  age 
of  15  at  which  point  it  reached  a plateau  at  approximately  VCt>  (14). 
Studies  of  rural  Thai  populations  have  shown  similar  age  acquisition 
curves  for  HBV  infection  (15). 

In  recent  years,  large  numbers  of  Americans,  mostly  military 
personnel,  have  resided  in  Southeast  Asia.  These  Americans  came 
from  an  area  in  which  HBsAg  has  been  found  in  only  0.1  to  1.0% 
of  the  population  and  evidence  of  HBV  infection  has  been  found  in 
only  five  to  twenty  percent  (16,  17). 

This  study  was  designed  to  determine  the  risk  of  becoming  infected 
with  hepatitis  B,  to  define  environmental  and  behavioral  factors 
which  increase  the  risk  of  infection,  and  to  determine  the  ratio 
of  clinically  apparent  to  inapparent  infections  in  a population  of 
American  enlisted  men  residing  in  Thailand. 

DESCRIPTION : A description  of  the  design  of  this  study  appeared 

in  the  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1974-1975. 

Subjects:  Subjects  were  drawn  from  service  men  aged  18-27  years 

in  enlisted  grades  E1-E5.  These  men  were  assigned  to  either  the 
United  States  Army  Support  Group,  Thailand  or  the  United  States 
Air  Force  635th  Combat  Support  Group.  Shortly  after  arriving  in 
Thailand  a questionnaire  was  administered  to  volunteers  to  determine 
personal,  demographic  and  medical  information.  During  the  ensuing 
year  these  men  were  interviewed  three  times  at  approximately  four 
month  intervals  regarding  social  behavior  and  medical  problems. 

Serology:  Serum  was  obtained  initially  and  at  the  time  of  each 

interview.  Serum  was  tested  for  HBsAg  by  a counterimmunoelectro- 
phoresis  (CIEP)  technique  (SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory 
Annual  Report  1973-1974)  and  a commercially  available  radioimmune 
assay  AUSRIA  (Abbott  Laboratories)  using  appropriate  absorption 
procedures  (14).  CIEP  positive  sera  were  subtyped  for  HBsAg 
determinants  d,  y,  w ano  r,  using  an  immunodiffusion  technique 
(SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1972-1973). 

Antibody  to  HBsAg  (anti-HB^)  was  detected  by  a commercially 
available  radioimmune  assay  (AUSAB,  Abbott  Laboratories).  This 
test  was  confirmed  by  a passive  hemagglutination  test  using  red 
blood  cells  coated  with  purified  HBsAg  of  subtype  ad  (Electro- 
nucleonics Laboratories)  or  by  inhibition  of  the  radioimmune  assay 
by  absorption  of  antibody  activity  with  HBsAg.  All  sera  from 
each  individual  found  to  have  HBsAg  or  anti-HBs  at  anytime  were 
retested  simultaneously.  The  presence  of  either  HBsAg  or  anti-HBg 
was  taken  as  evidence  of  prior  infection.  Sequential  sera  from  a 


sub-set  of  the  men  followed  for  one  year  in  Thailand  were 
submitted  to  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research (WRAIR) 
to  be  screened  for  antibody  to  Hepatitis  B core  antigen  (Anti- 
HBC).  Screening  was  done  by  a Radioimmune  assay  inhibition  test 
developed  at  WRAIR. 

PROGRESS : Study  sample:  Subjects  were  enrolled  in  this  study 

between  April  and  December  1973.  Initial  questionnaires  were 
completed  in  December  1973  and  the  three  follow-up  interviews 
were  completed  in  April,  August,  and  December  1974  respectively. 

The  first  interview  occurred  12  to  24  weeks,  the  second  24  to 
38  weeks,  and  the  last  39  to  65  weeks  after  entering  Thailand. 
Individuals  who  missed  interview,  or  whose  interviews  fell  outside 
of  the  established  time  periods  v ’re  considered  incompletely 
collected  for  purposes  of  this  study. 

Demographic  Data:  There  were  412  men  who  completed  the  initial 

questionnaire  and  submitted  blood  shortly  after  their  arrival  in 
Thailand.  Examination  of  the  questionnaires  showed  that  78%  were 
white,  21%  were  black,  and  1%  were  oriental.  Although  the  age 
range  was  set  from  18  through  27  years , over  80%  of  the  men  were 
between  the  ages  of  20  and  24  years.  Three  quarters  of  the  men 
had  graduated  from  high  school  while  five  percent  had  completed 
college.  Seventy- three  percent  of  the  men  were  enlisted  rank 
E4  and  above,  but  12.5%  were  E2  reflecting  the  number  of  recently 
enlisted  personnel. 

Approximately  60%  of  the  men  were  enlisted  in  the  Army,  and  the 
remainder  were  in  the  Air  Force.  The  Air  Force  personnel  tended 
to  be  older;  all  of  the  men  in  grade  E2  were  in  the  Army.  All 
of  the  Air  Force  and  approximately  two  thirds  of  the  Army  were 
stationed  in  a large  military  complex  on  the  east  shore  of  the 
Gulf  of  Thailand  near  the  town  of  Sattahip.  The  bulk  of  the 
remaining  Army  personnel  were  located  in  Bangkok,  but  a few  were 
stationed  at  military  posts  further  to  the  north.  Contact  with 
Thai  civilians  was  available  to  all  of  these  men. 

Of  the  412  men  initially  studied,  376  (91%)  were  seen  at  the  first 
interview,  340  (83%)  at  the  second,  326  (79%)  at  the  third  (Table  1). 
Some  men  were  lost  to  follow-up  due  to  curtailment  of  assignment 
in  Thailand  or  to  temporary  duty  elsewhere.  There  were  271  men 
who  were  followed  at  each  interview  (Table  2). 

Prior  Infections:  Evidence  of  prior  infections  with  HBV  was  detected 

in  31  (/. 5%)  of  the  412  men  studied  on  arrival  in  Thailand  (Table  1). 
Examination  of  questionnaires  revealed  that  156  (38%)  of  these  men 


1419 


Table  1.  Experience  with  Hepatitis  B Infection  Among  American 
Enlisted  Men  Followed  at  Four  Month  Intervals  for  One  Year 


Observation  Initial  . 

Interview  Interview  Interviev 

Weeks  in  Thailand  0 13-25  2f -39  40-65 

Total  number  studied  413  376  340  326 

Prior  HBV  infection  31(7.5)*  23(7.4)  26(7.6)  21(6.4) 

Acquired  HBV  infection  - 11(2.9)  14(4.1)  20(6.1) 

Total  HBV  infection  31(7.5)  39(10.3)  40(11.8)  41(12.5) 

’’'Percent  of  total  number  studied  enclosed  in  parentheses 


|Table  2.  Experience  with  Hepatitis  B Infection  Among  271  American 
■ Enlisted  Men  Followed  at  Four  Month  Intervals  for  One  Year 


Observation 

Initial 

1st 

Interview 

2nd 

Interview 

3rd 

Interview 

Weeks  in  Thailand 

0 

13-25 

26-39 

40-65 

Prior  HBV  infection 

17(6.2)* 

17(6.2) 

17(6.2) 

16(5.8) 

Acquired  HBV  infection 
By  interval 
Cumulative 

7(2.5) 

7(2.5) 

5(2.0) 

32(4.5) 

6(2.2) 

18(6.7) 

Total  HBV  infection 

17(6.2) 

24(8.7) 

29(10.7) 

34(12.5) 

* Percent  of  total  number  studied  enclosed  in  parentheses 


3 V*V=*«<*  TERMS' 


Table  3.  Prevalence  of  Experience  with  Hepatitis  B Infection 
Among  413  American  Enlisted  Men  on  Entering  Thailand: 

The  Importance  of  a Prior  Asian  Tour 


Prior  Asian 


Prior  Hepatitis  B Experience 


Tour 

Yes 

No 

Total 

Yes 

20 

136 

156 

No 

11 

246 

257 

Total 

31 

382 

413 

Chi  square  (1  df)  = 9.0053  p > 0.05 


Table  4.  Frequencies  of  HBsAg,  Anti-HBS  and  Anti-BBL  in  Sera 

Collected  on  Arrival  in  Thailand  from  334  American  Enlisted  Men 


HBsAg  Positive 


Anti-HB,. 


Positive 

1 


Negative 

1 


Total 


HBgAg  Negative 
Anti-HBS  Positive 


Anti-HBS  Negative 


total  Studied 


'TV- 


n 


i 


reported  a previous  Asian  assignment.  HBV  infections  were 
significantly  associated  with  experience  in  Asia  (Table  3). 

New  Infections:  There  were  six  men  who  were  hospitalized  for 

icteric  hepatitis  during  their  one  year  in  Thailand.  If  the  412 
men  initially  studied  were  taken  as  the  largest  demoninator,  the 
minimum  attack  rate  for  clinical  hepatitis  was  14.6  cases/1000 
men/year.  Five  of  the  six  clinically  apparent  cases  of  hepatitis 
proved  on  serological  testing  to  be  HBV  infections.  In  twenty 
additional  men  HBV  infections  were  identified  serologically  hy 
the  development  of  either  HBsAg  and/or  anti-HBs.  Although  these 
twenty  infections  were  clinically  mild,  four  men  reported  non- 
specific symptoms  at  approximately  the  time  of  infection.  Thus, 

83.3%  of  clinically  diagnosed  viral  hepatitis  in  this  group  of 
young  men  during  one  year  in  Thailand  proved  to  be  HBV  infections. 

The  ratio  of  clinically  inapparent  to  apparent  HBV  infections 
was  4:1,  only  20%  of  HBV  infections  in  this  population  manifesting 
themselves  clinically. 

Development  of  HBsAg:  HBsAg  was  detected  in  ten  individuals  at 

one  time  or  another  during  the  observation  period.  In  two  people, 

HB  Ag  was  detected  in  the  initial  serum.  One,  a 19  year  old 
white  man,  had  cleared  the  HBsAg  and  developed  anti-HBs  by  the 
first  interview,  four  months  after  his  arrival  in  Thailand.  This 
man  had  been  hospitalized  for  hepatitis  just  before  coming  to 
Thailand  and  admitted  intravenous  drug  use  prior  to  becoming  ill. 

The  second,  a 22  year  old  black  man,  carried  HBsAg  throughout  his 
tour  in  Thailand.  He  denied  any  prior  drug  use  or  clinical  hepatitis. 

HBgAg  was  first  detected  in  eight  individuals  while  they  were 
residing  in  Thailand.  HBsAg  was  found  in  serum  of  one  individual 
at  the  first  follow-up  bleed,  three  individuals  at  the  second, 
and  four  at  the  third.  All  four  of  the  men  who  developed  antigen 
at  the  first  and  second  follow-up  bleed  had  cleared  the  antigen  by 
the  subsequent  bleed  and  three  of  the  four  had  developed  anti-HBs. 


Subtypes  of  HBsAg:  Of  the  ten  HBsAg  detected,  subtypes  were 

identified  in  six.  Two  were  from  individuals  in  whom  antigen  was 
detected  upon  arrival  in  Thailand.  In  the  long  term  carrier,  adw 
was  detected  while  ayw  was  found  in  the  man  recovering  from 
hepatitis.  In  four  of  the  eight  men  who  developed  HBsAg  while 
in  Thailand,  adr  was  identified. 

Antibody  to  Hepatitis  B Core  Antigen:  Sequential  sera  from  334  men 

were  submitted  for  anti-HBc  screening.  Anti-HBC  was  found  in  the 
initial  sera  of  19  of  these  men.  It  was  associated  with  anti-HBs 
in  15  individuals.  In  three  sera,  anti-HBc  was  detected  alone; 
in  ten  sera  only  anti-HBs  was  found  (Table  4). 


2 -Ti  1 


rx? 


■r-  Z*,Kf** 


1422 


ir\*r*>b  •-•mrym  "tes* 


The  two  individuals  in  whom  HB  Ag  was  identified  on  arrival  in 
Thailand  were  included  in  the  §34  men  tested  for  anti-HBc.  Anti- 
HBC  was  found  only  in  the  initial  blood  of  the  22  year  old  HBsAg/ 
adw  carrier.  In  the  19  year  old  who  was  convalescing  from  HBV 
infection,  anti-HBc  had  appeared  by  the  end  of  the  first  four 
months  at  a time  when  the  HBsAg  had  been  replaced  by  anti-HBs. 

Among  the  334  men  screened  for  anti-HBc,  24  developed  HBV  infection 
while  in  Thailand  as  evidenced  by  the  appearance  in  their  serum 
of  HBsAg  and/or  anti-HBs.  In  two  men,  transferred  to  Thailand 
from  Vietnam,  anti-HBc  appeared  in  the  initial  serum  four  months 
prior  to  the  time  when  anti-HBs  was  detected.  These  men  clearly 
had  developed  their  HBV  infections  prior  to  entering  Thailand 
despite  the  fact  that  the  anti-HBs  was  not  present  at  the  time 
of  their  arrival. 

In  eight  of  the  remaining  22  men  who  developed  HBV  infection, 

HBsAg  was  detected.  Anti-HBC  was  demonstrated  in  only  three  of 
the  eight  at  the  time  the  antigen  was  detected.  In  four  of  the 
eight,  HBsAg  was  first  detected  in  serum  collected  at  the  last 
follow-up  interview  and  no  further  follow-up  could  be  carried  out. 

In  the  four  men  who  could  be  followed  HBsAg  had  cleared  by  the 
time  of  the  subsequent  bleed.  Although  anti-HBs  was  detected  in 
only  three  of  these  men  anti-HBc  was  present  in  all  of  them  by 
this  time.  Seventeen  men  developed  anti-HBs.  Ai:ti-HBC  was  found, 
usually  in  the  same  sera,  in  12  of  them;  in  five,  however,  no 
evidence  of  anti-HBc  could  be  found.  Once  anti-HBc  was  detected 
in  an  individuals  serum,  it  was  found  to  be  present  in  all 
subsequent  sera  tested.  Although  the  identification  of  anti- 
HBC  indicated  an  alteration  cf  the  time  of  infection  in  a few 
cases,  screening  for  this  antibody  did  not  diagnose  any  additional 
infections  other  than  those  detected  by  HBsAg  and/or  anti-HBs. 

HBV  infections  and  Behavioral  and  Environmental  Factors : Two 

hundred  and  seventy  one  men  were  studied  four  times  at  the  stated 
intervals  during  their  one  year  assignment  in  Thailand.  Seven- 
teen (6.3%)  had  experienced  hepatitis  B infection  prior  to  their 
assignment  but  18  (6.7%)  acquired  HBV  infections  while  in  Thailand 
(Table  2).  Figures  for  the  acquisition  of  HB  infection  in  271 
individuals  who  were  completely  followed  were  not  statistically 
different  from  those  obtained  from  men  bled  at  each  interview, 
suggesting  that  the  acquisition  of  hepatitis  B infection  in  Thailand 
was  not  related  to  any  behavior  which  led  to  curtailment  of 
assignment. 


1423 


Among  the  271  men,  the  incidence  of  hepatitis  B infections  was 
approximately  equal  for  each  four  month  period  (Table  2).  However, 
if  the  population  was  limited  to  the  167  men  who  had  no  previous 
Asian  experience,  a difference  in  the  incidence  for  each  time 
period  could  be  defined  (Table  5).  This  difference  probably 
reflected  the  large  number  of  men  who  had  been  directly  transferred 
to  Thailand  from  elsewhere  in  the  Far  East  and  who  may  have  been 
exposed  to  HBV  prior  to  their  arrival  in  Thailand. 

Questionnaire  and  interview  data  on  these  271  men  were  examined 
for  patterns  of  behavior  which  were  associated  with  the  development 
of  HBV  infections  in  Thailand.  There  was  no  statistically  apparent 
relationships  between  the  development  of  HBV  infection  and  age, 
rank,  educational  level  or  marital  status.  Blacks  enlisted  in  the 
Army  tended  to  have  an  increased  risk  of  infection.  Two  patterns  of 
behavior,  which  may  be  related,  were  statistically  associated  with 
HBV  infection;  residence  in  the  Thai  community,  off  post,  and  the 
use  of  drugs,  especially  cannabis. 

SUMMARY : A group  of  American  enlisted  men  were  followed  at  four 

month  intervals  for  a one  year  period  in  Thailand.  The  prevalence 
of  prior  HBV  infection  in  these  men  was  7.5%.  HBV  infection  was 
significantly  associated  with  prior  Asian  experience.  The  incidence 
of  HBV  infection  among  men  in  this  group  with  no  prior  Asian 
experience  was  6%,  with  90%  of  infections  falling  after  the  sixth 
month.  Residence  in  the  Thai  community  and  to  a lesser  extent 
drug  use,  especially  cannabis,  significantly  increased  the  risk  of 
HBV  infections  in  these  men.  Clinical  evidence  of  disease  was  only 
found  in  20%  of  those  individuals  who  experienced  HBV  infections 
in  Thailand. 


Table  5.  Experience  with  Hepatitis  B Infection  Among  167  American 
Enlisted  Men  with  no  Asian  Experience  Studied  at 
Four  Month  Intervals  for  One  Year 


Observation 

Initial 

1st 

Interview 

2nd 

Interview 

3rd 

Interview 

Weeks  in  Thailand 

0 

13-25 

26-39 

40-65 

Acquired  HBV  infection 
Cumulative 

- 

1(0.6) 

3(1.8) 

6(3.6) 

1424 


n — 


3.  Continuing  Studies  of  Hepatitis  B Antigen  Carriers 
in  Residents  at  Khao  Yai  National  Park 


OBJECTIVE : To  determine  the  frequency  of  exposure  to  Hepatitis 

B virus (HBV)  in  residents  at  Khao  Yai  National  Park  (KYNP). 

BACKGROUND  : This  is  a continuation  of  work  which  was  previously 

reported  (4).  The  presence  of  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen  (HBsAg) 
and  antibody  (anti-HBs)  serves  as  evidence  of  prior  exposure  to 
hepatitis  B virus  (HBV).  This  study  reports  the  frequency  of 
both  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  in  a rural  Thai  population. 

DESCRIPTION : HBsAg  carriers  were  identified  using  the  counter- 

immunoelectrophoresis  (CIEP)  test  and  radioimmune  assay  (RIA). 
Anti-HBS  was  identified  using  a radioimmune  assay  inhibition  test 
RIAI)  described  previously  (4). 

PROGRESS : Four  hundred  and  eighty  four  sera  from  KYNP  residents 

were  studied  for  the  presence  of  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs.  The  age 
specific  prevalence  of  HBsAg  (Table  1)  was  previously  reported  (4). 
Additional  data  on  the  prevalence  of  anti-HBs  in  this  population 
was  illustrated  in  Table  2.  There  were  no  statistically  significant 
differences  in  the  prevalence  of  anti-HBs  between  males  and  females 
(p  > 0.317).  When  the  prevalence  of  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  carriers 
were  combined  (Table  3),  however,  evidence  for  HBV  infection  in 
males  was  more  frequent  than  that  found  in  females  in  almost  every 
age  group.  This  was  due  to  higher  prevalence  of  HBsAg  carriers 
in  males.  The  differences  in  the  frequency  of  prior  exposure  to 
HBV  infection  between  males  and  females  was  statistically  significant 
for  total  population  (p  > .001).  The  prevalence  of  prior  infection 
by  HBV  was  low  in  children  and  higher  in  the  older  age  groups. 

The  age  specific  prevalence  of  HBV  infections  reached  a plateau 
of  about  44%  over  the  age  of  20  years. 

Subtypes  were  determined  on  six  families  in  which  more  than  one 
member  was  found  to  carry  HBsAg.  There  were  five  families,  each 
with  two  HBsAg  positive  members,  in  which  only  HBsAg/adr  was 
identified.  In  one  family  HBsAg/adw  was  detected  in  two  antigen 
positive  boys.  Anti-HBS  was  detected  in  the  parents  of  these 
two  boys.  There  were  no  families  in  which  more  than  one  FBsAg 
subtype  could  be  detected. 

SUMMARY : A well  defined  rural  Thai  population  of  484  people, 

representing  approximately  80%  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  KYNP  have 
shown  age  specific  prevalences  of  prior  HBV  infections  which  are 
similar  to  those  seen  in  an  urban  Bangkok  population  (14)  and  in 
an  urban  Cambodian  population  (15).  This  suggests  similar  trans- 
mission of  HBV  in  all  three  groups. 


1425 


- .?•  - !S4  WXWp  ' 


Total  312  87  27.9 


41.9  172  49  28.5  484  180  37.1 


4 . Prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B Virus  Infections  in 
Residents  of  Phnom-Penh 

OBJECTIVE : To  determine  the  experience  with  Hepatitis  B virus 

of  residents  of  Phnom-Penh. 

DESCRIPTION : Tuis  work  completes  the  study  of  a Phnom-Penh 

population  reported  in  the  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory 
Annual  Report  1974-1975.  This  study  was  done  in  collaboration 
with  the  National  Blood  Transfusion  Center  and  the  Institute  of 
Biology,  Phnom-Penh,  Khmer  Republic.  In  June  of  1973,  question- 
naire information  and  sera  were  obtained  on  residents  of  Phnom- 
Penh  presenting  for  polio  immunization.  Prior  to  transport  to 
SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  sera  were  stored  in  Phnom-Penh 
in  a -20°C  freezer  for  approximately  one  year.  Assays  were 
performed  for  antibodies  to  several  viruses  known  to  be  common 
in  the  tropics.  Sera  was  screened  at  a dilution  of  1:10  for 
antibodies  against  polio  types  one,  two  and  three  using  a metabolic 
inhibition  technique  with  LLC-MK2  cells  (18).  Antibody  to 
mosquito-borne  togaviruses  found  in  Southeast  Asia  was  detected 
by  a hemagglutination  inhibition  test  using  eight  hemagglutinating 
units  of  antigen;  antigens  used  were  chikungunya  (Ross)  for 
alphavirus  and  dengue  type  two  (Hawaii)  for  flavevirus.  Sera  with 
no  detectable  antibody  at  a dilution  of  1:10  were  considered 
negative.  Hepatitis  B surface  antigen  (HBsAg)  and  antibody 
(anti-HBs)  were  detected  bv  commercially  available  radioimmune 
assays.  For  HBgAg  the  AUSRIA  II  test  (Abbott  Laboratories)  was 
used  with  confirmation  by  counterimmunoelectrophoresis  (CIEP) 
or  appropriate  absorption  of  antigen  by  anti-HBs.  A radioimmune 
assay  inhibition  test  (RIAI)  using  a standardized  quantity  of 
JB0Ag  was  employed  for  the  detection  of  anti-HBs.  The  sensitivity 
of  the  RIAI  has  been  shown  to  be  approximately  equivalent  to  the 
passive  hemagglutination  test  (4). 

PROGRESS : Information  and  serology  was  completed  for  all  viruses 

tested  on  340  individuals  of  which  116  were  male  and  229  were 
female . Sexes  were  equally  represented  in  the  age  group  less 
than  ten  years  old.  The  preponderance  of  females  in  the  older  age 
groups  was  probably  due  to  collection  of  blood  from  mothers  who 
brought  their  children  in  for  immunization. 

In  the  Phnom-Penh  population  described,  the  age  specific  prevalence 
for  antibody  to  Alpha,  Flavavirus,  and  poliovirus  of  all  three 
types  is  presented  in  Table  1.  The  prevalence  of  prior  Hepatitis  B 
virus  infections,  as  defined  by  the  sum  of  those  people  with  HB^Ag 
and  with  anti-HBs,  is  also  shown. 


1429 


I..  mM|iiii,nii.iiHJii  "JJLI. -.  II  u.  III-1J.J  ..  I 1M  MWU 


* 


DISCUSSION : As  noted  in  the  preliminary  report  (4),  the  acquisi- 

tion of  antibody  to  the  three  forms  of  polio,  alphaviruses  and 
flavaviruses , is  extremely  rapid  in  this  population.  This  is 
probably  due  to  the  generally  poor  sanitation  and  high  density 
of  mosquitoes  in  the  Phnom-Penh  area  at  the  time  of  the  sampling. 
Development  of  the  HBsAg  carrier  state  appeared  to  occur  early 
in  life  and  to  be  maintained  at  a relatively  constant  level  through 
all  age  groups  tested.  Anti-HBS  appears  to  be  acquired  later; 
the  data  indicated  that  the  prevalence  of  anti-HBs  does  not  reach 
a plateau  until  the  age  of  15  years.  The  prevalence  of  K3sAg 
and  anti-HBs  among  these  residents  of  Phnom-Penh  is  similar  to 
that  reported  in  a Bangkok  population  using  a PHA  test  (Figure  1) 
(4).  Similar  age  specific  prevalence  of  experience  with  hepatitis 
B virus  in  these  two  cities  suggests  similar  epidemiological 
conditions  in  other  urban  centers  in  Southeast  Asia. 

SUMMARY:  Among  a group  of  Phnom-Penh  residents  presenting  for 

polio  immunization,  the  age  specific  point  prevalences  of 
hepatitis  B virus  infections  was  similar  to  those  seen  in  Bangkok, 
suggesting  a similar  epidemiology. 

5.  Transmission  of  Hepatitis  B Virus  to  Gibbons  by 

Exposure  to  Saliva  Containing  Hepatitis  B Surface  Antigen 

OBJECTIVE : To  determine  if  human  saliva  containing  Hepatitis  B 

surface  Antigen  (HBsAg)  contains  infectious  Hepatitis  B Virus  (HBV). 

BACKGROUND : The  presence  of  hepatitis  B surface  antigen  (HBsAg) 

in  the  whole  mouth  saliva  of  antigenemic  people  has  been  reported 
previously  (19).  The  high  prevalence  of  antigen  and  antibody  to 
HBsAg  in  members  of  the  same  family,  children  in  institutions, 
sexual  partners , and  hepatitis  in  dental  personnel  has  raised  the 
possibility  that  saliva  may  be  a vehicle  for  the  transmission  of 
Hepatitis  B Virus  (HBV)  (20).  A human  bite  has  been  implicated 
in  the  transmission  of  Hepatitis  B virus  in  one  case  (21).  Since 
no  reports  have  demonstrated  the  infectivity  of  saliva,  an  attempt 
was  made  to  transmit  HBV  by  exposing  captive  gibbons  to  a pool  of 
human  saliva  containing  HBsAg. 

DESCRIPTION : Saliva  Collection.  Seven  male  and  four  female  Thai 

adults,  who  were  known  to  have  HBsAg  positive  sera,  were  asked  to 
provide  fresh  saliva  specimens.  Since  HBsAg  is  inconstantly 
present  in  saliva  (19),  samples  were  collected  from  the  donors 
on  more  than  one  day.  Collections  were  made  between  1000-1200 
hours , at  least  two  hours  after  eating  any  food  or  brushing  the 
teeth.  The  mouth  was  rinsed  with  clear  water  before  starting 
the  collections.  Each  collection  period  lasted  one  to  two  hours. 


1432 


jsj  ■ y.jr  -nsk.  -ivT'*!*!  ■ 


! 

i 


Table  2.  Whole  Mouth  Saliva  Samples  from  Carriers 
of  HBsAg/adr  Used  in  the  Saliva  Pool 


Donor 

Serum 

Saliva  Samples 

HBsAg* 

Titer 

e | 

Antigen 

Occult 

Blood 

Reaction 

No. 

Tested 

HBsAg 

♦ 

Volume  added 
to  saliva 
pool  (ml) 

1.  Male 

1:128 

+ 

4+ 

2 

2 

62.6 

36  years 

2.  Male 

1:32 

- 

4+ 

2 

2 

75.0 

36  years 

3+ 

2 

2 

2* 

2 

1 

1 ♦ 

1 

1 

3.  Female 

1:28 

• 

4+ 

1 

1 

20.0 

35  years 

3+ 

2 

2 

2+ 

3 

2 

4.  Male 

1:11 

N.T.** 

4+ 

1 

1 

12.2 

33  years 

Trace 

1 

1 

5.  Female 

1:11 

♦ 

4+ 

1 

1 

1.5 

28  years 

171.3 

Two  types  of  saliva  collections  were  made.  The  first  involved 
spitting  into  sterile  containers.  These  samples  were  considered 
to  be  whole  mouth  saliva,  since  they  included  all  oral  secretions. 
No  sialagogues  were  used  to  obtain  these  samples.  The  second  type 
of  collection  utilized  a circular  hard  plastic  cup,  2 cm  in 
diameter  with  a peripheral  suction  ring  and  a central  drainage 
port  attached  to  a flexible  polyethylene  drainage  tube.  The  cup 
was  positioned  so  as  to  completely  cover  the  opening  of  one 
parotid  duct  and  attached  to  the  buccal  mucosa  by  gentle  suction. 
This  type  of  collection  was  considered  to  consist  of  unilateral 
parotid  secretio..^.  During  the  collection  of  parotid  secretions, 
the  donor  was  sometimes  permitted  to  suck  on  a hard  candy  in  order 
to  promote  secretory  activity.  For  both  types  of  collections, 
the  saliva  samples  were  kept  chilled  in  an  ice  bath.  After 
removing  a 1.0  ml  aliquot  for  testing,  the  remainder  of  each  sample 
was  promptly  frozen  at  -70°C  until  pooled.  Samples  were  selected 
for  inclusion  in  a saliva  pool  on  the  basis  of  the  HBsAg  test 
results.  All  saliva  samples  were  tested  for  occult  blood  using 
paper  strips  impregnated  with  a buffered  mixture  of  organic 
peroxide  and  orthotolidine  (Labstix;  Ames  Company,  Elkhart, 
Indiana).  Multiple  serum  samples  were  drawn  from  each  donor  in 
order  to  determine  the  geometric  mean  level  of  antigenemia  during 
the  period  of  saliva  collection. 

Preparation  of  the  Saliva  Pool 

Five  poeple  provided  samples  of  whole  mouth  saliva  and  parotid 
secretion;  HBsAg  was  present  in  16/23  (61%)  of  the  former  and 
only  1/8  (12.5%)  of  the  latter  (Table  1).  The  single  antigen 
positive  parotid  secretion  sample  had  an  unusually  large  volume 
suggesting  the  collection  cup  may  have  dislodged  allowing  HBsAg 
to  enter  the  sample  from  the  oral  cavity.  Because  of  the  low 
antigen  yield,  parotid  secretions  were  not  included  in  the  final 
saliva  pool. 

Six  of  the  11  saliva  donors  had  HBsAg  in  one  or  more  samples. 

Five  of  the  six  carried  HBsAg/adr;  the  other  had  the  adw  subtype. 

In  order  to  maintain  uniformity  of  the  antigen  subtype,  only  18 
samples  from  the  adr  carriers  were  used  (Table  2).  Each  sample 
was  thawed  quickly,  mixed  thoroughly  together,  centrifuged  at 
10,000  rpm  (12,100  x g)  for  30  minutes  at  4°C,  and  the  supernate 
used  as  the  saliva  pool.  The  pool  appeared  visually  clear,  was 
positive  for  occult  blood,  and  gave  a reaction  fcr  HBsAg  by  radio- 
immune  assay  only. 

The  pool  was  divided  into  aliquots  for  convenient  use  and  cultured 
for  bacterial  growth.  Portions  reserved  for  subcutaneous  injection 


1435 


were  treated  with  penicillin  (1,000  units/ml)  and  streptomycin 
(1,000  mcg/ml).  Bacterial  cultures  of  the  untreated  saliva  grew 
a few  colonies  of  alpha  streptococcus;  the  saliva  containing 
antibiotics  was  bacteriologically  sterile.  All  portions  were 
kept  frozen  at  -70°C  until  used. 

Gibbon  Management 


Non-breeding  white-handed  gibbons  (Hylobates  lar)  were  housed  in 
one  wing  of  a Veterinary  Medicine  building  designed  to  permit  free 
circulation  of  air  between  the  animal  rooms  and  the  outside  area. 
Temperature  and  humidity  were  near  ambient.  Rooms  were  double 
screened  to  prevent  the  entry  of  insect  vectors.  The  gibbons 
selected  for  exposure  to  the  saliva  were  kept  in  one  room  apart 
from  the  others.  Each  gibbon  was  held  in  an  individual,  galvanized, 
metal  cage  spaced  so  as  to  prevent  direct  contact  between  animals. 
Animals  were  fed  a commercial  primate  diet  supplemented  with 
fruits  and  vegetables.  Each  had  an  individual  food  and  water 
supply.  Soiled  bedding  from  the  cages  was  incinerated  daily. 

Only  veterinary  personnel  who  had  no  HBsAg  were  permitted  to  care 
for  the  study  gibbons.  All  personnel  wore  clean  protective  outer 
clothing,  face  masks,  and  gloves  when  working  with  the  animals. 

Study  Gibbons 

Ten  gibbons  with  no  detectable  HBsAg  or  anti-HBs  were  selected 
for  exposure  to  the  saliva  pool.  They  included  five  males  and 
five  females  that  ranged  in  age  from  1 to  11  years.  Six  were 
born  in  the  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  gibbon  colony ; the 
remainder  had  lived  there  for  8 to  10  years.  One  other  gibbon 
(B-66S)  had  anti-HBs  and  was  followed  as  a control  for  the  methods 
of  antibody  detection.  No  studies  of  the  transmission  of  viral 
hepatitis  had  ever  been  done  in  the  gibbon  colony  before. 

Exposure  to  the  Saliva  Pool 

Ten  gibbons  were  exposed  to  the  saliva  pool.  Two  gibbons  (Pc-13, 

Pc -14)  received  subcutaneous  injections  of  1.7  ml  of  saliva  every 
other  day  for  three  doses  (Table  3).  Eight  other  gibbons  were 
divided  into  pairs  and  exposed  to  1.0  ml  of  saliva  on  each  of 
five  successive  days  by  either  an  aerosol  spray  of  the  nose; 
aerosol  spray  of  the  mouth;  brushing  the  teeth  with  the  saliva; 
or  ingesting  saliva  injected  into  a banana.  Each  animal  received 
a total  of  5.0  or  5.1  ml  of  saliva  pool  over  the  same  five  day 
period.  It  may  be  assumed  that  a large  portion  of  the  saliva 
administered  by  the  oral  and  nasal  routes  was  swallowed.  The 
antibody  positive  control  gibbon  (B-66S)  was  not  exposed  to  the 
saliva. 


1436 


Table  3.  Method  of  hxposurc  of  Gibbons 
to  Human  Saliva  Pool 


Saliva  Pool 


Gibbon 


Route  of  Exposure*  Total  Dose  No.  Age  gex 

(ml)  (yr) 


Subcutaneous 


Nasal  Aerosol 


Oral  Aerosol 


Toothbrush 


Pc-13 

Pc-14 

Pc-20 

S-81 

Pc-21 

S-83 

Pc-16 

P-16 


* The  subcutaneous  doses  were  given  on  Days  0,  2 
and  4.  All  other  methods  of  exposure  were  used 
on  Days  0 to  4 inclusive. 


i --tz. 


- - 


C B,  j&y:  '•VJtw 


Method  'of  Follow-up 

The  first  day  of  exposure  to  the  saliva  pool  was  designated  Day 
0.  On  every  subsequent  day  each  animal  was  observed  for  altered 
behavior  and  the  rectal  temperature  was  recorded.  Once  a week, 
each  gibbon  was  weighed  and  examined  by  a veterinarian.  Following 
sedation  with  a rapidly  acting  intramuscular  anesthetic  (phency- 
clidine hydrochloride  or  ketamine  hydrochloride),  a blood  sample 
was  drawn  for  a complete  blood  count,  serum  transaminase  levels 
(SGOT,  SGPT),  and  hepatitis  B serological  tests. 

Detection  of  HBgAg,  Anti-HBS  and  e-Antigen 

All  serum  and  saliva  samples  were  tested  for  HBsAg  by  solid  phase 
radioimmune  assay  (AUSRIA  II,  Abbott  Laboratories,  Inc.,  North 
Chicago,  Illinois)  without  preliminary  ..reatment.  Positive 
reactions  were  confirmed  by  a 50%  or  more  reduction  of  test  serum 
reactivity  after  incubation  with  a human  serum  containing  anti- 
HBS.  Serum  antigen  titers  were  determined  by  complement  fixation. 
HBsAg  subtypes  were  detected  by  immunodiffusion  using  subtype- 
specific  rabbit  antisera.  e-Antigen  was  detected  in  serum  by 
immunodiffusion  using  serum  from  a Thai  blood  donor  as  antibody. ' 

Anti-HBS  was  detected  by  a solid  phase  radioimmune  assay  (AUSAB, 
Abbott  Laboratories,  Inc.)  interpreted  according  to  the 
manufacturer's  recommendations.  Positive  reactions  were  confirmed 
whenever  possible  by  a 50%  or  more  reduction  in  reactivity  after 
incubating  the  test  sera  with  human  serum  containing  HBsAg/adr. 
Antibody  titers  were  determined  by  passive  hemagglutination 
(Electronucleonics  Laboratory  Inc.,  Bethesda,  Maryland)  using 
erythrocytes  coated  with  HBsAg/ad. 

Immune  Electron  Microscopy 

Dane  particles  were  sought  in  the  saliva  pool  by  immune  electron 
microscopy.  First,  6.0  ml  of  the  saliva  pool  were  centrifuged  at 
19,000  rpm  (43,500  x g)  in  a Sorvall  RC2-B  centrifuge  with  an 
SS-34  rotor  for  3 hours  at  4°C.  As  a control  for  the  saliva 
preparation,  human  plasma  containing  HBsAg/adr  was  diluted  1:400 
in  saliva  collected  from  a donor  without  antigenemia  and  centrifuged 
in  an  identical  manner.  Second,  5.0  ml  of  each  supernate  were 
centrifuged  in  a Beckman  L350  ultracentrifuge  using  an  SW  39L  rotor 
at  35,000  rpm  (approximately  100,000  x g)  for  16  hours  at  4°C. 

The  top  4.85  ml  of  supernate  was  removed  with  a pipette.  The 
yellow  brown  sediment  was  easily  resuspended  in  the  remaining 
0.15  ml  of  supernate  to  give  a 33X  concentration  of  antigen. 


1438 


WEEKS  AFTER  EXPOSURE 


Figure  | RtspooM  of  gibbon  Pc -13  to  Ihd  subcutonoout  inaction  of  o pool  of  hum  on  saliva 

containing  HBfAg  Antigtnomia  (H0,Ag)  was  follovsd  sequentially  by  hypertranso- 
minoiomlo  and  tho  oppeoronce  of  antibody  detected  by  paitivo  hemagglutination  (PHA) 
and  rodioimmuna  a«My  ( Rl A ) . 


236 

128  f 

H* 

64 


u ! 

‘j 

8 o- 


4 l 

2 i 


Figure  2 


Response  of  gibbon  Pc  - 14  to  subcutaneous  inoculation  of  o pool  of  humon  saliva 
containing  H8(Ag  ot  0 weeks  Mypertransominosemio  ot  II  weeks  immediately  followed 
a Surgical  procedure  on  one  bond  Anti-HB,  wos  first  dlltcttd  by  radioimmunt  OSSOy 
(RIA)  ot  22  weeks  H8| Ag  wos  not  detected 


1439 


mamaagga  - * . 


Electron  micrographs  of  clumps  of  HBsAg  particles  derived  from 
human  plasma  and  saliva.  A;  partially  purified  HBsAg/odr 
(EH  017)  with  normal  rabbit  serum  C;  EH0I7  with  rabbit 
anti-HBs.  B,  D,  similar  small  and  large  particles  from  the 
human  saliva  pool  precipitated  with  rabbit  anti-HBs  Filamentous 
forms  were  not  found  in  the  saliva.  The  bar  represents  100  nm 
(X  192,000). 


’’  mn-e-wm  «'*,»). 


As  a third  step,  each  saliva  concentrate  was  divided  in  two  and 
0.07  ml  mixed  with  either  0.1  ml  of  a 1:50  dilution  of  raLbit 
anti-HBs/adr  or  an  equal  dilution  of  serum  from  the  same  rabbit 
obtained  before  it  was  immunized.  The  rabbit  antiserum  was 
absorbed  to  excess  with  normal  human  serum.  In  addition,  separate 
preparations  were  made  of  a partially  purified  HBsAg/adr  in 
cesium  chloride  which  had  previously  been  shown  to  contain  small 
particles,  filaments  and  Dane  particles.  Each  sample  was  incubated 
at  25°C  for  one  hour,  then  at  4°C  overnight. 

The  fourth  step  involved  centrifugation  of  each  sample  at  17,000 
rpm  in  the  Sorvall  RC2-B  for  90  minutes  (22).  The  entire  supernate 
was  removed  with  a pipette  and  each  sediment  resuspended  in  three 
drops  of  distilled  water.  One  drop  of  each  sample  was  placed  on 
a collodion-carbon  coated  copper  200  mesh  grid  and  stained  with 
2%  uranyl  acetate  before  it  was  examined  under  a Hitachi  HU-11C 
electron  microscope. 

RESULTS : HBV  Infections  in  Exposed  Gibbons.  On  3 September  1975 

12  weeks  after  the  first  inoculation  of  the  saliva  pool,  gibbon 
Pc-13  was  positive  for  HBsAg  (Figure  1).  This  gibbon  had  detectable 
antigenenia  for  the  next  two  weeks  accompanied  by  a distinct  rise 
in  the  SGPT  values.  Anti-HBS  was  detected  in  all  subsequent  sera. 
During  the  period  of  antigenemia,  Pc-13  had  a normal  temperature, 
normal  eating  behavior,  and  no  change  in  weight.  Jaundice, 
hepatomegaly,  lymphadenopathy , skin  rash,  and  other  abnormal 
physical  findings  were  not  found.  As  soon  as  antigenemia  was 
detected,  this  gibbon  and  the  other  that  was  inoculated  (Pc-14) 
were  transferred  to  an  empty  room  to  reduce  any  possibility  of 
inadvertent  exposure  of  the  remaining  eight  study  animals. 

Gibbon  Pc-14  remained  well  until  10  weeks  and  4 days  when  he 
escaped  from  his  cage  and  was  bitten  severely  on  the  hand  by 
gibbon  P-16.  Following  a surgical  repair,  during  which  one  finger 
was  amputated,  the  SGPT  value  rose  to  61  units  and  the  SGOT  to  45 
units  (Figure  2).  Both  values  were  at  normal  levels  one  week 
later.  At  22  weeks,  the  serum  first  contained  anti-HBs  by  radio- 
immune  assay.  The  following  week  the  PHA  titer  of  anti-HBsAg 
was  1:32.  HBsag  was  not  detected  in  any  serum  specimen.  The 
incubation  period  is  assumed  to  be  22  weeks , although  it  could 
have  been  as  short  as  11  weeks  based  on  the  SGPT.  It  is  not 
possible  to  be  certain  whether  or  not  the  rise  in  transaminase 
was  entirely  due  to  the  traumatic  injury.  Since  gibbon  P-16 
showed  no  evidence  of  HBV  infection,  there  is  no  reason  to  suspect 
infection  of  Pc-14  resulted  from  the  bite.  None  of  the  gibbons 
exposed  to  the  saliva  by  the  oral  or  nasal  routes  developed  HBsAg 
or  anti-HBs  at  any  time. 


1441 


HBV  Infections  in  Unexposed  Gibbons 


Blood  samples  collected  from  gibbons  living  in  the  colony  between 
March  1973  and  December  1975  permitted  tests  of  55  animals.  While 
some  animals  left  the  colony  for  a variety  of  reasons  during  this 
period,  others  were  born  into  it.  Two  gibbons  were  found  to  be 
chronic  carriers  of  HBsAg  in  March  1973;  only  one  of  these  was 
still  present  during  the  experimental  period.  Throughout  the  34 
month  observation  period,  none  of  the  unexposed  gibbons  developed 
HBcAg  or  anti-HBs.  Gibbon  B-66S,  the  antibody  control,  was 
consistently  positive  for  anti-HBs. 

Immune  Electron  Microscopy 

The  partially  purified  HBsAg/adr  (EH017)  was  found  to  contain 
some  clusters  of  particles  even  without  the  addition  or  rabbit 
anti-HBs.  In  the  presence  of  antiserum,  particle  clusters  were 
more  abundant.  The  mean  dimensions  of  the  principal  morphological 
forms  were:  small  spheres,  21.6  ± 3.6  nm  diameter;  filaments  up 

to  177  nm  long;  and  large  spheres,  36.1  nm  (Figure  3).  Small 
particles  similar  to  those  in  EH017  were  seen  in  the  normal  saliva 
containing  HBsAg/adr  serum  only  after  rabbit  antiserum  was  added. 

The  saliva  pool  contained  no  clusters  of  particles  in  the  absence 
of  antiserum.  The  addition  of  specific  antibody,  however,  pre- 
cipitated many  clusters  which  included  small  particles  with  a mean 
diameter  of  23.3  * 2.7  nm  and  large  spheres  averaging  41.8  nm  in 
diameter  (Figure  3).  Filamentous  forms  were  not  found  in  the 
saliva  pool. 

DISCUSSION : It  is  certain  gibbon  Pc- 13  and  Pc-14  were  infected 

with  Hepatitis  B virus  following  an  exposure  to  the  pool  of  human 
saliva.  Because  of  the  precautions  taken  to  avoid  other  exposures 
to  HBV,  it  is  highly  unlikely  they  were  infected  in  any  other  way. 
During  the  study  period,  one  other  gibbon  and  four  animal  technicians 
were  known  to  carry  HBsAg.  All  five  antigen  carriers  were  kept 
separated  from  the  study  gibbons.  Throughout  34  months  of 
observations,  none  of  the  other  gibbons  developed  serologic 
evidence  of  infection,  whether  or  not  they  were  included  in  this 
experiment.  The  detection  of  large  particles  in  the  saliva  pool, 
similar  in  size  to  Dane  particles  (23),  adds  additional  weight 
to  the  probability  that  the  saliva  was  the  source  of  the  infection. 

Why  didn't  the  eight  gibbons  exposed  by  the  oral  and  nasal  routes 
become  infected?  It  is  probable  the  concentration  of  infectious 
material  was  too  low.  It  can  be  assumed  that  each  animal  swallowed 
some  of  the  saliva.  Drugman  (24)  demonstrated  that  MS-2  serum 
was  highly  infectious  by  mouth.  The  MS-2  serum  contained  a con- 
centration of  HBsAg  detectable  by  immunodiffusion.  The  saliva 


1442 


pool  used  in  this  study  had  antigen  detectable  only  by  radio immune 
assay.  The  relative  insensitivity  of  immunodiffusion  compared 
to  radioimmune  assay  suggests  the  MS-2  serum  contained  a much 
higher  titer  of  HBsAg  than  the  saliva  and  probably  more  infectious 
particles  as  well. 

The  incubation  periods  of  12  and  22  weeks  observed  for  the  gibbons 
were  similar  to  the  ranges  reported  for  chimpanzees,  2 to  15  weeks; 
rhesus  monkeys,  12  t:>  15  weeks;  and  human  children,  4 to  15  weeks. 

The  presence  of  detectable  HBsAg  in  saliva  correlated  in  general 
with  high  serum  titers  of  antigen  and  the  concentration  of  occult 
blood.  Exceptions  to  this  generalization  were  observed,  however. 
Perhaps  the  presence  of  3-antigen  in  the  donor's  blood  is  also 
important  for  selecting  infectious  saliva  donors. 

SUMMARY : A pool  of  whole  mouth  saliva  collected  from  fivf  ..man 

carriers  of  HBsAg/adr,  was  found  to  contain  antigen  par+ic.  s 
with  mean  diameters  of  23.3  and  41.8  nm  by  immune  electron  microscopy. 
Two  gibbons  received  subcutaneous  injections  of  the  pool  and 
developed  serological  and,  in  at  least  one  animal,  biochemical 
evidence  of  Hepatitis  B virus  infection  at  12  and  22  weeks, 
respectively.  Although  none  of  eight  other  gibbons  that  were 
exposed  by  the  nasal  or  oral  routes  were  infected,  the  experiment 
demonstrated  that  human  saliva  can  serve  as  a vehicle  for  the 
transmission  of  hepatitis  B virus. 

6 . The  Prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B with  e-Antigen  and 
Antibody  in  Thai  Blood  Donors 

OBJECTIVE: 

1.  To  determine  the  prevalence  of  e-antigen  and  antibody  in 
Thai  blood  donors. 

2.  To  develop  and  test  methods  for  detection  of  the  e-antigen 
and  antibody  (anti-e). 

BACKGROUND : Hepatitis  B Virus  (HBV)  has  now  been  associated  with 

three  apparently  independent  antigens;  hepatitis  B surface 
antigens,  (HBsAg),  hepatitis  B core  antigen  (HBcAg)  and  e-antigen. 
HBsAg  is  present  on  the  surface  of  the  putative  virus;  the  40  nm 
"Dane"  particle.  It  also  appears  to  be  produced  in  over -at undance 
in  the  form  of  particles  and  rods,  28  nm  in  diameter.  HBcAg  is 
associated  only  with  the  Dane  particle  and  is  found  only  in  the 
nuclear  capsid  of  the  particle.  Recently  a third  antigen,  the 
e-antigen  has  been  described.  This  antigen  is  associated  with 
the  intact  Dane  particle  and  appears  to  be  a marker  of 
infectivity  (25).  Antibody  has  been  identified  against  each  of 


1443 


these  antigens.  This  reports  a study  of  e-antigen  and  antibody 
(anti-e)  in  HBgAg  positive  Thai  blood  donors  and  also  describes 
the  preliminary  testing  of  a count erimmuno electrophoresis  test 
(CIEP)  for  the  e-antigen  and  antibody. 

DESCRIPTION:  HB^Ag  positive  sera,  collected  from  Thai  blood 

donors  were  examined  for  the  presence  of  e-antigen  and  antibody 
using  a routine  immunodiffusion  test  (ID).  The  ID  test  used  a 
micro  Ouchterlony  technique  with  two-seven  well  patterns  punched 
in  0.8%  agarose  gel  diluted  in  a buffer  pH  7.6  coating  microscope 
slide.  Reference  human  serum  containing  anti-e  (EH-421)  was  placed 
in  the  central  well  of  the  left  pattern  and  in  the  top  well  of 
the  right  pattern.  Reference  human  serum  containing  e-antigen 
(Donor  No.  H.  50493)  was  placed  in  the  central  well  of  the  right 
pattern  and  the  top  well  of  the  left  pattern.  Serum  to  be  tested 
were  placed  in  coordinate  wells  of  both  patterns.  The  loaded 
slides  were  placed  in  a moist  chamber,  incubated  at  room  temperature 
for  48  hours  and  observed  for  the  presence  of  precipitin  lines 
between  test  and  reference  sera.  A count erimmunoelectrophoresis 
test  (CIEP)  for  detection  of  e-antigen  and  anti-e  was  developed. 

The  conditions  of  the  test  were  similar  to  that  used  for  detection 
of  HBsAg  (26).  A reference  sera,  donor-H-50483  was  used  for 
e-antigen,  and  EH-421  was  used  for  anti-e.  Appropriate  controls 
were  included  in  each  test. 

PROGRESS : Table  1 illustrates  the  prevalence  of  e-antigen  and 

anti-e  among  HBsAg  positive  blood  donors.  e-Antigen  was  found 
in  14%  of  105  HBsAg  positive  Thai  blood  donors.  Of  the  105  donors 
87.6%  were  HBsAg/adr  and  12.4%  were  HBsAg/adw.  The  prevalence  of 
e-antigen  was  the  same  in  each  subtype.  Anti-e  „Js  found  only  in 
HBsAg/adr  positive  sera,  however,  the  number  of  K3sAg/adw  positive 
individuals  was  small. 

Comparisons  were  made  of  the  ID  and  the  CIEP  test  for  the  detection 
of  e-antigen  and  anti-e.  A 12%  (3/25)  increase  in  the  detection 
of  e-antigen  and  a 42%  (3/7)  increase  in  detection  of  anti-e  were 
found  using  the  CIEP  test  (Table  2 and  3).  The  CIEP  also  detected 
anti-e  in  sera  negative  for  HBgAg. 

DISCUSSION : The  e-antigen  has  been  detected  in  the  sera  of  Thai 

blood  donors  using  a reference  serum  (EH-421)  containing  anti-e. 
Anti-e  also  has  been  detected  in  Thai  blood  donors  using  sera 
containing  e-antigen;  detected  in  Thailand.  A selection  of  those 
sera  in  which  e-antigen  and  anti-e  were  detected  have  been  sent  to 
Dr.  George  L.  Le  Bouvier,  Yale  University  for  confirmation  (Table  4). 
The  e-antigen  and  anti-e  were  detected  using  both  an  ID  and  a CIEP 
technique.  In  preliminary  testing  the  CIEP  technique  appeared  to 
be  more  sensitive  than  the  ID. 


Table  1.  Prevalence  of  e-Antigen  and  Antibody  Among 
H3sAg  Carrier  Blood  Donors  (Immunodiffusion  Test) 


Total 


e-Ag 

Positive 

(HU * vt.j  ICU 

No.  % 

92 

13  14 

13 

2 15 

105 

15  14 

No.  tested 


Anti-e 


Positive 


No.  % 


r9-  • 


* ^ ; 


Table  2.  The  Co.r.pc  'ison  of  e-/V  Vo., by  ID  and  CEP  Methods 


Test  for 

i-Ant :gen 

HBeAq 

No. 

ID 

CEP 

(IEOP) 

tested 

No. 

posi  i-ivo 

*.  : 

'!o. 

■ . • 1.  '•  VC 

Percent 

Positive 

51 

22 

43 

25 

n 

Negative 

25 

0 

0 

0 

n 

Total 

76 

22 

28 

25 

32 

Table  3.  The  Comparison  of  Anti-e  Tested  by  ID  and  CEP  Methods 


Test  for  Anti-e 

HBsAg 

No. 

ID 

CEP 

tested 

No. 

positive 

Percent 

No. 

positive 

Percent 

Positive 

28 

4 

14 

4 

14 

Negative 

25 

0 

0 

3 

12 

Total 

53 

4 

14 

7 

13 

1446 


:-.^c 


Table  4.  Red  Cross  Blood  Donors  Sera  Containing 
e- Anti  gen  and  Anti-e 


e-Antigen  H.  50475 

*H. 

50685 

H.  50400 

*H. 

50720 

H.  50482 

50771 

H.  50483 

*H. 

50772 

H.  50485 

*H. 

50773 

H.  50624 

50778 

*H.  50<>36 

50876 

*n.  ^uuu2 

Antl-e  H.  47960 

*H. 

50655 

H.  47994 

50664 

* Sent  to  Dr.  George  L.  l.o  Bouvier  for  confirmation 


1447 


F 


A similar  prevalence  of  e-antigen  was  found  among  blood  donors 
carrying  either  HBsAg/adr  or  HBsAg/adw.  This  suggested  that 
e-antigen  is  not  subtype  specific.  Since  e-antigen  has  been 
suggested  as  a marker  for  hepatitis  infection,  further  studies 
of  this  antigen  will  be  carried  out. 

SUMMARY : The  e-antigen  and  anti-e  has  been  detected  in  Thai  blood 

donors.  A CIEP  test  has  been  developed  which  appears  to  increase 
the  sensitivity  of  detection.  Further  studies  are  planned  to 
determine  the  usefulness  of  e-antigen  as  an  indicator  of  infectivity 
of  hepatitis  B virus. 


7. 


Radioimmune  Assays  for  Antibody  to  Hepatitis  B Surface 
Antigen 


OBJECTIVE : To  compare  three  assays  for  antibody  to  Hepatitis  B 

surface  antigen  (Anti-HBS):  A direct  radioimmuno  assay,  a passive 

hemagglutination  test  and  a radioimmuno  assay  inhibition  test. 

To  develop  a systematic  method  for  screening  sera  for  hepatitis  B 
surface  antigen  (HBsAg)  and  anti-HBs. 

BACKGROUND:  The  radioimmune  assay  inhibition  test  (RIAI,  based 

on  the  AUSRIA  II,  Abbott  Laboratories)  and  the  passive  hemagglutina- 
tion test  (PHA,  Electronucleonics,  Inc.)  for  anti-HBs  were  shown 
to  have  similar  sensitivity  for  the  detection  of  antibody  to 
hepatitis  B surface  antigen.  (SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory 
Annual  Report  Report  1974-1975).  These  tests,  as  well  as  a 
counterimmunoelectrophoresis  (CIEP)  technique  have  been  used 
routinely  at  the  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  for  the  past 
three  years.  In  1976  a new  direct  radioimmune  assay  for  anti-HBs 
(AUSAB,  Abbott  Laboratories),  became  commercially  available. 

This  necessitated  an  evaluation  of  the  new  test  and  the  development 
of  a new  system  for  screening  serum. 

DESCRIPTION : Comparative  tests  of  the  CIEP,  RIAI,  PHA,  And  AUSAB 

were  carried  out.  The  PHA  and  AUSAB  were  performed  using  the 
instructions  of  the  manufacturer  and  the  CIEP  and  RIAI  followed 
the  method  described  previously  (SEATC  Medical  Research  Laboratory 
Annual  Report  1971-1972  and  1974-1975).  Appropriate  controls  were 
included  for  each  test.  In  cases  where  one  test  was  not  confirmed 
by  another,  the  presence  of  anti-HBs  was  substantiated  by 
neutralization  with  HBsAg. 

PROGRESS : A panel  of  100  sera  from  a population  of  Thai  females 
collected  in  1973  and  known  to  have  a high  prevalence  of  anti-HBs 
were  tested  by  the  four  methods.  Of  the  100  sera  tested,  antibody 
was  detected  in  66  by  AUSAB,  37  by  RIAI  and  34  by  PHA.  Twenty-six 


1448 


Table  1.  Comparison  of  Four  Tests  for  Anti-IIUs 
Results  of  100  Sera 


Anti  HB 


sera  were  detected  by  AUSAB  only;  almost  twice  as  many  as  were 
detected  by  the  RIAI  (Table  1). 


The  marked  increase  in  sensitivity  without  loss  of  specificity  or 
reproducibility,  shown  by  the  AUSAB  over  previously  performed 
antibody  detection  methods  led  to  the  abandonment  of  the  RIAI  and 
the  PHA  for  routine  antibody  screening.  Because  of  this  a new 
protocol  for  HBV  testing  had  to  be  designed. 

The  laboratory  now  submits  all  sera  to  a testing  sequence  designed 
to  identify  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  by  the  most  efficient  but  inexpensive 
method  possible  (Figure  1).  Sera  is  initially  screened  for 
HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  by  CIEP.  The  CIEP  was  shown  in  previous  studies 
to  identify  over  80%  of  HBsAg  containing  sera  and  up  to  10%  of 
anti-HBs  containing  sera  ( SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory 
Annual  Report  1972-1973  and  1974-1975).  Sera  that  are  negative 
for  HBsAg  and  anti-HBs  by  IEOP  are  tested  by  AUSAB.  AUSAB 
positives  are  confirmed  and  titrated  by  PHA  or,  if  negative  by 
PHA,  they  are  substantiated  by  neutralization  with  HBsAg.  A serum 
is  considered  neutralized  if  the  counts  per  minute  are  less  than 
or  equal  to  50%  of  the  counts  per  minute  of  non-neutralized  serum. 
Those  rare  sera  in  which  neutralization  does  occur  are  called 
false  positives,  and  are  considered  negative.  The  sera  which 
are  negative  by  AUSAB  are  tested  by  RIA  (AUSRIA  II)  for  HBsAg. 

Sera  found  to  be  positive  for  HBgAg  by  this  technique  are  neutralized 
by  absorption  with  anti-HBs  and  are  considered  negative  for  HBsAg 
if  no  neutralization  takes  place. 

8.  The  Frequencies  of  Hepatitis  B Antigen  Subtypes  in 
Various  Parts  of  Thailand 


OBJECTIVE : To  determine  the  relative  frequency  of  hepatitis  B 

surface  antigen  (HBsAg)  subtypes  in  the  different  regions  of  Thailand. 

BACKGROUND : On  the  surfaceof  the  hepatitis  B antigen  particle 

there  are  at  least  five  different  antigenic  determinants;  the 
common  determinant  a,  and  two  pairs  of  usually  mutually  exclusive 
determinants  d/$r  and  w/r.  In  Asia  the  y determinant  is  uncommon 
and  the  majority  of  antigens  are  subtypes  adr  (HBsAg/adr). 

A gradient  of  increasing  frequency  from  north  to  south  of  the  r 
subtype  has  been  reported  in  Japan  (27).  This  observation  suggested 
that  similar  geographic  gradients  might  be  found  in  other  Asian 
nations  and  an  investigation  was  undertaken  in  Thailand  of  the 
prevalence  of  HBsAg  subtypes  in  different  regions. 

DESCRIPTION:  Available  information  on  the  HBgAg  subtypes  in  Thailand 

indicates  some  differences  in  subtype  frequency  between  samples 
collected  from  Bangkok,  the  northern  part  of  the  country  (Chiang  Mai) 


V* 


z’vtr** 


and  Khao  Yai  National  Park  (Figure  1).  Additional  information  on 
the  subtypes  of  HBsAg  may  or  may  not  support  the  preliminary 
findings . 

This  study  was  done  in  collaboration  with  the  Thai  Red  Cross  Center, 
Bangkok.  Blood  donors  presenting  to  the  blood  collection  centers 
in  the  central  and  eastern  regions  of  Thailand  were  sampled  by  the 
National  Blood  Bank  Service  of  the  Thai  Red  Cross  Center.  Sera 
was  tested  for  the  presence  of  HBsAg  by  counterimmunoelectrophoresis 
(CIEP)  at  the  Thai  Red  Cross  Laboratory  for  subtype  determination. 

All  HB0Ag  positive  blood  donors  provided  the  following  information: 


a . Name 

b. 

Age 

c.  Sex 

d. 

Present  residence 

e.  Previous  blood  donation 
and  transfusion 

f. 

History  of  clinical 
hepatitis  and  jaundice 

Antigen  subtypes  were  determined  by  immunodiffusion  (ID)  (28), 
using  specific  rabbit  antisera. 

PROGRESS : Six  hundred  and  fifty-four  sera  containing  HB^Ag  were 

tested.  All  of  them  were  found  to  have  the  d determinant.  Eighty- 
s^x  percent  of  311  HB^Ag  positive  sera  collected  from  blood  Honors 
residing  in  Bangkok  were  tlb  Ag/adr  (Table  1).  Seventy-six  percent 
of  252  HB.Ag  positive  sera  from  the  central  region  of  Thailand, 
collected  in  Nontaburi,  Phathumdhani , Ayudhya,  Lopburi , Samutprakarn 
Kanchanaburi , Samutsakorn,  Samutsongkram,  Rajburi,  Nakorn  Fathom, 
Petchaburi  and  Prachuab  Kirikan  were  HBsAg/adr.  Eight-four  percent 
of  SI  sera  collected  in  the  eastern  region  from  Cholburi , Trat , 
Chanthaburi , Chacherngsoa  and  Prachinburi  were  HBsAg/adr.  The 
combination  of  all  of  the  HBsAg  positive  sera  collected  from 
Bangkok  and  other  provinces  in  the  central  region  show  81%  HBsAg/adr. 
So  far  we  have  detected  no  statistical  differences  in  the  prevalence 
of  HBsAg/adr  in  the  central  part  of  Thailand. 

DISCUSSION : The  data  on  the  frequency  of  HB^Ag  subtypes  collected 

from  the  central  districts  of  Thailand  have  not  revealed  any 
regional  differences  in  subtype  prevalences;  however,  HB£Ag 
positive  blood  donors  from  the  north  and  the  south  of  Thailand 
remain  to  be  tested. 

All  of  the  654  blood  donors  tested  in  this  study  have  had  the  d 
determinant.  However,  a HB£Ag  obtained  from  the  serum  of  a 15- 
year  old  Karen  girl,  living  in  Sangkhlaburi , Kanchanaburi,  a 


1453 


remote  section  of  Thailand , has  been  identified  in  our  laboratory 
as  HBgAg/ayw.  This  antigen  showed  lines  of  identity  in  immunodiffu- 
sion to  a reference  HBgAg/ayw  antigen  (WRAIR-DI-387 , JF  019)  and 
to  D2-2  antigen  (confirmed  in  Paris,  France,  April  1975  as  HBsAg/ 
ayw).  This  is  the  first  serum  of  an  indigenous  Southeast  Asian 
in  which  the  y determinant  has  been  detected.  Further  information 
is  being  sought  on  the  contacts  of  this  Karen  woman,  in  an  attempt 
to  determine  the  source  of  this  anomalous  subtype. 

SUMMARY:  Sera  from  654  HBgAg  positive  blood  donors  collected  in 

the  central  and  eastern  regions  of  Thailand  were  tested  for  HBsAg 
subtypes.  Eighty-one  percent  of  the  sera  contained  HBsAg/adr. 

There  were  no  statistical  differences  in  the  prevalences  of 
subtypes  in  different  regions.  Subtype  prevalence  in  the  northern 
and  southern  regions  of  Thailand  are  being  examined. 


Table  1.  The  Relative  Frequency  of  HBsAg  Subtypes 
in  Blood  Donors  from  Various  Parts  of  Thailand 


Region 


HB  Ag  Positive 


Subtype  Frequency  (%) 


Sera 

a dr 

adw 

Bangkok 

311 

86 

12 

Central 

252 

76 

17 

East 

91 

84 

13 

9.  Serum  Immunoglobulin  Levels  in  Infants  with  and 
without  Hepatitis  B Virus  Infection 


OBJECTIVE: 


1.  To  determine  the  serum  levels  of  IgM  and  IgG  during  the  first 
year  of  life. 

2.  To  determine  if  Hepatitis  B virus  (HBV)  infection  alters  the 
serum  immunoglobulin  levels  in  infants. 

BACKGROUND:  Little  information  is  available  on  IgM  and  IgG  levels 

in  Thai  infants.  No  information  exists  on  the  effect  of  HBV 
infections  on  immunoglobulin  levels  of  Thai  infants.  This 


TAT  T t ■ 


(%6ui)  ftb|  wn«3S 


1455 


T,,  ,S. 


Table  1.  Serum  IgM  Levels  (mg%)  During  the  First  Year  of  Life 


Infant  Group 

Birth 

4-10 

Age  in  Weeks 
11-19  22-33 

36-42 

48-51 

HBV  Infected 

Mean 

9.5 

90 

157 

132 

123 

128 

S.D. 

3.2 

51 

76 

39 

48 

11 

S.E. 

1.1 

23 

27 

15 

21 

8 

N. 

8 

5 

8 

7 

5 

2 

Non- infected 

Mean 

11.9 

93 

113 

149 

159 

267 

S.D. 

5.5 

74 

70 

58 

62 

99 

S.E. 

1.3 

18 

16 

14 

22 

44 

N. 

19 

17 

20 

17 

8 

5 

Combined 

Mean 

11.2 

92 

126 

144 

145 

227 

S.D. 

5.0 

69 

73 

53 

58 

106 

S.E. 

1.0 

15 

14 

r 

16 

40 

N. 

27 

22 

28 

24 

13 

7 

1456 


Table  2.  Serum  IgG  Levels  (mg  %)  During  the  First  Year  of  L :fe 


Infant  Group 

Birth 

4-10 

Age  in 
11-19 

Weeks 

22-33 

36-42 

48-52 

H8V  Infected 

Mean 

134-1 

660 

771 

809 

1249 

1255 

S.D. 

384 

138 

419 

387 

824 

629 

S.E. 

157 

69 

171 

158 

412 

445 

N. 

6 

4 

6 

6 

4 

2 

Non- infected 

Mean 

1143 

785 

857 

867 

998 

1465 

S.D. 

536 

323 

375 

313 

303 

365 

S.E. 

130 

81 

86 

81 

107 

163 

N. 

17 

16 

19 

15 

8 

5 

Combi ned 

Mean 

1195 

760 

836 

850 

1081 

1405 

S.D. 

501 

296 

379 

327 

509 

407 

S.E. 

104 

66 

76 

71 

147 

154 

N. 

23 

20 

25 

21 

12 

7 

1457 


investigation  was  incorporated  into  a larger  study  of  the  € Cfects 
of  HBV  infections  on  Bangkok  children  during  the  first  year  of 
life. 


DESCRIPTION : Serial  serum  samples  were  collected  during  the  first 

year  of  life  from  infants  of  mothers  who  carried  hepatitis  B 
surface  antigen  (HBsAg),  antibody  (anti-HBs)  or  were  negative  at 
the  time  of  delivery. 

Serum  samples  were  stored  at  -20°C  until  tested  for  HBsAg  and 
anti-HBs  by  techniques  previously  described  (4).  Serum  IgM  and 
IgG  levels  were  determined  by  testing  all  serum  samples  using 
commerical  radial  immunodiffusion  kits  (Hyland  Laboratories). 
Questionable  determinations  were  repeated  on  each  individual 
simultaneously.  For  purposes  of  analysis,  eight  infants  who 
developed  HBV  infections  were  compared  to  21  infants  who  did  not. 
All  of  the  mothers  of  the  eight  infected  infants  were  HBsAg 
positive;  the  mothers  of  the  non- infected  infants  included  two 
with  anti-HBs  (FM69,  535),  five  with  HBsAg  (FM68,  487,555,  573, 
578)  and  14  negatives. 

PROGRESS:  IgM  and  IgG  concentrations  for  each  age  are  shown  in 

Tables  1 and  2,  respectively.  Although  few  infants  had  complete 
scrum  collections  to  test,  there  was  a general  trend  toward  rising 
IgM  levels  in  both  groups  of  infants  during  the  first  33  weeks 
(Figure  1).  IgG  levels  fell  immediately  after  birth,  then  showed 
a progressive  rise  (Figure  2).  The  wide  range  of  values  in 
members  of  both  study  groups  prevented  the  recognition  of  any 
difference  between  them  due  to  infection  with  HBV. 


SUMMARY : A small  pilot  study  of  serum  IgM  and  IgG  levels  in 

Bangkok  infants  was  completed.  Combined  data  for  all  infants 
showed  IgM  levels  rose  progressively  after  birth  as  infant  IgM 
production  began.  Serum  IgG  levels  fell  during  the  period  when 
maternal  antibody  was  declining  but  recovered  as  intrinsic  IgG 
production  increased.  There  was  no  discernible  difference  between 
eight  infants  with  HBV  infections  and  15  non-inf ected  infants. 

C.  RABIES 

1.  Animal  Rabies  in  Thailand : Rabies  Diagnostic  Laboratory 

Services 


OBJECTIVE : To  provide  rabies  diagnostic  services  to  US  military 

personnel  in  Southeast  Asia  and  the  Western  Pacific. 


M-f. 


m 


DESCRIPTION : Every  brain  submitted  was  examined  by  the  fluorescent 

antibody  test  and  confirmed  by  mouse  inoculation.* 

PROGRESS:  Of  750  brain  specimens  examined,  230  (31%)  were  positive 

(Table  1).  The  prevalence  of  rabies  in  the  dog  (37%)  and  in  the 
cat  (4%)  was  slightly  less  than  in  recent  years. 

Withdrawal  of  US  armed  forces  from  Thailand  resulted  in  a decrease 
in  rabies  specimens  of  military  origin.  Tor  instance,  during 
the  first  quarter  of  1976,  rabies  specimens  submitted  by  US 
armed  forces  accounted  for  20%  of  the  total.  By  the  end  of  the 
second  quarter  of  1976,  US  armed  forces  specimens  accounted  for 
only  11%  of  the  total. 


* As  described  in  Laboratory  Techniques  in  Rabies,  Third  Edition, 
WHO  Monograph  Series  No.  23,  (1973). 


1459 


Table  I.  Summary  of  Rabies  Diagnoses  1 April  1975-31  March  1976 


Species 

Number  of  Specimens 

Number  Positive 

Percent  Positive 

Canine 

586 

217 

37 

Feline 

101 

4 

4 

Human 

5 

4 

80 

Rodent 

9 

0 

0 

Primate 

9 

1 

11 

Rabbit 

10 

0 

0 

Bat 

6 

0 

0 

Squirrel 

5 

0 

0 

Monkey 

8 

0 

0 

Others  * 

11 

4 

36 

Total 

750 

230 

31 

* 1 avian,  3 mice,  4 bovine,  1 horse,  1 otter,  1 pig. 


1460 


III.  PARASIT.  - DISEASES  OF  MAN  AND  ANIMALS 

A.  FILARIASIS 

1.  Ecology  of  Bancroft ian  Filariasis 

OBJECTIVE : To  investigate  the  ecology  of  bancroftian  filariasis 

in  rural  areas  of  Sangkhlaburi  district,  Kanchanaburi  Province 
with  the  following  specific  aims: 

1.  To  identify  the  vector(s)  of  Wuchereria  bancrofti  by 
recovery  of  filariae  from  wild-caught  mosquitoes  and  by  feeding 
laboratory-reared  strains  of  suspected  vector  species  on  known 
microfilaria-carriers . 

2.  To  gather  data  on  the  distribution,  larval  habitats 
and  bionomics  of  vector  species  and  to  collect  correlated 
series  of  larvae,  pupae  and  adults  of  these  mosquitoes  for 
taxonomic  studies. 

DESCRIPTION : In  1970,  Harinasuta  and  associates  (29)  described 

an  endemic  focus  of  bancroftian  filariasis  in  rural  villages 
located  near  the  headwaters  of  the  Kwai  River  in  the  Sangkhlaburi 
district  of  Kanchanaburi  Province.  Microfilaremia  in  infected 
villagers  was  nocturnally  subperiodic  , with  peaks  near  2000 
hours  but  microfilariae  were  also  present  in  significant  numbers 
in  the  peripheral  blood  during  daylight  hours.  Infective  stage 
larvae  of  W_.  bancrofti  were  found  only  in  wild-caught  mosquitoes 
belonging  to  the  Aedes  ( F inlaya ) niveus  complex.  These  mosquitoes 
are  among  the  most  common  diurnal  man-biting  mosquitoes  in  the 
forested  areas  of  Southeast  Asia;  but  many  of  the  species  of 
this  complex  cannot  be  differentiated  with  certainly  at  the 
present  time. 

During  the  1974-1975  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  report 
period,  a total  of  5141  mosquitoes  were  caught  in  biting  collec- 
tions made  from  villagers  during  daylight  and  early  evening  hours 
in  five  villages  in  the  Sangkhlaburi  district,  Lawa,  Wang  Kalang, 
Nithae,  Nong  Padong  and  Kupadu.  Of  these,  45  mosquitoes  belonging 
to  eight  species  (Aedes  niveus  group  species  "A,"  Aedes  desmotes, 
Aedes  gardnerii,  Aedes  medlopunctatus ; Aedes  imprimens , Armigeres 
annulitarsis,  Armigeres  flavus  and  Mansonia  dives)  were  found 
infected  with  filarial  larvae  (4).  While  matur : larvae  found 
in  "Species  A"  were  typical  of  K.  bancrofti , the  larvae  from  the 
other  species  were  not  identified  at  the  time  of  the  last  report. 


1461 


Table  1.  Results  of  Dissection  of  Mosquitoes  for  Filariae- 
Sangkhlaburi , 1975-76. 


Species 


Number  | Number  "| 
Dissected  Positive  i 


Aedcs  niveus  group  (species  "A") 
Aedes  desmotes 


Acdes  gardnerii 


Armigeres  subalbatus 


Mansonia  dives 

Anopheles  barbirostris  group 

Anopheles  aconitus 


Anopheles  balabacensis 


Anopheles  maculatus 


Anopheles  minimus 


Anopheles  nivipes 
Culex  vishnui  complex 


Other  species* 


*Less  than  20  specimens  per  species  dissected. 


4T£X  ' ; ; v 


Table  2.  Mosquitoes  fed  on  microfilaria  carriers- 
Sangkhlaburi , 1975. 


Patient  Mfl.per 
No.  cmm. 


Mosquito 


No.  No.  No.  Percent 


Anopheles  maculatus 
Anopheles  balabaccn: 
Anopheles  maculatus 


Fed 

Diss 

Pos.  Pos 

27 

13* 

0 0 

27 

9* 

1 11 

100 

68* 

16  24 

29 

7* 

2 28 

*Mosquitoes  which  were  alive  after  21  day  incubation  period. 


£ 


Colonized  strains  of  Aedes  aegypti,  a.  albopictus,  A.  togoi, 
Armigeres  annulitarsis  and  Culex  quinquef asciatus  were  fed 
upon  villagers  circulating  microfilariae  of  W.  bancrofti,  but 
development  to  the  infective  stages  of  the  parasite  was  observed 
only  in  A.  togoi  and  C.  quinquef asc latus . 

PROGRESS : One  of  the  principal  objectives  of  this  study  was  to 

identify  the  memDer(s)  of  the  Aedes  niveus  complex  involved  in 
the  transmission  of  V/.  bancrofti  in  the  Sangkhlaburi  area. 
Therefore,  the  collection  and  dissection  of  these  and  other 
diurnal  mosquitoes  was  emphasized  during  the  previous  reporting 
period.  During  the  present  period,  from  April  1975  to  February 
1976,  we  concentrated  on  the  examination  of  nocturnal  mosquitoes, 
especially  anopheline^.  Night-time  human-bait  collections  were 
made  and  CDC  light  trap^  operated  in  the  five  study  villages, 
yielding  a total  o.  110.  n.  souitoes  for  dissection.  Essentially 
the  same  species  oi  mosquitoes  that  were  positive  in  the  1974-75 
studies  were  again  foui  infected  (Table  1).  Infective  stage 
larvae  of  W.  bancrof t were  present  only  in  species  "A"  of  the 
Aedes  niveus  complex  The  filariae  found  in  Aedes  desmotes , 

A..  gardnerii , Armigeres  subalbatus  and  Mansonia  d ives  during 
this  period  have  not  yet  been  identified.  However,  most  of 
the  filariae  recovered  from  these  same  species  of  mosquitoes 
during  the  1974-75  season  have  been  identified  as  Dirof ilaria 
sp.  (30 y.  There  is  some  uncertainty  aoout  a few  of  these 
determinations  because  first  and  second  stage  filarial  larvae 
were  found  in  t!  - thoracic  muscles  of  the  mosquitoes  rather 
than  in  the  maluighian  tubules  which  are  the  typical  develop- 
mental sites  of  most  Dirof ilaria  species.  None  of  the  anophelines 
dissected  during  the  present  period  were  infected,  although 
harinasuta  et  al.  reported  finding  early  stage  filariae  j.n 
Anopheles  maculatus , An.  minimus  and  An.  vagus  during  their 
investigations  (79). 

Deionized  strains  of  Anopheles  balahacensis  and  Anopheles 
maculatus  were  transported  to  Sangkhlaburi  and  fed  cn  f 
Known  microfilaria  carriers.  Infective  stage  larvae  ' 
bancrofti  were  found  in  the  head  and  mouthparts  of  noth  --et’es 
21  days  after  feeding  on  a patient  circulating  approximati  Iv 
21  microfilariae  per  cmm  of  blood  (Table  2).  When  then, 
mosquitoes  were  fed  on  a patient  circulating  significant iy  fewer 
microfilariae,  development  to  infective  stages  was  observed  ;n 
a single  An . maculatus. 

Mosquito  larvae,  collected  from  bamboo  oviposition  cups  set  out 
in  the  study  villages  throughout  the  1975-76  rainy  season,  'e^e 


1464 


reared  to  maturity,  and  their  arval  and  pupal  sxins,  togeiner 
with  tne  correlated  adults,  were  preserved  for  taxonomic  study. 
Memoers  or  the  Aedes  niveus  complex  most  rrequentiy  identified 
from  tnese  collections  included  species  "A,"  Aedes  niveoides 
Barraud  and  Aedes  nipponicus  uu  Casse  and  Yamaguti.  The  females 
of  species  "A"  closely  resemble  those  of  Aedes  af bolateralis 
(Theobald),  but  the  terminalia  of  the  males  are  distinctly 
difterent.  Descriptions  of  ail  stages  of  this  apparently 
undescribed  species  are  being  prepared  for.  puoiication. 

2 . Establishment  of  An  animal  Model  for  Use  in 
FjLlariasis  Studies 

OBJECTIVE:  To  trap  wild  rodents  of  Genus  Rattus  infected  with 

nematodes  of  Superfamily  Filarioidea,  to  maintain  these  in  the 
laboratory  and  to  transmit  the  filarial  infections  from  tnem, 
through  mosquitoes,  to  laboratory  albino  rats. 


BACKGROUND:  The  need  for  a consistently  reproaucioxe  .Laboratory 

infection  with  nematodes  of  SuDerfamilv  "1 Laria idea  in  a readily 
available,  genetically  controlled,  laboratory  animal  has  been 
expressed  (31).  Litomosoides  carinii  naturally  found  in  tne 
wild  cotton  rat  can  be  experimentally  transmitted  to  the  labora- 
tory albino  rat  and  the  Mongolian  gerbil  but  not  by  a mosquito. 
n mosquito-transmitted  f ilaria-laboratory  rat  system  wouJd  More 
closely  meet  the  requirements  of  the  desired  experimental  modal 
(32).  Attempts  to  transmit  3rugia  tupaia  lgh  nos.'uitoes, 
to  various  laboratory  animals  were  made  at  ’•-"  EATO  Medical 
Research  Laboratory  (SMRL)  in  1969  and  lQr7  '53.34)  but  were 
unsuccessful.  One  mosquito-transmittea  : anal  parasite, 
Brienlia  oooliati , was  recently  reported  'aiavsta  and 
laboratory  rats  have  been  successfully  ‘ ifectea  with  this 
nematode  at  the  University  of  iingapcre  35,36). 


A preliminary  study  in  which  wild  rodents  in  Thailand  were 
trapped  and  screened  for  microfilaria  revealed  the  presence 
of  unreported  filarial  nematodes  in  several  species.  This 
study  was  initiated  to  evaluate  the  model  potential  of  some 
of  these. 


DESCRIPTION : Small  mammals  were  live-traDped , using  bananas  as 

bait,  in  8 different  locations  in  Southeastern  and  South  Central 
Thailand  from  late  August,  1975  through  May,  1976  (Figure  1). 

The  habitats  trapped  ranged  from  evergreen  rorests  on  mountain 
sides  to  tne  water  front  area  of  Bangkok.  Traps  were  set  in 
the  evening  and  picked  up  in  the  morning.  Blood  was  drawn  from 


ft*  mi 


the  rats  and  examined  for  microfilariae  in  late  morning  and 
early  afternoon,  generally  between  1130  and  1530  hours. 

The  animals  were  anesthetized  with  ether  and  1/4  to  1 1/2  cc  of 
blood  was  withdrawn  by  cardiac  puncture  with  a heparin-wet 
syringe.  The  blood  was  mixed  with  20  to  30  cc  of  normal  saline 
and  passed  through  a 3 or  5 micron  Millipore  filter.  The 
filter  was  placed  on  a clean  glass  slide  with  one  or  two  drops 
of  saline,  a coverslip  was  added,  and  the  filter  was  examined 
at  a magnification  of  100  X.  Movement  of  the  microfilariae 
was  readily  discernible  and  an  estimate  of  size  could  be  made 
from  these  live  mounts.  By  using  this  procedure,  relatively 
large  numbers  of  animals  could  be  examined  quickly  and  the 
animals  determined  to  be  positive  or  negative  within  10  minutes 
of  bleeding.  All  negative  animals  were  released  within  3 to  4 
hours  of  bleeding  and  positive  animals  were  transferred  to 
laboratory  rat  cages. 

Although  no  attempts  were  made  to  study  periodicity  of  micro- 
filaria, different  bleeding  times  were  used  occasionally  to 
see  if  the  percentage  of  positive  animals  varied.  Animals 
were  bled  as  early  as  0900  hours  and  as  late  as  2400  hours 
and  no  significant  difference  was  noted. 

Any  positive  animals  that  died  as  a result  of  handling  or 
bleeding  were  necropsied  and  examined  for  adult  filariae. 

If  any  were  found  , they  were  placed  in  10%  glycerin-alcohol 
fixative.  Microf ilaremic  animals  in  which  rhe  adult  filariae 
were  not  found  were  placed  in  10%  neutra1  uffered  formalin 
and  returned  to  the  laboratory  for  histcr.  thological  examina- 
tion. Live  positive  animals  were  returne<.  to  the  laboratory 
for  mosquito  feedings  and  as  a source  cl  adult  filariae  for 
taxonomic  study. 

For  mosquito  feedings,  donor  rats  were  restrained  in  wire  cloth 
cylinders  and  placed  in  a cage  containing  laboratory  reared 
Aedes  togoi , Anopheles  balabacensis , and  Armigeres  subalbatus , 
respectively.  Mosquitoes  that  fed  on  donor  rats  were  dissected 
after  2 to  3 weeks  to  detect  filarial  infections.  If  larval 
stages  of  filaria  were  found,  mosquitoes  from  that  group  were 
fed  on  albino  laboratory  rats  by  the  procedure  described  above. 
After  3 months  thick  blood  films  were  made  from  the  laboratory 
rats  and  examined  for  microfilaria. 

To  study  the  morphology  of  the  microfilariae,  smears  from  wild 
caught  rats  were  made  at  the  laboratory,  dried  overnight  at 


uMH  i ft  v jtfi’BM  ' 


room  temperature,  dehemoglobinized  for  two  minutes  in  tap 
water,  fixed  for  30  seconds  in  methyl  alcohol,  and  stained  in 
Giemsa  and/or  Field's  stain. 

Some  positive  animals  were  later  sacrificed  in  the  laboratory 
to  obtain  adult  filariae.  These  nematodes  and  thick  blood 
films  from  some  of  the  animals  in  which  they  were  found  were 
sent  to  the  Filariasis  Research  Division  of  the  Institute  for 
Medical  Research  (IMR),  Kuala  Lumpur,  Malaysia  for  identifica- 
tion . 

PROGRESS : One  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety  four  (1964) 

animals  of  15  different  species  were  trapped,  235  of  which 
were  microf ilaremic . The  trapping  locations,  the  number  and 
species  of  animals  trapped  and  the  number  and  percent  of  those 
that  were  microf ilaremic  are  given  in  Table  1.  Six  different 
types  of  microfilariae  were  evident  on  the  live  mounts  and 
this  was  confirmed  when  stained  thick  films  were  studied. 

Brienlia  booliati,  Brugia  tupaia , and  Dunnif ilaria  ramachandri 
have  tentatively  been  identified  from  the  microfilariae,  the 
host  species,  and  the  location  and  size  of  the  adult  filariae. 
Adult  filariae  of  five  of  the  six  species  he^e  been  submitted 
to  the  IMR  for  identification  but  these  studies  are  incomplete. 
Unfortunately,  the  six  positive  Hylomys  suilis  all  died  shortly 
after  trapping,  and  the  adult  worms  were  not  found  at  necropsy. 

Mosquitoes  were  infected  with  B_.  booliati  which  was  found  in 
Rattus  rattus  , Rattus  neilli , and  Rattus  koratensis . Aedes 
togoi , which  fed  on  infected  Rattus  rattus,  became  infected 
and  when  dissected  later  third  stage  larvae  were  found  in 
these  mosquitoes.  These  Aedes  togoi  were  allowed  to  feed  on 
laboratory  rats . There  were  no  microfilariae  on  thick  smears 
made  from  these  rats  3 months  later.  Unsuccessful  attempts 
were  made  to  infect  mosquitoes  with  an  unidentified  filaria 
from  R.  rattus.  Mosquito  transmission  was  not  attempted  with 
animals  infected  with  Brugia  tupaia  or  Dunnifilaria  ramachandri 

Screening  histopathology  sections  proved  to  be  an  unrewarding 
method  of  locating  adult  filariae  in  the  animals  and  was 
discontinued . 

SUMMARY : One  thousand  six  hundred  and  ninety  four  (1964)  small 

wild  mammals  were  trapped  in  Thailand  and  screened  for  micro- 
filaremia. Two  hundred  and  thirty  five  were  found  to  be  positive. 
Identification  of  the  species  of  filariae  found  and  mosquito 
transmission  studies  of  the  filariae  to  laboratory  rats  are 
incomplete . 


1468 


Total  Table  1.  Results  of  Trapping  and  Screening  for  Microfilaria  by  Location  and  Speciea  of  Animal  Trapped 
Positive . 


I 


IV.  MISCELLANEOUS 


1 . An  Epizootic  of  Canine  Ehrlichiosis  (Tropical  Canine 
Pancytopenia)  in  Thailand 


OBJECTIVE : To  study  the  epizootiology  of  Canine  Ehrlichiosis 

(TCP)  in  a population  of  military  working  dogs,  and  to  evaluate 
the  efficacy  of  currently  recommended  prophylactic  and  thera- 
peutic measures  in  a natural  outbreak. 


BACKGROUND : Canine  ehrlichiosis  was  first  suspected  in  Thailand 

in  March  1974  among  a group  of  7 German  Shepherd  dogs  working 
at  Lopburi , Thailand.  The  methods  used  to  confirm  this  tentative 
diagnosis  and  the  control  measures  instituted  thereafter  at  the 
Military  Working  Dog  Center,  (MWDC)  Pakchong,  Thailand  from 
June  1974  through  March  1975  have  been  previously  described 
(37,  4).  This  report  consists  of  a continuation  of  those 
studies  plus  the  extension  of  the  serologic  testing  to  include 
some  of  the  Royal  Thai  Army  (RTA)  and  Royal  Thai  Air  Force 
(RTAF)  installations  in  the  provinces  where  most  of  the  older, 
trained  dogs  actually  work. 


DESCRIPTION : The  population  of  working  dogs  at  the  MWDC  has 

increased  from  an  average  of  175  dogs,  during  the  period  June 
1974  - March  1975,  to  262  dogs  in  March  1976.  This  number 
includes  only  those  dogs  actually  present  at  the  MWDC  at  this 
time  and  over  six  months  old.  As  of  March  1976  we  have  identified 
and  serologically  tested  for  ehrlichiosis,  at  least  once,  514 
dogs.  This  increase  (from  301  in  March  1975)  is  partially  due 
to  the  increase  in  the  numbers  of  dogs  reaching  six  months  of 
age  at  the  MWDC  and  partially  due  to  testing  at  RTA  and  RTAF 
installations  in  some  of  the  more  remote  provinces. 


It  has  not  proved  to  be  practical  to  attempt  to  regard  the  dogs 
at  the  MWDC  and  the  dogs  at  remote  installations  as  two  popula- 
tions since  almost  all  of  the  dogs  come  from  the  MWDC  originally 
and  return  there  periodically.  To  date,  however,  almost  all  of 
the  control  measures  have  been  centered  at  the  MWDC  although 
many  serologically  positive  dogs  have  been  treated  upcountry 
and  tick  control  recommendations  were  made  at  all  installations 
that  were  visited. 


In  September  1975,  RTA  and  RTAF  installations  in  Lopburi,  Chieng 
Kam,  Phitsanulok,  Chieng  Mai,  Nan,  Chieng  Rai,  Takhli,  Lopburi, 
Nakhon  Pathom,  Prachuab,  Nakhonsrithamaraj , Hat  Yai,  and  Don 
Muang  (Figure  1)  were  visited  and  120  dogs  were  bled. 


t-  i&i 


Dcgs  were  bled  at  the  MWDC  on  June  4-5  1975,  July  18,  1975, 

Sept  r er  10-11,  1975,  October  6,  197r  and  on  March  29-30, 

1976.  The  results  of  this  serologic  testing  are  shown  in 
Table  1 which  also  includes  all  testing  done  upcountry  in 
September  1975.  Unfortunately,  due  to  problems  with  antigen 
production  at  WKAIR  and  the  University  of  Illinois,  the  results 
for  the  July,  September  and  October  serology  were  received  in 
March  1976. 

All  dogs  found  to  be  serologically  positive  were  treated  with 
tetracycline  (30  mgm/lb/day  for  14  days).  Dogs  entering  the 
MWDC  for  any  reason  were  quarantined  .or  14  days,  dipped  for 
ticks  four  times  and  given  3 mgm  tetracycline/lb/day  for  14 
days.  Recommendations  for  tick  control  were  made  at  all  in- 
stallations that  were  visited.  Prophylactic  itracycline 
(3  mgm/lb/day)  was  not  given  to  any  dogs  (except  for  those  in 
quarantine)  this  year.  All  other  c ntrol  measures  that  had 
been  instituted  at  the  MWDC  (4)  were  continued. 

PROGRESS:  As  of  31  March  .1976,  514  dogs  have  been  tested 

serologically  at  least  once.  There,  are  currently  87  dogs  that 
were  positive  on  their  last  test  (which  was,  in  some  cases, 
two  years  ago)  for  a positive  percentage  of  17%  overall.  This 
is  the  lowest  positive  percentage  since  the  initiation  of  testing 
in  June  1974  (Table  1 ).  There  were  241  dogs  tested  at  the 
MWDC  in  March  1976  and  of  these  there  were  23  positives  (9.5%). 
There  were  10  serologic  conversions  to  positive  at  the  MWDC 
between  September  1975  and  March  1976.  Four  of  these  were  old 
positives  that  had  had  one  negative  test  at  the  1:10  dilution. 

From  March  1975  through  March  1976  there  was  one  case  of 
ehrlichiosis  seen  at  th«  MWDC  Veterinary  Hospital.  On  March  1, 
Kerchief,  tattoo  number  5217,  a 2 year  old  female  German  Shepherd, 
was  returned  from  upcountry  to  the  hospital  with  epistaxis, 
anorexia  and  a temperature  of  105.6°.  Tetracycline  therapy  was 
instituted  1 March  1976  on  the  basis  of  clinical  symptomatology . 
She  was  serologically  positive  when  bled  on  29  March.  No  other 
cases  were  clinically  diagnosed  and  serologically  confirmed 
during  this  period. 

During  June  1975,  10  dogs  in  the  breeding  section  converted  to 
positive  and  a recommendation  to  treat  all  of  the  16  serologic- 
ally positive  dogs  was  made.  In  September  1975  there  were  2 
more  new  positives  in  the  breeding  section  and  in  March  1976 
there  were  2 more.  All  of  these  were  treated. 


1473 


DISCUSSION : The  report  in  the  1975  SEATO  Medical  Research 

Laboratory  (SMRL)  Annual  Report  (4)  stated  that  prophylactic 
tetracycline  was  being  given  to  all  dog;.  except  the  young  adults 
at  the  MWDC.  This  was  a misunderstanding  between  personnel  at 
SMRL  and  those  at  the  MWDC.  Actually  tetracycline  prophylaxis 
was  administered  in  June,  July  and  August  1974  and  in  January, 
February  and  March  1975  and  has  not  been  used  since. 

Due  to  budgetary  limitations  it  was  not  possible  to  administer 
prophylactic  tetracycline  to  any  dogs  this  year.  During  the 
same  period  heavy  demands  for  dogs  were  made  from  the  field 
resulting  in  some  dogs  going  out  to  work  at  one  year  rather 
than  16  months  as  in  the  past. 

Despite  problems  with  test  results,  non-availability  of  drugs, 
rapid  turnover  and  frequent  movement  of  dogs  the  number  of 
obvious  clinical  cases  of  ehrlichiosis  and  the  percentage  of 
dogs  found  to  be  positive  continued  to  decline  indicating  that 
application  of  the  recommended  control  measures  will  control 
the  disease  even  when  they  are  used  under  somewhat  less  than 
perfect  conditions. 


Neonatal  Diarrhea  with  Sepsis  in  the  Nursery 
Phra  Mongkutklao  Hospital 


of  the 


OBJECTIVE : To  define  the  cause  of  and  to  make  recommendations 

on  methods  of  tenninating  an  epidemic  of  neonatal  diarrhea  with 
sepsis. 

BACKGROUND:  Neonatal  sepsis  is  a worldwide  problem.  Because 

of  the  hospitalization  of  mothers  for  delivery  and  the  subsequent 
placing  of  the  newborn  infant  in  common  nurseries,  nosocomial 
neonatal  infections  are  and  will  continue  to  be  an  aggravating 
and  potentially  severe  problem.  The  extent  of  this  problem  may 
be  partially  estimated  by  the  output  of  scientific  articles 
dealing  with  it.  A computerized  literature  search  resulted  in 
retrieval  of  an  average  of  2,500  references/year  over  the  past 
10  years. 

For  at  least  the  first  half  of  1975,  the  nursery  at  the  Phra 
Mongkutklao  Hospital  (PHK)  experienced  neonatal  diarrhea.  During 
this  period  between  two  and  ten  cases  of  diarrhea  occurred  per 
month. 


During  the  third  quarter  of  1975  a marked  increase  in  the  inci- 
dence of  neonatal  diarrhea,  up  to  20-30  cases  per  month,  wao 
noted  by  the  nursing  staff.  Because  of  the  increase  in  the 


Si*  fX. 


number  of  cases  the  pediatric  service  of  the  Phra  Mongkutklao 
Hospital  requested  the  assistance  of  the  SEATO  Medical  Research 
Laboratory  in  investigating  the  source  of  the  epidemic  and  in 
formulating  recommendations  for  eradicating  this  problem. 

DESCRIPTION : Five  lines  of  investigation  were  followed: 

1.  A review  of  the  nurseries,  clinical  and  laboratory 
records  for  the  preceeding  year  to  determine  the  extent,  cause 
and,  if  possible,  source  of  the  epidemic. 

2.  A bacteriologic  survey  of  a sample  of  infants  in  the 
nursery  to  determine  if  colonization  of  infants  with  pathological 
organisms  was  occurring. 

3.  A bacteriological  survey  of  the  nursery  to  identify  the 
types  of  organisms  found  and  to  indicate  possible  areas  of 
contamination. 

4.  A bacteriological  survey  of  the  personnel  entering 
and/or  working  in  the  nursery  and  delivery  areas  to  identify 
carriers  of  pathogenic  organisms. 

5.  A review  of  antibiotic  sensitivities  on  bacterial 
isolates  from  the  nursery. 

Review  of  Clinical  and  Laboratory  Records: 

During  the  first  half  of  1975  hospital  records  showed  diarrhea 
related  morbidity  rate  of  1.9%  among  approximately  1600  deliveries 
at  the  Phra  Mongkutklao  Hospital.  In  the  third  quarter  the 
diarrhea  related  morbidity  rate  jumped  from  2%  in  July  to  12.2% 
in  August,  to  8.4%  in  September  and  to  9.4%  in  October. 

Review  of  the  isolations  from  rectal  swabs  sent  for  routine 
culture  to  the  Microbiology  Department  of  the  SEATO  Medical 
Research  Laboratory  from  October  1974  through  September  1975 
revealed  the  continuous  presence  of  pathogenic  Escherichia 
coli . Of  245  specimens  received,  pathogenic  EL  coli  were 
detected  in  107  or  44%.  Other  pathogenic  organisms  such  as 
Shigella  and  Salmonella  were  occasionally  cultured.  There  were 
10  serotypes  of  pathogenic  E.  coli  isolated  (Table  1),  However 
one  subtype  0127 :B8  was  consistantly  present  throughout  the 
year  and  represented  75%  of  all  pathogenic  E_.  coli  isolated. 

Environmental  Survey  of  the  Nursery: 

Several  site  visits  were  made  to  the  nursery  in  mid-October  1975. 
The  nursery  was  located  on  the  second  floor  of  a ten  year  old 


1475 


Table  1.  Monthly  Isolation  of  Pathogenic  Organises 
froa  Rectal  Seabs  Submitted  by  the  Praaongkhut  Klao  Hospital 
froa  October  1974  - Septeaber  197S 


Pathogenic  Organiss  Oct  Nov  Dec  ban  Feb  Mar  Apr  May  Jun  Jul  Aug  Sep 


Escherichia  coli 
0127:68 
0119:614 
012S:B15 
0112:611 
02S:B19:623 
026:66 
0128:612 
066:67 
OSS: BS 
0111:64 


4 2 0 28  7 1 2 T 1 2 3 12 

4 11  2 2 1 


2 2 1 
6 


1 4 

1 1 1 


Total  E.  coli 

11 

22 

29 

11 

Other  pathogens 

0 

2 

S 

6 

Total  pathogens 

11 

24 

34 

17 

Total  sables 

12 

31 

52 

24 

* Percent  of  total  cultures 


80(32.7%)* 
11  (4. S%) 

8 (3.3%) 

S (2.0%) 

4 (1.6%) 

4 (1.6%) 

3 (1.2%) 

2 (0.8%) 

1 (0.4%) 

1 (0.4%) 


11  22  29  11  1 7 T 6 4 3 11  14  119(43.7%) 


27(11.0%) 


11  24  34  17  5 7 T 8 4 3 14  1 9 146(54.7%) 


zs  ,ru. 


I 


Obstetrics  and  Gynecology  building.  It  lay  within  the  Obstetric 
Department;  adjacent  to  the  delivery  area  (Figure  1). 

The  neonatal  unit  was  composed  of  a series  of  interconnecting 
rooms.  Infants  were  housed  in  one  of  four  bays  which  were 
separated  from  each  other  by  glass  and  screen  partitions.  A 
service  area,  along  one  end  of  the  bays,  was  partially  parti- 
tioned from  them  £>y  a glass  wall  with  screening  at  the  top.  The 
four  bays  were  loosely  designated:  1)  normal  newborn  bay,  2) 

premature  infant  bay,  3)  potentially  septic  and  intensive  care 
bay,  and  4)  septic  bay.  There  were  separate  entrances  from  the 
service  area  into  each  of  the  four  nursery  bays  but  air  could 
circulate  freely  between  bays  through  the  screened  partitions. 

The  nursery  bays  were  individually  ventilated , with  window  air 
conditioners.  Each  bay  was  provided  with  a sink  and  separate 
waste  and  diaper  disposal  pails. 

The  formula  preparation  area  was  located  adjacent  to  the 
nursery  area.  Formula  was  prepared  from  powdered  preparations 
by  the  addition  of  boiled  tap  water.  No  terminal  sterilization 
was  used. 

The  bacteriological  survey  identified  widespread  contamination 
of  the  neonatal  unit  and  formula  preparation  area.  Pathogenic 
organisms  were  isolated  from  ten  of  60  cultures  obtained  from 
sites  throughout  the  nursery  bays  and  the  food  preparation  area. 
These  sites  included  floors , preparation  tables , door  handles 
and  lids  to  diaper  pails.  One  culture  grew  Shigella  boydii 
and  the  remaining  nine  grew  pathogenic  £.  coli  of  three  serotypes ; 
two  strains  each  of  0128:B12  and  0127 :B8  and  five  strains  of 
0119 :B14. 

Bacterial  Survey  of  Infants: 

Stool  cultures  were  obtained  from  30  babies  housed  in  the  newborn 
nursery  on  15  October  1975,  21  of  these  were  housed  in  the  normal 
or  premature  nursery  bays,  seven  were  housed  in  the  potentially 
septic  bay  and  two  were  in  the  septic  bay.  From  these  infants 
six  potential  pathogens  were  isolated , five  pathogenic  £.  coli 
serotypes  0127:B8  (three)  and  0119:B14  (two),  were  isolate1,  from 
seemingly  healthy  infants  and  one  F.  coli , serotype  0123 :B12, 
from  an  infant  with  diarrhea. 


NURSERY  PRAMONGKHUT  KLAO  HOSPITAL 


Personnel  Survey: 

Ninety-seven  people  were  reported  to  frequent  the  nursery. 
Sixty-two  of  these  people  provided  an  adequate  perineal  swah 
for  culture.  Fourteen  pathogenic  organisms  were  isolated 
(Table  2),  one  was  a Salmonella  B_.  and  the  remaining  13  were 
pathogenic  E.  coli  of  six  serotypes.  Eight,  (over  half  of 
the  pathogenic  organisms  isolated),  were  pathogenic  lb  coli 
serotype  0127 :B8.  Thus  22.5%  of  the  personnel  who  frequented 
the  nursery  and  were  adequately  sampled , were  found  to  be 
carriers  of  pathogenic  organisms. 


Sensitivity  of  Isolates: 


We  were  able  to  recover  the  antibiotic  sensitivity  data  on  39 
strains  of  pathogenic  Eh  coli  collected  from  infants  in  the 
nursery  at  PKH  from  June  to  September  1975  and  tested  by  the 
Kirby  Bauer  Disc  Technique  (Table  3).  The  isolated  pathogenic 
E.  coli  were  generally  found  to  be  susceptible  to  trimethoprim- 
sulfamethoxizole  (one  resistant  strain  out  of  39  strains  tested). 
The  next  best  drugs  appeared  to  be  colimycin  (seven  resistant 
strains  out  of  39  strains  tested),  and  gentamycin  (12  resistant 
strains  out  of  39  tested). 

Discussion  and  Recommendations: 

Investigation  of  the  epidemic  of  neonatal  diarrhea  and  sepsis 
in  the  nursery  at  PKH  indicated  five  possible  contributors  to 
the  epidemic: 

1.  Carriers  of  pathogenic  organisms  among  personnel 
assigned  to  the  nursery. 

2.  Large  number  of  individuals,  (nearly  100)  who  frequent 
the  nursery  and  delivery  areas. 

3.  General  contamination  of  the  nursery  and  formula  pre- 
paration area  with  pathogenic  organisms. 

4.  Failure  to  use  terminal  sterilization. 

5.  Open  nursery  bays  allowing  for  free  movement  of  air 
from  contaminated  to  uncontaminated  areas. 

6.  Introduction  of  new  strains  of  pathogenic  organisms 
from  septic  deliveries. 


At*--  » *■»  J 


1479 


ensitivity  Patterns  on  Rectal  Isolates  from  Inf 
Pramongkhut  Klao  Hospital  June  - September  1975 


Resistant/ sensitive 


Table  2.  Isolations  of  Pathogenic  Organisms  from  Nursery 
Personnel  at  the  Pramongkhut  Klao  Hospital 


Personnel  Frequenting  th>  Nursery 


Personnel  Adequately  Culti  red 


Carriers  of  Pathogenic  Organise 


Salmonella  B 


Pathogenic  E.  coli  0127: B8 


026:  B 


0119: B14 


01 24 : B17 


0125: B15 


01 26: Bid 


Total  carriers 


* Percent  of  adequately  cultured 


14  (23%)* 


No  one  organism  could  be  implicated  as  the  cause  of  the  epidemic. 
The  major  group  of  pathogenic  organisms  isolated  from  rectal 
swabs  on  affected  infants  were  pathogenic  E_.  coli  of  at  least 
ten  serotypes.  These  organisms  were  also  isolated  from  environ- 
mental surfaces  in  the  nursery  and  from  perineal  swabs  from 
22.5%  of  the  nursery  personnel  who  submitted  adequate  cultures. 

E.  coli  serotype  01°7:B8  was  the  most  prevalent  organism 
cultured  in  both  the  rectal  swabs  of  affected  babies  and  in 
the  perineal  swab  of  the  nursing  personnel.  Ninety-seven 
percent  of  39  organisms  tested  were  sensitive  to  trimethoprim- 
sulfamethoxzole , 82%  were  sensitive  to  Colimycin  and  66%  were 
sensitive  to  Gentamycin. 

Recommendations  were  made  to  the  hospital  in  eight  general 
categories: 

1.  General  decontamination  of  the  nursery  and  delivery 


2.  Treatment  of  all  personnel  associated  with  the  nursery 
with  an  appropriate  antimicrobial  therapy. 

3.  Suspension  of  all  new  admissions  to  potentially 
contaminated  areas  and  admission  of  all  new  babies  to  a 
decontaminated  nursery. 

4.  Alterations  in  the  preparation  of  formula  to  allow 
for  terminal  sterilization. 


5.  Decrease  traffic  in  and  through  the  nursery  area. 

6.  Minor  structual  alterations  to  decrease  air  circulation, 
increase  isolation  and  facilitate  formula  production. 

7.  Increase  emphasis  on  sterile  precautions  in  the 
nurseries . 


8.  Changes  in  the  linen  and  waste  disposal  systems. 


Follow-up: 


The  first  two  recommendations  were  implemented  in  mid- 
November  1975.  The  nurseries  and  the  food  preparation  areas 
were  thoroughly  decontaminated  using  a glutaraldehyde  pre- 
paration and  all  personnel  frequenting  the  nursery  were  provided 
with  adequate  amounts  of  trimethoprim-sulfamethoxizole  for  a 
ten  day  period  of  therapy. 


gars, 


Following  this  the  neonatal  morbidity  rate  due  to  diarrhea  fell 
from  9.4%  in  October  to  1%  in  December,  with  a corresponding 
decline  in  the  sepsis  related  mortality  rate  from  7%  to  0%. 

During  the  same  period  the  number  of  rectal  swabs  submitted 
from  the  nursery  to  the  Microbiology  Department  at  the  SEATO 
Medical  Research  Laboratory  fell  from  75  in  October  to  15  in 
December  and  the  number  of  pathogenic  organisms  isolated  fell 
from  27  isolates,  of  seven  different  pathogenic  strains  of 
E.  coli  in  October,  to  two  isolates  of  one  pathogenic  strain 
of  E_.  coli  (0127:B8)  in  December. 

SUMMARY : During  1975  the  neonatal  nursing  at  the  Phra  Mongkutklao 

Hospital  experienced  on  epidemic  o neonatal  diarrhea.  Investiga- 
tion revealed  that  the  epidemic  wa  due  to  pathogenic  EL  coli 
of  several  serotypes. 

The  organisms  had  contaminated  the  nursery  environment,  were 
colonizing  the  infants  and  were  carried  by  over  20%  of  the 
nursery  staff.  Decontamination  of  the  nursery  and  treatment 
of  the  nursing  staff  with  Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxizole  led 
to  a marked  decrease  in  diarrhea  cases. 

3 . Fathogens  of  Medically  Important  Mosquitoes  of 
Thailand 

OBJECTIVE:  To  determine  the  kinds  of  mosquito  pathogens 

occurring  in  medically  important  species  of  mosquitoes  in 
Thailand  and  to  elucidate  the  biology  of  selected  pathogens 
sufficiently  to  assess  their  potential  as  biological  mosquito 
control  agents. 

BACKGROUND : An  examination  of  the  slide-mounted  mosquito  larva 

collection  ir,  the  Department  of  Medical  Entomology,  SEATO 
Medical  Kesearcn  Laboratory  . and  a preliminary  survey  fcr 
patnopens  in  Culex  quinquefasciatus  in  Bangkok  confirmed  the 
occurrence  of  pathogens  in  the  Thai  mosquito  fauna  (4  ).  The 
present  study  involved  a surve’-  for  mosquito  pathogens  in 
Aedes  aegypti  and  C.  quinquefasciatus  at  20  locations  in 
Thailand.  These  mosquito  species  were  selected  for  study 
because  of  their  primary  medical  importance,  because  they  can 
be  easily  collected  in  relatively  large  numbers  and  because 
their  breeding  habits  make  them  vulnerable  to  biological 
control  by  pathogens. 


1483 


DESCRIPTION;  From  four  to  40  man-days  were  spent  collecting 
larvae  of  Ae_.  aegypti  and  £.  quinquefasciatus  at  the  locations 
in  Figure  1,  excluding  Bangkok.  Because  of  its  size  and 
proximity  to  the  laboratory,  more  extensive  collecting  was  done 
in  Bangkok,  here  considered  to  include  Thon  Buri,  Nonthaburi, 
and  Pathum  Thani.  Collections  from  Sangkhlaburi  were  from 
numerous  small  villages  along  the  Khwae  Noi  River  between 
Sai  Yok  and  Cha  Deng  Cheng,  and  up  the  Sang  Kalia  River  as 
far  as  Sang  Kalia.  Collections  from  Ko  Samui  were  from  several 
villages  on  adjacent  islands  as  well  as  from  the  villages  of 
the  main  island. 

£.  quinquefasciatus  larvae  were  collected  primarily  from 
polluted  water  discharged  from  dwellings  and  market  places. 

Ae.  aegypti  larvae  were  collected  from  domestic  water  containers 
in  and  around  homes.  Other  species  of  larvae  were  collected 
occasionally  and  were  processed  and  examined,  also,  although 
they  were  not  necessarily  pertinent  to  the  study.  Larvae 
were  examined  successively  in  white  enamel  pans  and  in  black 
pans  under  a bright  light  to  detect  gross  signs  of  pathology. 
Watched  for  were  any  abnormality  in  color,  size,  shape  or 
behavior.  Larvae  displaying  such  signs  were  separated  and 
identified.  Part  were  smeared  on  microscope  slides,  five  per 
slide,  in  discrete  smears,  and  the  remainder  were  preserved 
in  7%  neutral  buffered  formalin.  Smears  were  air  dried,  fixed 
with  methanol,  and  stained  with  Giemsa  stain  in  Tris  buffer  at 
pH  7.2.  Formalinized  material  was  embedded  in  paraplast , 
sectioned  and  stained  with  hematoxylin  and  eosin.  Specimens 
were  examined  at  a magnification  of  500X.  A sample  of  larvae 
showing  no  gross  signs  of  infection  was  also  taken  from  each 
collection.  These  were  identified,  smeared,  processed,  and 
examined  for  evidence  of  covert  infections.  With  the  exception 
of  eugregarines  and  ciliates,  only  those  organisms  observed  in 
host  tissue  or  hemolymph  were  reported.  Some  preliminary 
studies  have  been  made  to  determine  the  infect ivity,  mode  of 
transmission  and  host  specificity  of  some  of  the  pathogens 
found . 

RESULTS:  Twenty-five  host-pathogen  associations  were  found  in 

20,000  specimens  prepared  from  eight  species  of  mosquitoes. 

These  are  summarized  in  Table  1 and  briefly  discussed  below. 

A.  Protozoans 

1.  Ciliates  - Ciliates  were  frequently  seen  in  the  midguts 
and  occasionally  in  the  hemolymph  of  £.  quinquefasciatus . 


1484 


I 


'•  33  i 

\ -4  ' 

\ 


> 'U 

V ^ 


THAILAND 


CAMBODIA 


GULF 

OF 

THAILAND 

o 


l9r\s 


MALAYSIA 


1.  Chiong  Moi 

2.  Lamphun 

3.  Lompong 

4.  Mo*  Sot 

5.  Tok 

6.  Phittanulok 

7.  Udon  Thoni 

8.  Sangkhloburi 

9.  Nakhon  Sawan 

10.  Khon  Kaen 

1 1 . Phro  Phutthabat 

12.  Nakhon  Rotchoiima 
13  Ubon  Ratchothoni 

14.  Bangkok 

15.  Chanthaburi 

16  Prachuap  Khiri  Khan 

17.  Ko  Somui 

18.  Surat  Thoni 

19.  Phuket 

20.  Hot  Yoi 


Figure  I.  Locations  where  Aedes  aegypti  and  Culex  pipiens 
qumquefascio  js  were  surveyed  for  mosquito  pathogens. 

” 1485 


Table 


Although  some  species  of  ciliates  are  pathogenic  for  mosquitoes, 
they  generally  are  regarded  as  having  little  bio-control  potential. 

2.  Microsporldans  - Seven  apparently  distinct  microsporidan 
species  were  found,  four  in  Ae_.  aegypti  and  one  each  in  £. 
quinquefasciatus , Anopheles  vagus  and  Culex  (Lutzia)  sp.  Of 
those  in  Ae  aegypti,  one  was  a Stempellia  sp.,  two  were 
Thelohania  spp.,  and  one  was  a Nosema  sp. 

The  Stempellia  had  pyriform  spores  8.0  x 4.0  pm  in  wet  mounts, 
and  was  present  at  17  of  the  20  locations  studied.  It  has  been 
transmitted  in  the  laboratory  both  per  os  and  transovarially , 
and  about  8.0  x 10 5 spores  were  obtained  per  patently  infected 
larva.  The  dose-infection  rate  curve  was  linear  between 
infection  rates  of  15  and  85  percent,  and  infection  rates  of 
100  percent  have  been  obtained.  Mortality  rates  approaching 
100  percent  occurred,  but  these  rates  varied  widely  in  response 
to  unknown  factors  in  addition  to  infection  rates. 


Thelohania  spp.  of  Ae.  aegypti  were  found  respectively  at 
Ubon  Ratchathani  and  at  Hat  Yai.  One  was  a pathogen  of  the 
midgut  epithelium,  with  oval  spores  2.0  x 1.5  pm.  The  tissue 
preference  of  the  other  is  unknown,  because  it  was  found  only 
in  smears.  The  spores  were  oval  and  3.0  x 2.0  pm. 

The  microsporidan  in  £.  quinquefasciatus  was  a Stempellia  sp. 

It  was  found  at  9 of  the  20  locations  studied  but  was  highly 
prevalent  only  at  Hat  Yai.  The  spores  were  pyriform  and 
5.0  x 2.75  pm  in  wet  mounts.  Chapman  (38)  reported  seeing 
a Stempellia  sp.  in  £.  quinquefasciatus  in  Bangkok  and  considered 
it  identifical  to  a species  of  Stempellia  in  the  United  States, 
subsequently  described  and  named  S milleri  by  Hazard  and 
Fukuda  (39).  Hazard  and  Fukuda  did  not  report  having  examined 
material  from  Thailand,  so  the  identity  of  this  species  is  still 
in  doubt.  We  have  transmitted  it  per  os . and  further  studies 
are  underway. 

Anopheles  vagus  at  Lamphun  were  infected  with  an  unidentified 
genus  of  Microsporida.  The  spores  were  5.0  x 3.0  pm  and  had 
structural  features  which  will  require  electronmicroscopy  for 
resolution.  It  was  distinctly  different  from  others  encountered 
in  this  study  and  was  found  primarily  in  the  fatbody.  Attempts 
to  transmit  it  £er  ££  to  Anopheles  maculatus  were  unsuccessful. 


• *S- 


rv/  Vf  1 ■' 


C.ulex  (Lutizia)  sp.  at  Sangkhlaburi  were  infected  with  a 
microsporidan  with  pyriform  spores  7.0  x 4.0  ym.  The  body 
cavity  of  infected  larvae  was  filled  with  sporoblasts,  though 
few  spores  were  seen.  The  sporoblasts  were  usually  disassociated, 
but  some  were  associated  in  groups  of  eight.  Insufficient 
material  was  examined  to  conclude  that  it  was  Genus  Thelohania , 
so  identification  will  require  further  study. 

3.  Helicosporidans  - Apparently  the  same  species  of 
Helicosporidium  was  found  widely  distributed  and  moderately 
prevalent  in  Ae.  aegypti  and  £.  quinquef asciatus . The  spores 
were  spherical  and  5.5  ym  in  diameter.  It  has  been  transmitted 
per  os  to  Ae . aegypti , £.  quinquef  asciatus  and  Anopheles 
balabacensis . There  is  only  one  previous  report  of  Helicosporida 
in  mosquitoes  (40).  The  order  is  currently  considered  monotypic 
(41). 

4 . Eugregarines  - These  agents  were  commonly  found  in 
Ae . aegypti,  aedes  albopictus,  £.  quinquef asciatus , and 
Armigeres  subalbatus . They  are  generally  regarded  as  having 
little  bio-control  potential. 

B . Fungi 

Apparently  the  same  species  of  Entomophthora  was  found  in  Ae . 
aegypti  and  £.  quinquef asc iatus  at  Sangkhlaburi.  It  was  trans- 
mitted through  several  passages  in  the  laboratory  and  was  highly 
virulent  though  not  very  infectious.  A fungus  of  Genus 
Coelomomyces  was  found  in  Culex  minor  at  Sangkhlaburi . 

C.  Bacteria 

In  several  locations,  he_.  aegypti , £.  qulnquefasciatus , and 
Ar.  subalbatus  were  found  infected  with  minute  (about  lym  long), 
gram  negative,  highly  motile,  vibrioform  bacteria  that  produced 
an  extremely  virulent  septicemia . Chapman  (38)  reported  seeing 
possibly  the  same  species  in  Bangkok  and  commented  that  the 
agent  was  found  many  places  in  the  world  but  had  never  been 
cultured.  Our  attempts  to  culture  this  organism  so  far  have 
been  unsuccessful. 

An  erdospore-forming  bacillus  was  found  in  Ae_.  aegypti , Ae . 
subalbatus  from  Sangkhlaburi,  but  only  in  preserved  material. 

An  apparent  bacterial  agent , which  turned  the  infected  host 
red,  was  found  in  £.  quinquefasc iatus  in  Bangkok. 


1488 


D . Unknown 


A pathogen  of  undetermined  identity  was  found  in  the  midgut 
epithelium  of  Ae . chrysolineatus  from  Sangkhlaburi . Epithelial 
cells  were  greatly  enlarged  and  contained  small,  non-staining 
particles  less  than  0.5  pm  in  diameter.  The  particles  resemble 
a rickettsia  of  Genus  Enterella . 

The  following  information  reflects  the  prevalence  of  mosquito 
pathogens  in  Bangkok.  Ae.  aegypti  was  collected  73  times  at 
55  collecting  sites.  At  least  one  kind  of  pathogen  was  found 
in  37  of  the  73  collections  and  at  45  of  the  55  collection  sites, 

C.  quinquefasciatus  was  collected  151  times  at  90  collecting  sites. 
At  least  one  kind  of  pathogen  was  found  in  137  of  the  151 
collections  and  at  81  of  the  90  collecting  sices. 

No  viruses  were  detected  during  the  survey. 

4.  Zoological  Aspects  of  SMRL  Studies 


OBJECTIVE:  To  provide  information  on  the  native  fauna  to  those 

departments  whose  work  on  human  diseases  in  Thailand  involves 
natural  reservoir  hosts. 


BACKGROUND : In  support  of  studies  on  Japanese  encephalitis, 

now  concluded,  an  intensive  capture-mark -and-release  program 
of  birds  and  mammals  necessitated  delving  into  taxonomy  and 
accumulation  of  a scientific  vertebrate  collection.  Groups 
which  particularly  needed  clarification  on  species-limits  and 
which  species  live  in  Thailand  were  rats,  mice,  and  gibbons. 

PROGRESS : Taxonomic  revisions  were  concluded,  based  on  morphology, 

ecology,  distribution,  karyology,  and  additionally,  for  the 
gibbons,  analysis  of  tape-recordings  of  their  songs. 

Rat  hosts  of  fleas  and  chiggers  subject  to  systemic  poison 
which  do  not  harm  the  rat)  were  identified  for  the  Department 
of  Entomology.  Rattus  rattus  in  the  forest  was  the  principal 
host  of  chiggers;  whereas  in  the  town,  R.  exulans  and  R.  rattus 
had  fleas.  During  trapping  at  Paktongchai,  Mr.  Vandee  discovered 
the  field  mouse,  Mus  cervicolor,  living  in  houses  at  the  market. 

A study  of  natural  hosts  of  filarial  worms  by  Department  of 
Veterinary  Medicine  was  supported  through  identifying  the 
various  rodents  and  Tupaias  which  naturally  harbored  the  worms. 


These  included  Rattus  sabanus , _R.  berdmorei , R.  surifer , £. 
bukit,  R.  neilli  (which  we  found  at  Saiyok  - a large  extension 
of  known  range  for  this  newly  discovered  species),  R.  koratensis 
and  R.  rattus . They  are  easily  identified  in  life,  except  for 
the  last  two.  Unfortunately,  the  conditions  of  the  experiment 
denied  us  access  to  examination  of  the  carcasses  to  ascertain 
the  number  of  mammae  (12  in  koratensis,  10  in  rattus) . Of  the 
many  dozens  of  each  species  tKat  were  sacrificed  m order  to 
obtain  the  adult  worms  we  received  only  6 skulls,  which  are 
necessary  for  the  identification.  All  from  Sakaerat , they  all 
had  the  characteristic  skull  of  Rattus  koratensis  although  4 of 
them  had  been  identified  as  R.  rattus  by  the  veterinary  field 
team . 

Taxonomic  studies  of  native  mice  included  sending  live  colonies 
to  Laboratory  of  Cell  Biology,  National  Cancer  Institute,  where 
Dr.  Michael  Potter  found  biochemical  traits  distinguishing  the 
various  species.  There,  a type  C virus  of  leukemia  was  discovered 
in  our  Mus  carol i (37),  which  is  the  same  as  that  in  gibbons, 
and  different  from  that  of  the  laboratory  mouse.  NCI's  expanding 
search  for  the  virus  led  to  an  agreement  for  full-time  support  of 
SMRL  personnel  in  collecting  and  shipping  to  NCI  native  live  mice, 
especially  those  species  which  share  forest  habitats  with  gibbons 
such  as  Mus  shortridgei , M.  pahari , M_.  cookii  and  Mus  cervicolor 
popaeus . Shipments  of  about  100  mice  per  month  to  NCI  have  been 
received  in  good  condition. 

We  initiated  the  programmed  release  of  conditioned  gibbons  from 
the  laboratory  colony  to  a safe  forest  area  at  Saiyok,  Kanchana- 
buri  Province,  through  the  cooperation  of  the  Protein  Expansion 
Project  (Ministry  of  Defense).  Of  the  twelve  animals  so  far 
liberated,  all  took  immediately  to  the  trees  and  found  natural 
food  and  water.  We  conclude  that  domestic -reared  gibbons  in- 
stinctively revert  to  a natural  life  and  need  not  be  extensively 
rehabilitated.  The  only  problem  is  that  tame,  human  oriented 
animals  have  to  be  taken  far  enough  into  the  hills  so  that  they 
will  not  follow  people  back  to  civilization.  The  release  program 
did  not  include  breeding  pairs. 

5.  Bacterial  Etiology  of  Leucorrhea 


OBJECTIVE:  To  determine  the  aerobic  and  anaerobic  bacteria 

associated  with  leucorrhea  in  cervicitis  patients. 

BACKGROUND:  Leucorrhea  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  encountered 

conditions  seen  in  females  attending  the  obstetric  and  gynecological 


clinic  of  the  Royal  Thai  Army  Hospital,  Bangkok,  Thailand.  The 
condition  may  be  the  result  of  infection  with  bacteria,  fungi, 
parasites  or  viruses.  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  determine 
the  aerobic  and  anaerobic  organisms  present  in  discharges  from 
cervicitis  patients. 

DESCRIPTION : Specimens  were  obtained  from  cervicitis  patients 

attending  the  obstetrics  and  gynecology  clinic  of  the  Royal  Thai 
Army  Hospital.  Routine  cervical  swabs  were  immediately  streaked 
on  Thayer-Martin  chocolate  agar,  5%  sheep  blood  agar,  and  MacConkey 
agar  poured  in  standard  petri  plates.  After  specimens  were  obtained 
they  were  sent  to  the  bacteriology  section  of  the  SEATO  Medical 
Research  Laboratory  within  two  hours.  The  chocolate  agar  plates 
were  incubated  in  candle  extinction  jars  for  the  detection  of 
Neisseria  gonorrhoea.  Blood  agar  and  MacConkey  agar  plates  were 
incubated  aerobically.  All  cultures  were  incubated  at  37  C, 
and  were  examined  at  24  and  48  hours.  An  additional  cervical 
swab  was  obtained  for  the  culture  of  anaerobic  organisms.  This 
swab  was  placed  in  tubed  cooked  meat  broth  media,  incubated  at 
37  C in  anaerobic  jars  using  Gas-Paks  (Baltimore  Biologicals, 
Cockeysville , Md.)  to  establish  an  oxygen  free  atmosphere. 

Cultures  were  observed  seven  days  for  growth  with  routine  sub- 
cultures to  biochemical  media  being  made  when  indicated. 

RESULTS : During  the  period  July  1975  - April  1976  a total  of  78 
specimens  were  cultured  for  aerobic  organisms,  and  69  for 
anaerobes.  Neisseria  gonorrhoeae  was  isolated  from  two  patients 
(2.5%).  This  result  was  similar  to  that  found  in  a 1972-73  study 
of  gonorrhea  in  asymptomatic  females  performed  in  the  same 
hospital  where  3.5%  were  found  to  be  harboring  the  gonococcus. 

Aerobic  bacterial  isolates  from  cervical  cultures  are  presented 
in  Table  1.  Staphylococcus  epidermidis  and  alpha  hemolytic 
streptococci  were  found  frequently,  occurring  in  54%  and  36%  of 
the  patients  respectively.  Candida  albicans  was  isolated  in 
15  of  78  patients  (19%).  This  yeast  was  also  isolated  in 
throat  cultures  from  three  patients  whose  cervical  cultures 
revealed  £.  albicans . Anaerobic  bacterial  isolates  are  shown 
in  Table  2.  Sixty  nine  specimens  were  submitted  for  anaerobic 
cultures.  Clostridium  perfringens  was  isolated  in  five  patients 
(7.3%).  However,  this  organism  is  often  found  as  a harmless  in- 
habitant of  the  vagina.  Other  anaerobic  organisms  isolated  in- 
clude the  Peptostreptococcus , Peptococcus,  Bacteroides,  Veillonella 
and  Fusobacterium  groups.  Anaerobic  bacteria  were  not  isolated 
in  19  of  the  69  cultures  examined. 


1491 


Anaerobic  Organisms 


No  Isolated 


Project  3A762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  074  Tropical  and  subtropical  diseases  in  military 
medicine 

Literature  Cited: 

References : 

1.  Halstead,  S.B.:  Observations  Related  to  Pathogenesis  of 

Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever.  IV.  Hypothesis  and  Discussion.  Yale 
J.  Biol.  Med.  42:350,  1970. 

2.  Russell,  P.K. : Pathogenesis  of  the  Dengue  Shock  Syndrome: 

Evidence  for  an  Immunologic  Mechanism.  Pages  426-435  in  P.A. 
Miescher,  (ed.)  Immunopathology , Schwabe , Basal,  1970. 

3.  Nimmannitya,  S. , Halstead,  S.B.,  Cohen,  S.N.  .and  Margiotta, 

M.R. : Dengue  and  Chikungunya  Virus  Infection  in  Man  in  Thailand, 

1962-1964.  I.  Observations  on  Hospitalized  Patients  with 
Hemorrhagic  Fever.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  18:954,  1969. 

4.  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1975. 

5.  Rosen,  L.  and  Gubler,  D. : The  Use  of  Mosquitoes  to  Detect 
and  Propagate  Dengue  Viruses.  J of  Trop.  Med.  23_:1153,  1974. 

6.  McNeil,  B.J.  , Keeler,  E.  and  Adelstein,  S.J. : Primer  on 

Certain  Elements  of  Medical  Decision  Making.  New  Eng.  J.  Med. 
293:211,  1975. 

7.  Top,  F.H. , Jr.,  Gunakasem,  P.  , Chantarasri , C. , et  al:  Serologic 

Diagnosis  of  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever  Using  Filter  Paper  Discs 

and  One  Dengue  Antigen.  Southeast  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  and  Pub. 

Hlth.  6_:18-24,  1974. 

8.  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1974. 

9.  Hunter,  W.M.  and  Greenwood,  F.C. : Preparation  of  Iodine-131 

Labeled  Human  Growth  Hormone  of  High  Specific  Activity.  Nature 
(London),  194:495,  1962. 

10.  Lampe,  R.M. , Kirdpol,  S. , Mansuwan,  P.  , Benenson,  M.W.  : 
Glucose-6-Phosphate  Dehydrogenase  Deficiency  in  Thai  Children 
with  Typhoid  Fever.  J.  of  Ped.  87_:576,  1975. 


1494 


11.  Morror , R.H.,  Smetana,  H.F. , Sai , F.T.  and  Edgcomb , J.H. : 
Unusual  Features  of  Viral  Hepatitis  in  Aeera,  Ghana.  Ann. 
Intern.  Med.  68:1250,  1968. 


12.  Gall,  J.C.  , Brewer,  G.J.  and  Dern,  R.J. : Studies  of  Glucose- 

6-Phosphate  Dehydrogenase  Activity  of  Individual  Erythrocytes: 

The  Methemoglobin-Elution  Test  for  Identification  of  Females 
Heterozygous  for  G-6-PD  Deficiency.  Am.  J.  of  Human  Genetics, 

17:359,  1965. 

13.  Magnius , L.O.  and  Espmark,  J.A. : New  Specificities  in  Australia 

Antigen  Positive  Sera  Distinct  from  the  Le  Bouvier  Determinants. 

J.  Immunol.  109:1017-1021,  1972. 

14.  Grossman,  R.A.,  Benenson,  M.W.,  Scott,  R.  McNair,  Snitbhan,  R.  , 

Top,  F.H.,  Jr.  and  Pantuwatana,  S. : An  Epidemiological  Study  of 

Hepatitis  B Virus  in  Bangkok  Thailand.  Amer.  J.  Epidemiol.  101: 
144-159,  1975. 

15.  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1976. 

16.  Lander,  J.J.  , Holland,  P.V. , Alter,  H.  J.  et  al:  Antibody  to 

Hepatitis-Associated  Antigen.  Frequency  and  Pattern  of  Response 
as  Detected  by  Radioimmunoprecipitation.  JAMA. 220 : 1079 , 1972. 

17.  Cherubin,  C.E.  , Purcell,  R.H. , Lander,  J.J.  et  al:  Acquisition 

of  Antibody  to  Hepatitis  B Antigen  in  Three  Socioeconomically 
Different  Medical  Populations.  Lancet  £:149,  1972. 

18.  Lennette,  E.H.  and  Schmidt,  N.J.  (ed):  Diagnostic  Procedures 

for  Viral  and  Rickettsial  Infections.  Am.  Pub.  Hlth.  Assoc.  1969. 

19.  Irwin,  G.R.  , Allen,  A.M. , Bancroft,  W.H. , Karwacki , J.J., 

Brown,  H.L. , Pinkerton,  R.H. , Willhight,  M. , Top,  F.H. , Jr.: 

Hepatitis  B Antigen  in  Saliva,  Urine  and  Stool.  Infection  and 
Immunity  11:142-145,  1975. 

20.  Vaisrub,  S. : Hepatitis  B - Traffic  in  the  Dentists'  Office. 

JAMA  232:1270,  1975. 


1495 


Fi 


fc 


23.  Dane,  D.S.,  Cameron,  C.H.,  Briggs,  M.  : Virus-like  Particles 
in  Serum  of  Patients  with  Australia- Antigen-Associated  Hepatitis. 
Lancet  1:695-698,  1970. 


24.  Drugman,  S. , Giles,  J.P.,  Hammond,  J. : Infectious  Hepatitis. 

Evidence  for  Two  Distinctive  Clinical  Epidemiological  and 
Immunological  Types  of  Infection.  JAMA  200 : 365-373 , 1967. 


25.  Okada,  J. , Kamiyama,  I.,  Inomata,  M.  , Imai , M. , Miyakawa,  Y.  , 
and  Mayumi , M. : e-Antigen  and  anti-e  in  the  Serum  of  Asymptomatic 

Carrier  Mothers  as  Indicagors  of  Positive  and  Negative  Transmission 
of  Hepatitis  B Virus  to  Their  Infants.  New  Eng.  J.  Med.  294:746 , 
1976. 


26.  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report  1971-1972. 


27.  Yamashita,  Y. , et  al : South-North  Radient  in  Distribution  of 
r Determinant  of  Hepatitis  B Surface  Antigen  in  Japan.  J.  Inf. 
Dis.  131:567,  1975. 


28.  Snitbhan  R. , et  al:  Subtype  of  Hepatitis  B Surface  Antigen 

in  Southeast  Asia.  J.  Inf.  Dis.  131:708,  1975. 


29.  Harinasuta,  C.  et  al. : Bancroftian  Filariasis  in  Thailand, 

A New  Endemic  Area.  SE  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  _l:233-245  , 
1970. 


30.  Muller,  R. : Personal  Communication. 


31.  WHO  Expert  Committee  on  Filariasis  2nd  Report,  WHO  Tech 
Report,  1967,  No.  359. 


32.  Schacher,  J.F;  Laboratory  Models  in  Filariasis:  A Review 

of  Filarial  Life-Cycle  Patterns.  SE  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub. 
Hlth.  4:336-349,  1973. 


33.  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report,  1969 

34.  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Report,  1970. 


35.  Singh,  M. , Ho,  B. : Brienlia  booliat.  A Filaria  of  the 
Malayan  Forest  Rat,  Rattus  sabanus.  J.  of  Hel.  77:127-133,  1973. 


36.  Singh,  M. , Ho,  B.  and  Booliat,  L. : Preliminary  Results  on 

Experimental  Transmission  of  a New  Filarial  Parasite,  Brienlia 
booliat  from  Malayan  Wild  Rats  to  Laboratory  Albino  Rat.  SE 
Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  3_:622,  1972. 


■■ 


1496 


37.  Davidson,  D.E. , Dill,  G.S. , Tingpalapong , M. , Premabutra, 

S. , Nguen,  P.L.  , Stephenson,  E.H.  and  Ristic,  M. : Canine 

Ehrlichiosis  (Tropical  Canine  Pancytopenia)  in  Thailand.  SE 
Asian  J.  Trop.  Med.  6 Pub.  Hlth.  6_:  540- 543,  1975. 

38.  Chapman,  H.C. : Biological  Control  of  Mosquito  Larvae. 

Ann.  Rev.  Entomol.  19_:33,  1974. 

39.  Hazard,  E.  and  Fukuda,  T. : Stempellia  milleri  sp.  n. 

( Microsporida : Nosematidae)  in  the  Mosquito  Culex  pipiens 

quinquefasciatus  Say.  J.  Protozool.  21:497,  1974. 


40.  Chapman,  H.C. , Woodard,  D.B.  and  Petersen,  J.J. : Pathogens 

and  Para  ites  of  Louisiana  Culicidae  and  Chaoboridae.  Proc.  N. 

J.  Mosq.  Exterm.  Assoc.  _54:54,  1967. 

41.  Kudo,  R.R.  : Protozoology.  5th  Ed.  C.C.  Thomas,  Publishers. 

Springfield.  1966. 

Publications : 

1.  Bailey,  C.L.  and  Gould,  D.J.  : Flight  and  Dispersal  of 

Japanese  encephalitis  Vectors  in  Northern  Thailand.  Mosquito 
News.  35:172-178,  1975. 

2.  Bailey,  C.L.,  Vongpradist , S.  and  Mongkolpanya , K.  : Observa- 

tions of  an  Unusual  Oviposition  Habit  in  Armigeres  ( Leicesteria) 
annulitarsis  (Leicester) . Mosquito  News.  ^1564-565,  1975. 

3.  Bancroft,  W.H.,  Scott,  R.M. , Snitbhan,  R.  , Weaver,  R.E. , and 
Gould,  D.J.  Isolation  of  Langat  Virus  from  Haemaphysalis  papuana 
in  Thailand.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med  & Hyg.  25/500-504,  1975. 

4.  Benenson,  M.W. , Scott,  R.M.,  Snitbhan,  R.  , Top,  F.H.  , Jr.  and 
Pantuwatana,  S.  , Grossman,  R.A.  An  Epidemiological  Study  of 
Hepatitis  B Virus  in  Bangkok,  Thailand.  Am.  J.  of  Epidemiol. 
101:144-159,  1975. 

5.  Davidson,  D.E. , Dill,  G.S.,  Tingpalapong,  M. , Premabutra,  S. , 

Nguen,  P.L.,  Stephenson,  E.H.  and  Ristic,  M.  : Canine  Ehrilichiosis 

(Tropical  Canine  Pancytopenia)  in  Thailand.  SE  Asian  J.  Trop.  Med. 
Pub.  Hlth.  6:540-543,  1975. 

6.  Markvong,  A.,  J.T.  Marshall,  Pathak,  S.  and  Hsu,  T.C. 
Chromosomes  and  DNA  of  Mus  : The  Karyotypes  of  M.  fulvidiventris 
and  M_'  dunni . Cytogenetics  and  Cell  Genetics.  14:116-125 , 1975. 


r;  " 


I 

[ 

{ 


7.  Marshall,  J.T.  Karyotypes  of  Asian  Species  of  Mus.  Mammalian 
Chromosomes  Newsletter.  16 :19-25 , 1975. 

8.  Marshall,  J.T.  and  Marshall,  E.  Letters  to  the  Editor  (Critical 
Evaluation  of  published  karyotypes  of  Gibbons).  Mammalian 
Chromosomes  Newsletter.  16_:3Q-33,  1975. 

9.  Marshall',  J.T.  and  Marshall,  E.  Gibbons  and  Their  Territorial 
Songs.  Science.  193 : 235-237 , 1976. 

10.  Ratanaworabhan,  N.  and  Panthusiri,  P. : An  Illustrated  Key  to 

The  Female  Culicoides  of  Chiangmai  Valley,  Thailand.  Bangkok:  SEATO 
Medical  Research  Laboratory,  1-49,  1975. 

11.  Scott,  R.M. , Chiewsilp,  D.  and  Bancroft,  W.H.  The  Effect  of 
the  Offspring  of  Maternal  Hepatitis  B Antigenemia  Pediatric  Research. 
61:299,  1975. 

12.  Scott,  R.M. , Nimmannitya,  S. , Bancroft,  W.H.  and  Mansuwan,  P. 
(Abs.  1976).  Serum  Complement  Levels  in  Primary  Dengue  with  Shock 
Syndrome.  Malasian  Soc.  of  Pura  and  Trop.  Med.  P.  4 


13.  Snitbhan,  R.  , Scott,  R.M. , Bancroft,  W.H.,  Top,  F.H.,  Jr.  and 
Chiewsilp,  D.  Subtypes  of  Hepatitis  B Antigen  in  Southeast  Asia. 
J.  of  Infect.  Dis.  131:708-711,  1975. 


•m 


[Pll  Redacted] 


1<  OCNINU  UlC 


RESEARCH  AMD  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


» OATf  ARE  V SuM*NY 

75  07  01 


4 KINO  or  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 


10  NO  CODES*  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 


b COMTRIBu’ING 


62760A 


CARDS  U4F 

L|  P’traOm  ml  tft  it  Ctrl  ty  C lattlllcailmr  Ct*t)* 


^Tummaa*s<^^ 

u 


4 ROR^EOJRI^^ 

u 


PROJECT  NUMBER 


3A762  759A811 


i KoTno^Q^utoiF 

DA  OA  6442 


» REGRACMNG* 

NA 


^Ta^^j^ummaay^ 

76  07  01 


'Tl" 


00 


report  cow  not  maot 

nn  nh^f  {AR)tst 


IW  IR(  Cl  TIC  DATA  - 
COM  TRACTOR  ACCEII 

D MO 


fii 


LEVEL  Of  tUM 
A BORE  UNIT 


WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


~rrr 


nn  R I eke t ts lal  Diseases  of  Military  Personnel 

I ill!  NT  1 1 C »*  O T I CtlllOl  OCIC  » l AREAS* 


. ^TIgTl.QQ.  ..Mir  rnh  iolusy 


r^m- 


***S/E» 

uMAI  m * 


GRANT 

ICTlvB 


II  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATC 


CONT 


NA 


. ■ 'NO  Of  ANA  AO 


I ■CSPO'iVIlI  DOD  ORGANIZATION 


IE  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A PROFESSIONAL  MAN  Y AT 

4 FUND4  fl"  mtutmki.) 

EIRIRATIOM 

FISCAL 

76 

4 

>'4 

4 AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 

YEAR 

77 

4 

IT'’ 

"‘“‘"Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


AlirONWlLl  INOIV’OUA 


Joy,  Robert  J.T. , COL 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 
,iv*onfi» rr<»«,A 2sn -iA issi9 tisssfissns «j«i  (UJ  Kicxettsia 
(U)  Vaccines;  (U)  Epidemiology  


II  rUNDlNG  AGENCY 


DA 


IE  PCWTORMAmCI  MCTHOO 

C.  In-House 


to  PCWfORMING  ORGARIIATIOM 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  CD&I 

“’'’•'“Washington,  DC  20012 

RRIMCIRAL  INVESTIGATOR  fftmlak  MAR  >1  V t *ta*mlt  latllfUmm) 

«*«•*  Osterman,  Joseph  V.,  DR. 

202-576-2146 

SOCIAL.  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBE 
ASSOCIATE  IN VASTIO ATOMS 

«»«Shirai,  Akira,  DR. 

»»«i  Eisenberg,  George  H.G.,  Jr.,  MAJ.MSC 

TBrggtiflrrgTuT)  Tawrranrry  iTtagnns-in; — 


IS  TECHNICAL.  OBJECTIVE.*  IS  APPROACH.  IS  RROGACSS  rfw»T»l«A  l»«»f**l  N»PM*I  *y  ntmiOat  r«lfM  fat  tl  NN*  MB  tacmltr  Claatll'ttlan  C*M  ) 

23.  (U)  Detection  of  rickettsial  diseases.  2.  Improvement  of  methods  for  clinical 
serologic  diagnosis.  3.  Immunopathol oglcal  studies  u Lost  response  to  infection  with 
wild  type  and  attenuated  rickettsial  agents,  which  epresent  a serious  hazard  to 
troops  operating  in  the  field. 

24.  (U)  1.  Development  of  a monocyte  culture  technique  for  early  diagnosis  of  rickett- 
sial disease.  2.  Comparison  of  histopathology  following  infection  with  strains  of 
different  virulence  for  mice.  3.  Comparison  of  physical  and  chemical  methods  for  pro- 
duction of  experimental  scrub  typb  is  immunogens. 

25.  (U)  75  07-76  06.  1.  A monocyte  culture  technique  for  the  early  diagnosis  of  Rocky 
Mountain  Spotted  Fever  has  been  developed.  The  technique  allows  diagnosis  from  4-6 
days  after  onset  of  febrile  illness  and  employs  equipment  commonly  available  in  any 
tissue  culture  laboratory.  2.  Host  defenses  In  experimental  scrub  typhus  have  been 
characterized  at  the  histopathologlcal  level.  Using  the  inbred  BALB/c  mouse  model, 

a comparative  study  was  performed  on  the  pathology  of  sublethal  immunizing  Gilliam 
Infection,  lethal  Karp  infection  and  Karp  infection  of  Gilliam-immunized  mice.  3. 

A comparative  study  of  the  immunizing  capacity  of  formalinized  and  gamma  irradiated 
rickettsiae  has  been  performed.  Gamma  Irradiated  organisms  are  clearly  superior  to 
formalinized  preparations,  eliciting  higher  levels  of  protection  with  fewer  organisms, 
and  providing  substantial  protection  against  heterologous  challenge.  For  technical 
report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 
30  Jun  76. 

Jupport  in  the  amount  of  .j>6l,000  from  FY  7T  funds  Is  programmed  for  the  period 
i J j1-y0  Jep  76. 


»A»A |1a61>  fo  c 


DO, '".“J  498 


animator1  $ A| 


!S£ 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIl  FORM  ■*.  4 E ORldLETf  ■ V5  FORME  I49SA  NOV  «B 
AND  1494  1 1 MAR  A 4 FOR  ARM  V US  fv  ■»  - t 't 


“(W  •* 


_ r •vr.«i96'..TNM»w 


I 


Project  3A762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  075  Rickettsial  Diseases  of  Military  Personnel 
Investigators. 

Principal:  Joseph  V.  Osterman,  Ph.D.;  Akira  Shirai,  Ph.D.; 

MAJ  George  H.  G.  Eisenberg,  Jr.,  MSC 

Associate:  Janis  Campbell;  SP4  John  Hallam 

Description. 

xo  develop  new  techniques  for  diagnosis  of  rickettsial  disease 
and  to  characterize  both  the  humoral  and  cell-mediated  immunological 
responses  to  rickettsial  infection. 

Progress. 

I.  Development  of  new  diagnostic  techniques. 

A.  Early  diagnosis  of  Rocky  Mountain  Spotted  Fever  using 
the  primary  monocyte  culture  technique. 

Rickettsial  disease  continues  to  be  of  great  actual  and  potential 
significance  in  the  world.  During  the  last  six  years  the  incidence 
of  Rocky  Mountain  Spotted  Fever  (RMSF)  in  the  United  States  has 
increased  from  an  average  of  400  cases  per  year  in  the  1960's  to  774 
cases  in  1974.  Five  to  seven  percent  of  the  infected  patients  died. 

As  with  other  rickettsial  diseases,  diagnosis  is  based  initially  on 
clinical  findings  because  serological  confirmation  is  available  only 
late  in  the  illness.  The  development  of  a rapid  laboratory  diagnostic 
technique  for  RMSF  would  be  of  great  immediate  usefulness. 

Buhles  et^  al.  (1973)  identified  Rickettsia  rickettsii  in  cultures 
of  circulating  monocytes  from  four  experimentally  infected  guinea 
pigs  at  10  to  14  days  after  inoculation.  Gambrill  and  Wisseman 
(1973)  have  described  in  detail  both  the  morphology  of  cultured 
macrophages  and  the  growth  of  typhus  rickettsiae  in  experimentally 
infected  human  macrophage  cultures.  The  characteristic  adherence  of 
monocyte  r?lls  to  a glass  surface  was  used  by  both  groups  of  investi- 
gators to  select  and  cultivate  this  subpopulation  of  circulating  cells. 

Work  by  Badger  (1933)  and  Saslaw  e£  al.  (1966)  has  shown  the 
mon'  ey  to  be  a useful  host  for  study  of  RMSF.  They  demonstrated  that 
the  animal  was  not  only  susceptible  to  the  disease,  but  developed  a 
seemingly  identical  clinical  and  histological  picture  to  that  seen 
in  man. 


This  study  was  performed  to  further  investigate  the  usefulness 
of  the  monocyte  culture  technique  as  a diagnostic  procedure  for 
human  rickettsial  disease. 


Four  10-12  pound  irale  rhesus  monkeys  (Macaca  mulatta)  were 
assigned  to  two  groups  and  inoculated  subcutaneously  with  one 
milliliter  (ml)  of  a yolk  sac  suspension  of  R.  rickettsii  (Sheila 
Smith  strain)  adjusted  such  that  two  received  1 X 10*1  and  two  1 X 10 
plaque  forming  units  (PFU) . Monkeys  were  monitored  by  daily  physical 
examination  and  measurement  of  rectal  temperatures.  Complete  blood 
count,  platelet  count,  serology  by  complement  fixation,  monocyte 
culture,  and  plaque  assay  were  performed  prior  to  inoculation  and  on 
the  second,  fourth,  and  tenth  days  after  the  onset  of  fever.  Because 
the  temperature  of  monkeys  varies  with  excitement,  the  designation 
of  "second  febrile  day"  was  made  only  after  two  consecutive  days  of 
a rectal  temperature  greater  than  104F. 


The  monocyte  culture  technique  was  performed  basically  as  described 
by  Nyindo  et  al.  (1971).  Sixteen  ml  of  blood  were  drawn  aseptically 
from  each  monkey  into  a heparinized  (20  units/ml)  disposable  sterile 
plastic  syringe  comaining  8 ml  of  3%  dextran  (Pharmachem)  in  normal 
saline.  The  syringe  was  inverted  with  the  needle  end  up  and  allowed 
to  stand  for  30  to  60  minutes  until  the  supernatant  was  clear.  The 
supernatant  fluid,  consisting  of  a mixture  of  dextran  and  white  blood 
cells,  was  transferred  to  a second  sterile  plastic  syringe  and  gently 
agitated  to  distribute  the  cells  throughout  the  mixture.  One  ml  of 
this  mixture  was  placed  into  each  of  eight  sterile  Leighton  tubes 
containing  alcohol-washed  8 X 35  mm  borosilicate  coverslips.  Culture 
tubes  were  incubated  horizontally  at  35C  in  an  atmosphere  of  5%  CO 
for  24  hours,  then  washed  three  times  with  Hanks'  balanced  salt 
solution  to  remove  unattached  cells.  Cultures  were  maintained  in 
Eagle's  minimum  essential  medium  with  Earle's  balanced  salt  solution 
supplemented  with  1%  glutamine  and  20%  homologous  heat-inactivated 
monkey  serum.  Cultures  were  refed  every  three  days.  No  antibiotics 
were  employed  in  any  aspect  of  the  monocyte  culture  technique. 


Two  coverslips  were  removed  from  Leighton  tubes  on  the  second, 
fifth,  eighth,  and  tenth  day  of  culture.  One  coverslip  was  stained 
by  the  Gimenez  technique  and  one  was  stained  with  specific  fluorescein- 
conjugated  anti-R.  rickettsii  rabbit  serum.  Specificity  of  the  anti- 
serum was  established  before  use  in  the  study.  Uninfected  monocyte 
cultures  were  used  for  control  purposes.  Identification  of  rickettsiae 
was  based  on  typical  morphological  and  tinctorial  or  immunof luorescent 
characteristics  of  organisms  observed  intracellularly . When  possible, 
250  cells  were  counted  before  calling  a culture  negative. 


1501 


J 


— 


The  disease  course  in  the  monkeys  was  related  to  the  infecting 
dose.  Both  monkeys  receiving  the  higher  dose  of  rickettsiae  (// 1 and 
#3)  became  febrile  by  the  fourth  post-inoculation  day.  Monkey  //I 
remained  febrile  for  three  days,  showed  slight  decreases  in  appetite 
and  activity  but  did  not  develop  a rash.  Monkey  It 3 remained  febrile, 
became  increasingly  lethargic  and  anorectic,  and  manifested  a genera- 
lized petechial  rash  on  the  fourth  febrile  day.  The  monkey  died  one 
dav  later.  Histological  studies  demonstrated  diffuse  necrotizing 
vasculitis,  typical  of  R.  rickettsii  infection.  In  the  lower  dose 
group.  Monkey  It 2 was  febrile  by  the  fourth  post  inoculation  day,  but 
became  afebrile  within  four  days.  No  clinical  signs  of  the  disease 
were  noted  other  than  the  fever.  Monkey  It 4 had  an  elevation  in  temp- 
erature for  only  one  day  and  did  not  become  clinically  ill.  Since  the 
hyperthermia  could  have  been  induced  by  excitement,  this  monkey  was 
not  considered  to  have  become  febrile. 

The  estimated  levels  of  rickettsemia  by  the  plaque-formation 
technique  are  shown  in  Table  1.  Transiently  febrile  Monkeys  It  1 
and  It 2 had  approximately  300  rickettsiae/mi  on  the  second  febrile 
day  and  none  subsequently.  Monkey  It 3,  which  succumbed,  had  a persis- 
tent rickettsemia.  Monkey  It  A,  which  never  became  febrile,  was  not 
rickettsemic  when  tested  on  day  10. 

In  the  surviving  monkeys  specific  complement  fixing  antibody 
titers  developed  by  the  tenth  febrile  day.  Moderate  anemia,  leuko- 
penia, and  thrombocytopenia  developed  in  the  three  febrile  animals, 
while  Monkey  It 4 never  showed  significant  hematologic  changes. 

The  results  of  staining  of  coverslip  cultures  of  monocytes  from 
Monkeys  It  1,  It 2,  and  It 3 by  the  Gimenez  and  direct  immunofluorescent 
techniques  are  shown  in  Table  2.  Rickettsiae  were  demonstrated  by 
fluorescent  staining  as  early  as  the  fourth  and  not  later  than  the 
sixth  day  after  the  onset  of  fever.  The  fluorescent  antibody  technique 
was  more  sensitive  for  observing  rickettsiae  very  early  in  the  disease, 
but  by  seven  days  into  the  illness  organisms  were  clearly  discernable 
by  the  Gimenez  staining  technique.  Surprisingly,  rickettsiae  also 
were  demonstrated  from  a culture  taken  on  the  13th  post-inoculation 
day  from  Monkey  It 4,  which  never  became  febrile. 

The  two  levels  of  rickettsial  inocula  selected  for  this  study 
produced  the  full  spectrum  of  clinical  illness,  from  asymptomatic 
to  fulminating  and  fatal.  In  the  fatal  case,  clinical  and  histological 
observations  supported  a diagnosis  of  RMSF  similar  to  that  seen  in 
seriously  ill  humans.  The  asymptomatic  infection  seen  in  Monkey  //4 
was  substantiated  by  significant  increases  in  specific  complement 
fixing  antibodies  and  demonstration  of  organisms  in  monocyte  culture 
preparations.  The  period  of  rickettsemia  detected  by  plaque  assay 
correlated  well  with  the  febrile  response.  This  technique  may  have 
minimized  levels  of  rickectsemia,  since  detection  of  small  numbers  of 
plaques  in  undiluted  blood  was  obscured  by  the  presence  of  red  blood  cells. 


1502 


The  small  size  of  the  monkeys  used,  and  attendant  problems  with 
anemia,  limited  the  volume  of  blood  obtained  and  the  frequency  of 
sampling  for  monocyte  culture.  Nevertheless,  the  animals  receiving 
1 X 10^  PFU  of  rickettsiae  had  positive  cultures  which  allowed  a 
diagnosis  of  RMSF  to  be  made  as  early  as  four  days  into  their  illness. 

The  group  receiving  1 X 10^  PFU  was  more  difficult  to  diagnose  but 
were  positive  by  febrile  day  six.  It  is  possible  that,  with  more 
frequent  sampling  and  larger  numbers  of  replicates,  the  time  required 
for  diagnosis  could  be  reduced  further. 

Our  work  concentrated  on  diagnosis  from  onset  of  the  febrile  ill- 
ness to  days  9 and  12  when  serological  data  becomes  clinically  useful. 
Although  all  animals  had  positive  cultures  by  12  days,  data  from  this 
time  onward  are  not  reported  because  they  lacked  diagnostic  significance. 


No  available  laboratory  method  allows  diagnosis  of  RMSF  during 
the  critical  period  from  onset  of  symptoms  to  development  of  sero- 
logical response,  which  occurs  after  about  12  days  of  the  illness. 

The  supporting  equipment  for  monocyte  culture  is  available  in  labora- 
tories with  tissue  culture  capabilities.  The  technique  is  relatively 
simple  and  the  volume  of  blood  necessary  is  minimal.  We  believe  the 
success  demonstrated  here  in  diagnosis  of  RMSF  warrants  investigation 
of  this  technique  as  a diagnostic  tool  in  human  rickettsial  disease. 


Table  1.  Estimated  levels  of  rickettsemia  (PFU/cc) 


Monkey 

Infecting 

Day 

after 

onset  of  febrile 

illness  when 

number 

dose  (PFU) 

culture  taken 

(a) 

2 

4 

10 

1 x io5 

3 X 

io2 

0 

0 

t 

' 3 

1 x io5 

9 X 

io2 

2 

2 X 10 

ND(b) 

i 2 

4 

1 X 10 

3 X 

io2 

0 

( 4<c) 

> 

4 

1 X 10 

ND 

ND 

0 

(a)  (0)  indicates  no  rickettsemia  detected,  ND  indicates  not  done. 

(b)  Monkey  if 3 died  on  day  5 after  onset  of  febrile  illness. 

(c)  Monkey  H was  cultured  only  on  day  10. 


Jt  v 7. 


Infecting 
dose  (PFU) 


1 X 10' 


1 X 10 


1 X 10 


Identification  of  Rickettsia  rickettsii  in  monocyte 
cultures  from  blood  of  infected  monkeys 


Monocyte  staining 
technique 


Gimenez 

Fluorescent 

Gimenez 

Fluorescent 

Gimenez 

Fluorescent 


Day  after  onset  of 
febrile  illness  when 
culture  was  first 
positive  (a) 


(a)  Cultures  were  read  on  days  0,  4,  6,  and  7.  Cultures  read  on 
days  4 and  7 were  planted  on  day  2,  whereas  cultures  read  on 
day  6 were  planted  on  day  4 after  onset  of  febrile  illness. 


II.  Characterization  of  humoral  and  cell-mediated  immunity  to 
rickettsial  infection. 

A.  Host  defenses  in  experimental  scrub  typhus  - 
Histopathological  correlates. 

In  other  studies,  we  have  verified  previous  observations  that 
the  virulence  of  the  Karp  strain  of  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi  was  far 
greater  than  that  of  the  Gilliam  strain  In  mice  and  that  pre-inoculation 
with  an  infectious  dose  of  a less  virulent  strain  of  scrub  typhus  pro- 
tected mice  from  subsequent  challenge  with  a lethal  strain.  Finally 
and  most  importantly,  it  was  observed  that  cell-mediated  immunity 
induced  by  Gilliam  immunization  was  principally  responsible  for  the 
initial  stages  of  heterologous  protection. 

The  ultimate  goal  of  studies  such  as  these  is  an  understanding 
of  the  mechanisms  of  immune  protection.  An  essential  prerequisite  for 
achieving  this  goal  is  a thorough  knowledge  of  the  pathobiology  of 
rickettsial  infection.  Although  others  have  studied  the  pathology  of 
scrub  typhus,  such  reports  have  not  focused  on  the  pathological  conse- 
quences of  infection  with  a sublethal  dose  of  Gilliam  strain  nor  on 
the  modifications  in  ’ethal  Karp  pathology  effected  by  prior  hetero- 
logous immunization  with  Gilliam.  Therefore,  we  decided  to  compare 
and  contrast  the  pathology  of  sublethal,  immunizing  Gilliam  infection 
with  lethal  Karp  infection  and  also  Karp  infection  of  Gilliam-immunized 
mice . 


Sequential  pathological  alterations  were  observed  after  intra- 
peritoneal  inoculation  of  R.  tsutsugamushi.  There  were  three  experi- 
mental groups:  (1)  animals  infected  with  a lethal  dose  (1,000  MLD,.^) 

of  the  Karp  strain;  (2)  animals  infected  with  a nonlethal  dose  (100 
MID^q)  of  the  Gilliam  strain,  which,  in  fact,  resulted  in  immune 
protection  against  otherwise  lethal  Karp  challenge;  and  (3)  animals 
immunized  with  the  Gilliam  strain,  as  above,  3 days  before  challenge 
with  1,000  MLD^q  of  the  Karp  strain.  Groups  of  three  mice  were  sac- 
rificed on  the  first  and  third  days  postinfection  and  every  third  day 
subsequently.  At  each  time  point,  a comparable  control  group  was  also 
sacrificed.  Regardless  of  the  lethality  of  the  infecting  strain,  the 
elapsed  time  postinfection,  or  the  state  of  immunity,  the  histopatho- 
logical  changes  were  confined  to  the  peritoneal  cavity,  the  peritoneal 
surfaces  of  abdominal  organs,  and  the  spleen  and  liver.  Lesions  outside 
the  peritoneal  cavity  (excluding  the  spleen  and  liver)  were  not  observed 
in  these  experiments  at  the  level  of  resolution  of  the  light  micro- 
scope. Pathological  differences  between  the  three  groups  of  infected 
mice  were  usually  of  a quantitative  rather  than  a qualitative  nature, 
and  similar  classes  of  lesions  differing  only  in  severity  could  be 
demonstrated  in  each  group. 

Titration  of  the  stock  suspension  of  Karp  in  BALB/c  mice  indicated 
identical  values  of  10  MLD^g/ml  and  10^  MID^g/ml.  The  stock  suspension 
of  Gilliam  was  similarly  titrated  and  found  to  contain  10^  MLD^/ml  and 
10®"^  MID^g/ml  of  rickettsiae.  The  similarity  of  MLDcq  and  MID^q 
values  for  Karp  confirmed  its  lethality  for  this  strain  of  mice.  The 
difference  between  MLD,-0  and  MID5Q  values  for  Gilliam  reflects  its 
reduced  virulence  for  mice  and  was  the  basis  for  selection  of  the  100 
MID^g  immunizing  dose.  Since  the  MLD^q  and  MID^q  values  were  identical 
for  Karp,  the  inoculum  of  1,000  MLD50  contained  approximately  10-fold 
more  infectious  doses  of  rickettsiae  than  the  inoculum  of  100  MID^q 
of  Gilliam  used  for  immunization. 


The  peritoneal  fluid  of  a normal  mouse  was  clear,  straw-colored, 
and  contained  cells  free  in  suspension.  These  cells  were  mostly  mono- 
nuclear, consisting  of  both  lymphocytes  and  macrophages,  but  occasional 
polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  (PMNs)  and  mast  cells  were  also  observed. 
During  the  first  6 days  after  infection  with  either  strain  of  R. 
tsutsugamushi,  there  was  a definite  increase  in  the  number  of  peritoneal 
cells  observed,  particularly  mononuclear  cells  (Fig.  1).  At  this  time, 
macrophages  were  principally  of  the  monocytoid  type.  They  were  of 
medium  size  and  did  not  contain  prominent  granules,  vacuoles,  or 
projections (Fig.  2).  Rickettsial  organisms  were  not  identifiable 
during  this  period,  but  there  were  numerous  examples  of  lymphocyte- 
macrophage  interaction  with  occasional  lymphoid  cell  rosette  formation 
around  macrophages  (Fig.  3).  During  the  initial  6-day  period,  peritoneal 
scrapings  from  the  three  groups  of  mice  were  indistinguishable,  but 
differences  began  to  appear  9 days  after  infection.  At  that  time, 
peritoneal  fluid  from  mice  bearing  lethal  Karp  infections  was  thick, 


.4  7;:t T?J:M 


1505 


tenacious,  and  pale  reddish-gray,  suggesting  a fibrinous  peritonitis. 
Microscopically,  numerous  macrophages  containing  large  numbers  of 
intracellular  coccobacillary  organisms  identical  in  morphology  to 
scrub  typhus  rickettsiae  were  observed  (Fig.  4).  Further,  a sharp 
increase  in  PMNs  also  occurred,  but  no  rickettsiae  were  observed  in 
these  cells.  In  sharp  contrast  to  lethal  Karp  challenge,  rickettsial 
organisms  were  rarely  observed  in  either  the  group  infected  with  a 
nonlethal  dose  of  Gilliam  strain  or  the  group  immunized  with  Gilliam 
and  subsequently  challenged  with  Karp.  The  animals  from  these  groups 
both  exhibited  an  increased  number  of  peritoneal  macrophages  with 
large  empty  vacuoles  (Fig.  5),  in  contrast  to  the  organism-filled 
vacuoles  demonstrated  in  Fig.  4.  This  morphological  appearance 
suggested  that  these  macrophages  were  able  to  destroy  the  intracellular 
rickettsiae.  Again  in  contrast  to  lethal  Karp  infection,  no  comparable 
increase  in  PMNs  was  observed,  and  fibrinous  peritonitis  did  not  occur. 

Until  3 days  after  infection,  spleens  of  infected  mice  were  indis- 
tinguishable from  those  of  control  animals  (Fig.  6).  After  that  time, 
infection  with  either  Karp  or  Gilliam  resulted  in  a marked  increase 
in  spleen  size  due  principally  to  an  enlargement  of  the  white  pulp 
(Fig.  7).  Also  evident  at  this  time  was  an  increased  prominence  of 
germinal  center  formation.  This  trend  of  splenomegaly  due  to  increase 
in  white  pulp  continued  with  time  and  reached  its  peak  at  12  days  in 
mice  infected  with  Gilliam  and  in  Karp- infected  animals,  some  of  which 
were  moribund.  The  group  of  mice  immunized  with  Gilliam  and  subse- 
quently challenged  with  Karp  showed  the  most  striking  development  of 
white  pulp  (Fig.  8),  which  was  first  evident  at  3 days  after  Karp 
challenge.  Rickettsial  organisms  were  not  observed  in  histological 
sections  of  the  spleen  in  any  of  the  three  groups. 

Infection  with  either  Karp  or  Gilliam  led  to  a generalized  promi- 
nence of  Kupffer  cells  during  the  first  6 days.  At  low  magnification, 
the  prominent  nuclei  of  the  usually  flattened  Kupffer  cells  were 
readily  identifiable.  After  day  6,  definite  nodular  aggregates  of 
cells  could  be  identified,  scattered  randomly  throughout  the  hepatic 
parenchyma  (Fig.  9).  At  higher  magnification,  it  was  observed  that 
these  nodules  lacked  PMNs  and  were  composed  of  mononuclear  cells, 
mainly  Kupffer  cells  (Fig.  10,11).  After  day  9,  these  mononuclear 
aggregates  or  "granulomas"  decreased  in  size  and  number  in  animals 
infected  with  Gilliam  and  in  animals  immunized  with  Gilliam  and 
subsequently  challenged  with  Karp.  However,  the  converse  occurred  in 
Karp- infected  animals  - the  number  and  size  of  such  granulomas  increased 
until  time  of  death.  At  no  time  were  rickettsial  organisms  observed 
by  light  microscopy  in  these  granulomas  or  elsewhere  in  the  hepatic 
parenchyma.  Only  Karp-infected  animals  eventually  evidenced  a severe 
fibrinous  peritonitis  (Fig.  12). 


1506 


Our  results  have  shown  a clear  difference  between  the  pathobiology 
of  a nonlethal  immunizing  infection  with  Gilliam  strain  and  lethal 
infection  with  Karp,  as  well  as  the  moderating  effect  of  prior  Gilliam 
immunization  on  lethal  Karp  challenge.  It  must  be  understood,  however, 
that  we  have  purposely  selected  a small  (100  MIDcr,)  nonlethal  dose  of 
Gilliam  for  study  because  it  provides  effective  heterologous  immuni- 
zation and  allows  the  study  of  cross- immunity  between  strains  of  scrub 
typhus.  If  we  had  used  a larger,  lethal  dose  of  Gilliam,  it  is  possible 
that  the  pathological  manifestations  of  infection  would  more  closely 
resemble  those  seen  with  Karp. 

The  results  presented  confirmed  the  reports  of  others  that  intra- 
peritoneal  scrub  typhus  infection  remains  largely  confined  within  the 
peritoneal  cavity.  However,  two  histological  observations  deserve 
mention  before  further  discussion  of  the  particular  results:  (1)  the 
lymphocyte-macrophage  interactions  depicted  in  Fig.  3 have  been 
previously  described  in  vitro  (peripolesis)  and  in  vivo  and  are 
thought  to  represent  afferent  events  in  an  immune  response,  probably 
related  to  the  presentation  of  antigen  by  macrophages  to  immuno- 
competent lymphocytes;  (2)  although  organisms  were  not  demonstrable 
within  hepatic  granulomas,  it  seemed  likely  that  their  appearance 
and  growth  were  due  to  the  presence  of  rickettsiae  or  their  products. 
Such  local  proliferation  of  Kupffer  cells  has  been  observed  in  the 
livers  of  mice  stimulated  by  Corynebacterium  parvum  vaccine.  However, 
in  the  absence  of  radioautographic  and  immunof luorescent  confirmation, 
this  remains  speculative. 

In  animals  infected  with  R.  tsutsugamushi,  two  phenomena  occurred 
in  parallel:  (1)  those  related  to  proliferation  of  rickettsia  in 

macrophages  and  presumably  in  hepatic  granulomas;  and  (2)  those 
related  to  concomitant  immunization  and  splenic  lymphoid  hyperplasia. 

In  the  case  of  Gilliam-infected  animals,  the  phenomena  relating  to 
rickettsial  proliferation  were  minimal  and  transient.  Thus,  hepatic 
granulomas  appeared  briefly  and  regressed,  and  there  was  minimal  and 
finite  proliferation  of  rickettsia  in  peritoneal  macrophages  (Fig.  5). 
These  findings  were  consistent  with  the  host's  ability  to  mount  a 
sufficiently  vigorous  immune  response  to  deal  with  the  infectious 
burden.  The  cellular  site  of  rickettsiacidal  activity  appeared  to  be 
the  macrophage.  This  cell  undergoes  extensive  morphological  alterations 
during  infection  from  the  "inactive"  monocytoid  state  frig.  2)  to  the 
"angry"  macrophage  (Fig.  5),  capable  of  destroying  rickettsial  orga- 
nisms in  its  lysosomal  complex. 

Similarly,  an  immune  response  seems  to  be  initiated  in  a lethal 
Karp  Infection,  as  is  evidenced  by  splenic  lymphoid  hyperplasia.  In 
contrast  to  the  Gilliam  infection,  however,  rickettsial  proliferative 


1507 


phenomena  in  peritoneal  macrophages  (Fig.  A)  and  the  number  and  size 
of  hepatic  granulomata  (Fig.  9 to  12)  continued  to  increase  until 
death.  These  findings  are  consistent  with  a host  immune  response 
inadequate  to  deal  with  the  proliferative  effects  of  a highly  lethal 
infection. 

It  is  suggested  that  survival  in  scrub  typhus  infections  in  mice 
is  the  result  of  a delicate  balance  between  the  proliferation  of  the 
organism  and  the  intensity  of  host's  immune  response.  In  support  of 
this  concept  is  the  experiment  in  which  Gilliam- immunized  mice  were 
infected  with  Karp.  Although  an  equally  lethal  dose  of  Karp  was 
given  to  immune  as  well  as  to  nonimmune  animals,  the  immune  animals 
displayed  a rickettsial  proliferative  component  similar  to  that  observed 
with  a nonlethal  Gilliam  infection.  These  immune  animals,  however, 
displayed  the  most  striking  splenic  lymphoid  hyperplasia  observed 
in  this  series  of  experiments.  This  suggested  that  an  extremely 
vigorous  host  immune  response  overcame  the  proliferative  capacity  of 
Karp.  In  this  context,  preimmunization  with  Gilliam  seems  to  "prime" 
the  immune  system  to  produce  and  mobilize  sufficient  effector  cells 
to  deal  with  the  lethal  Karp  challenge. 

III.  Development  of  an  inactivated  scrub  typhus  immunogen. 

A.  Experimental  scrub  typhus  immunogens  - Gamma-irradiated 
and  formalinxzed  rickettsiae. 

Primary  scrub  typhus  infection  renders  man  solidly  immune  to 
reinfection  by  the  homologous  strain  of  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi  for 
at  least  one  year,  but  protection  against  the  several  known  hetero- 
logous strains  wanes  rapidly  with  susceptibility  to  disease  reappearing 
within  months.  A similar  period  of  protection  against  homologous 
challenge  is  seen  in  rodent  animal  models,  but  the  duration  of 
heterologous  immunity  is  less  clearly  defined  since  most  studies 
have  tested  heterologous  resistance  within  1-2  months  following 
initial  infection.  Attempts  to  develop  a safe,  effective  vaccine 
for  scrub  typhus  have  not  been  successful,  although  at  least  three 
conceptual  approaches  have  been  employed.  Vaccination  with  strains 
of  R.  tsutsugamushi  considered  to  be  "attenuated"  by  laboratory 
or  clinical  criteria  resulted  in  scrub  typhus  infections  that  were 
indistinguishable  from  those  occurring  after  natural  exposure. 
Inoculation  of  pathogenic  rickettsiae  combined  with  chemoprophylaxis 
had  limited  practical  applicability  because  the  technique  required 
a delicate  balance  between  the  individual  and  the  rickettsial  infection 
to  allow  sufficient  replication  of  the  organism  for  adequate  immuno- 
genicity,  while  suppressing  overt  disease  by  chemotherapy.  Immuniz- 
ation with  formalin  or  merthiolate  treated  rickettsiae  was  ineffective 
in  providing  protection  for  man  against  natural  infection,  but  did 
protect  laboratory  animals  against  moderate  homologous  challenge. 


1508 


after  Gilliam  infection.  Cellular  composition  after  Karp  infection.  The  cells  are  predomi- 

is  predominantly  mononuclear,  consisting  of  nantly  monocytoid  macrophages  lacking  promi- 

darker-staining  small  lymphocytes  and  larger  nent  vacuolization.  Organisms  were  not 

macrophages  with  pale  cytoplasm.  Organisms  were  identified.  Arrow  indicates  degenerating  PMN. 

not  identified.  (Giemsa,  X440)  (Giemsa,  XI, 000) 


: ;T?£ 


»&*+.  zsr: 


y®»  JWjt 


+v*'«*v* 


**-V 


^ ’W  - ^ 


FIG.  7 Low-power  view  of  a spleen  3 days  FIG.  8 Low-power  view  of  a spleen  6 days 

after  Gilliam  infection.  Note  the  develop-  after  Karp  challenge  of  a Gilliam- 

ment  of  the  white  pulp  (X)  at  the  expense  immunized  animal.  The  spleen  is  composed 

of  the  red  pulp  (compere  with  Fig.  6).  almost  completely  of  white  pulp. 

(Hematoxylin  and  eosin,  X40)  (Hematoxylin  and  eosin,  X40) 


* %, 


of  the  cells  appear  to  be  Kupffer  cells,  whereas  absent  from  animals  Infected  with  G:lliam 

others  appear  to  be  typital  monocytoid  macro-  and  those  Immunized  with  Gi-liam  and 

phages  (arrow).  Organisms  could  not  be  demon—  subsequently  challenged  with  Karp, 

strated  histologically.  (Hematoxylin  and  (Hematoxylin  and  eosin,  X250) 

eosin,  XI, 0201 


Si  ice  chemically  inactivated  immunogens  elicited  little 
heterologous  protection  and  only  moderate  homologous  protection  in 
laboratory  animals,  we  explored  inactivation  by  a physical  process. 
Ultraviolet  light  has  been  employed  to  inactivate  rickettsiae,  but 
the  necessity  of  preparing  thin  films  of  rickettsial  suspensions 
for  exposure  to  a light  source  detracted  from  the  usefulness  of  this 
technique.  Gamma  radiation  has  been  used  previously  for  preparation 
of  immunogens  from  protozoan  parasites  and  is  known  to  inactivate 
bacteria.  Since  its  penetrating  capacity  facilitates  preparation  of 
large  volumes  of  immunogen,  it  was  chosen  for  use  in  this  study. 

Immunogens  were  prepared  fror  infected  yolk-sac  suspensions  of 
R.  tsutsugamushi  either  by  exposu’  * to  lethal  doses  of  y-radiation  or, 
for  comparison,  by  addition  of  for  ralin  and  merthiolate.  We  chose  to 
duplicate  the  formalinization  techniques  and  the  vaccination  and 
challenge  schedules  of  Smadel  £t  al. (1946)  to  insure  that  comparisons 
were  valid  with  respect  to  the  capabilities  of  the  formalinized 
immunogens  and  to  provide  a sense  of  historical  continuity  to  the 
research.  The  relative  immunizing  capacities  of  the  two  types  of 
immunogens  were  contrasted  by  vaccination  of  mice  followed  by 
homologous  and  heterologous  challenge  with  highly  virulent  strains 
of  scrub  typhus  rickettsiae.  These  protection  tests  showed  that 
radiation  inactivated  preparations  were  far  superior  to  those  con- 
taining formalin-killed  rickettsiae. 

Mouse  protection  tests  showed  that  formalinized  immunogens  pre- 
pared from  two  different  suspensions  of  the  Karp  strain  of  R. 
tsutsugamushi  provided  vaccinated  mice  with  similar  levels  of  pro- 
tection against  homologous  challenge,  although  the  preparation  con- 
taining greater  numbers  of  rickettsiae  evidenced  a higher  immunity 
index  (Table  3).  Absolute  protection  was  never  achieved,  and  most 
surviving  mice  showed  signs  of  distress  during  the  challenge  period. 
The  suspension  providing  the  greatest  protection  against  homologous 
challenge  azforded  insignificant  protection  against  challenge  with 
the  heterologous  Kato  strain. 

The  effect  of  increasing  doses  of  y-radiation  on  the  lethality 
of  two  different  Karp  preparations  is  shown  in  Table  4.  Regression 
analysis  (Table  5)  indicates  that  the  radiation- inactivation  response 
is  linear,  with  a slope  that  is  independent  of  the  Karp  suspension 
tested.  Linearity  is  important  because  mouse  mortality  due  to 
injection  of  rickettsial  suspensions  that  had  received  radiation 
doses  above  100  Krad  was  too  low  to  permit  estimation  of  surviving 
rickettsiae.  Since  the  responses  were  linear  and  the  correlation 
coefficients  similar,  the  data  was  used  to  approximate  the  numbers 
of  viable  rickettsiae  remaining  after  exposure  of  suspensions  to 
high  doses  of  radiation. 


‘Jl 


Table  4.  Effect  of  yradiation  on  lethality  of  Karp  suspensions 


y-radiation  dose 
Krad) 


Suspension 


Values  expressed  as  log  MLI)  /g  yolk  sac. 

10  50 


Table  5.  Regression  analysis  of  radiation  dose  - Karp  lethality  curve 


Calculated  value 


Suspension 


Log^gMLD^g  unirradiated 
suspenslon/g  yolk  sac 


100%  lethal  Y-radiation 
dose  (Krad)a 


Slope  (log10MLD5Q/g  yolk 
sac/Krad) 


Correlation  coefficient 


-4.4  x 10 
0.99 


-4.4  x 10 
0.96 


d < 

Point  at  which  there  will  be  - 1 surviving  rickettsia/g  irradiated 


yolk  sac, 


The  calculated  100%  lethal  dose  was  180-190  Krad  (Table  5),  but 
on  one  occasion  4 mice  inoculated  with  a suspension  receiving  200 
Krad  died.  The  application  of  a radiation  dose  in  excess  of  200 
Krad  was  obviously  desirable  to  provide  a safety  factor,  but  it  was 
also  important  to  know  the  effect  of  higher  doses  on  the  immunogenicity 
of  the  rickettsiae.  The  effects  of  increased  radiation  doses  on 
immunogenicity  (Table  6)  were  comparable  for  the  two  suspensions  and 
indicated  a reciprocal  relation  between  Y~radiation  dose  and  immuno- 
genicity (i.e.,  an  increase  in  quantity  of  rickettsiae  required  for 
protection  indicates  a decrease  in  immunogenicity).  However,  the 
decrease  in  immunogenicity  seen  with  increasing  radiation  dose  was  small 
in  comparison  to  the  corresponding  decrease  in  MLD  of  the  suspension. 
Referring  to  Tables  4 and  6,  it  can  be  seen  that  a^§00  Krad  dose  caused 
a decrease  of  approximately  1 x 10®  MU)  while  application  of  an 
additional  200  Krad  dose  caused  only  a lu-fold  reduction  in  the  50% 
protective  dose  (PD^q) . Since  an  increase  of  100  Krad  over  the  calcu- 
lated 100%  lethal  dose  had  relatively  little  effect  on  immunogenicity, 
it  was  used  to  provide  the  necessary  safety  factor,  resulting  in  the 
300  Krad  dose  which  was  employed  for  the  remainder  of  these  studies. 


Previous  experiments  (Table  6)  established  that  one  injection  of 
4 x 10®  MLDcq  of  rickettsiae  irradiated  with  the  selected  dosage  afforded 
mice  protection  against  homologous  challenge  of  1,000  MLD  . Approxi- 
mately the  same  level  of  protection,  evidenced  by  an  immunity  index  of 
2.9  (Table  3),  required  the  injection  of  a total  of  9 x 10'  MLDr„  of 
formalinized  rickettsiae.  This  indicated  that  the  irradiated  rickettsiae 


Table  6.  Effect  of  lethal  doses  of  y-radiation  on  iranunogenicity 
of  Karp  suspensions 


y-radiation  dose 
(Krad) 


Suspension 


200 

250 

300 

400 


1.1  x 10c 


4.0  x 10 


1.5  x 10 


2.5  x 10 


3.8  x 10 


7.9  x 10 


PD  * 50%  protective  dose,  the  number  of  MLD  of  irradiated 
50  50 

rickettsiae  required  to  protect  50%  of  vaccinated  mice  from 


a 1,000  MLD^q  homologous  challenge. 


1518 


were  considerably  more  immunogenic  than  the  formalinized  organisms. 

Studies  were  initiated  to  determine  if  increasing  the  number  of 
irradiated  rickettsiae  and  modifying  the  injection  regimen  would 
result  in  further  enhancement  of  protection.  Homologous  protection 
was  studied  after  vaccination  with  1 and  3 injections  of  either 
10°  or  10  radiation- inactivated  rickettsiae  (Table  7) . Increase 
in  either  concentration  of  rickettsiae  or  number  of  injections  resulted 
in  increased  protection.  The  immunity  indices  indicate  that  protection 
was  heightened  100-fold  by  increasing  the  regimen  from  1 injection  of 
10°  rickettsiae  to  either  3 injections  of  10°  or  1 injection  of  10' 
organisms.  Since  challenges  calculated  to  contain  greater  than 
10,000  MLD  were  not  employed,  immunity  indices  do  not  clearly 
differentiate  the  further  increase  in  protection  that  may  have  been 
achieved  by  use  of  3 injections  of  10'  irradiated  Karp.  However, 
from  Table  7 it  can  be  seen  that  this  latter  regimen  provided  absolute 
protection  against  homologous  challenge  with  at  least  10,000  MLD,... 
of  Karp.  In  addition,  mice  showed  no  signs  of  illness  throughout 
the  observation  period  following  challenge. 

As  a result  of  the  excellent  homologous  protection  demonstrated 
in  this  experiment,  additional  tests  were  performed  to  evaluate  the 
protective  effect  of  a two-injection  regimen  against  homologous 
challenge  and  the  effectiveness  of  all  three  regimens  against  hetero- 
logous challenge.  As  can  be  seen  from  the  immunity  indices  in  Table  7, 
all  regimens  provided  substantial  protection  against  heterologous 
challenge,  but  a large  Increase  in  protection  was  seen  when  more  injec- 
tions of  immunogen  were  administered.  Within  the  limits  of  the  experiment, 
both  multiple  injection  regimens  appear  to  provide  approximately  the 
same  level  of  protection.  Both  schedules  protected  vaccinated  mice 
against  homologous  and  heterologous  challenges  of  10,000  MLD  . 

Homologous  protection  was  absolute  with  no  morbidity  observeflUat  any 
time  after  challenge.  Mice  challenged  with  the  heterologous  Kato  strain 
showed  signs  of  distress  p,d  generally  some  died  at  each  challenge  level, 
although  the  immunity  indices  were  of  similar  magnitude  to  those  seen 
after  homologous  challenge. 

Studies  previously  reported  by  this  laboratory  indicated  that  spleen 
cells  obtained  from  mice  surviving  infection  with  small  doses  of  Gilliam 
strain  are  able  to  protect  normal  recipient  mice  against  heterologous 
challenge  with  Karp.  Considering  these  observations,  experiments  were 
performed  to  determine  if  differences  in  immunogenicity  observed  between 
formalinized  and  irradiated  rickettsiae  were  due  to  their  capacities 
to  activate  a cell  mediated  immune  response.  Neither  homologous  nor 
heterologous  protection  was  observed  in  mice  that  received  cells  from 


a.-*'-,: t.  , , 


-»s  * 


donors  vaccinated  with  formalinized  organisms  (Table  8).  On  the 
other  hand,  80%  of  the  mice  receiving  cells  from  donors  vaccinated 
with  irradiated  immunogens  survived  subsequent  homologous  challenge 
of  1,000  MLD^q,  and  100%  of  the  recipients  resisted  homologous 
challenge  of  100  MLD  . Spleen  cell  recipients  challenged  with  the 
heterologous  Kato  strain  showed  little  resistance,  with  only  20% 
surviving  100  MLD,.q  challenge. 

The  results  from  serological  studies  on  mice  vaccinated  using 
the  3 injection  regimen  are  shown  in  Table  9.  Neither  type  of 
immunogen  proved  to  be  a potent  stimulator  of  antibody  production 
as  assayed  by  the  complement  fixation  test.  On  the  other  hand,  mice 
were  capable  of  responding  against  the  challenge  strain  and  showed 
excellent  antibody  titers  when  tested  4-6  weeks  post  challenge. 


Our  results  show  that  the  lethality  of  scrub  typhus  rickettsiae 
can  be  abolished  by  application  of  yradiation  doses  in  excess  of  200 
Krad,  producing  immunogens  that  are  markedly  superior  to  formalinized 
rickettsiae  in  protection  of  mice  against  both  homologous  and  hetero- 
logous challenge.  Not  only  are  the  mice  resistant  to  larger  challenge 
doses,  but  the  protection  is  achieved  with  fewer  rickettsiae. 

Resistance  to  homologous  challenge  of  1,000  MLDr„  required  9 x 10' 

MLD^q  of  formalinized  rickettsiae,  while  a similar  level  of  protection 
was  achieved  with  4 x 10°  MLD,-q  of  irradiated  organisms.  When 
multiple-injection  regimens  were  used  with  the  irradiated  immunogens, 
they  routinely  elicited  homologous  protection  levels  higher  than  those 
achieved  with  formalinized  suspensions,  but  it  has  not  yet  been 
determined  if  this  enhanced  protection  is  due  to  the  temporal  regimen 
employed  or  is  simply  the  result  of  accumulating  a larger  amount  of 
immunogen  in  the  host.  The  homologous  protection  with  irradiated 
immunogens  was  absolute  to  at  least  10,000  MLD^^,  while  formalin-killed 
rickettsiae  were  unable  to  routinely  induce  absolute  immunity  at  any 
challenge  level.  The  differences  in  protection  levels  induced  by  the 
two  types  of  immunogens  were  even  more  striking  when  heterologous 
challenge  was  employed.  Vaccination  with  formalinized  rickettsiae 
provided  negligible  protection  against  heterologous  challenge,  the 
results  being  quite  similar  to  those  reported  by  Jackson  and  Smadel 
(1951).  On  the  other  hand,  although  absolute  immunity  was  not  observed, 
use  of  multiple-injection  regimens  with  radiation-inactivated  organisms 
resulted  in  protection  of  the  majority  of  mice  against  the  heterologous 
Kato  strain. 

The  mechanism  responsible  for  the  heightened  protection  observed 
after  vaccination  with  radiation- inactivated  scrub  typhus  immunogens 
remain  undefined.  It  is  possible  that  radiation  inactivation  simply 


M U 

S J 

•H 

H i 


0) 

o o o o o 

<f  00  CN  CN 

vO  vO  fO 


a o a a.  o 

Vl  VI  U M U 

* 3 tS  j2t2 


CO 

CM 

a> 

vi 

0 

•c 

c 

Vi 

0) 

vi 

• 

CO 

G 

0) 

0} 

a> 

0) 

00 

Vl 

•o 

• 

Vi 

rH 

c 

e 

c 

a 

a 

CO 

0) 

a> 

cO 

p 

a> 

> 

rH 

0) 

CO 

u 

•H 

rH 

<u 

T3 

* 

3 

CO 

M 

0) 

01 

cr  j: 

a 

> 

X 

00 

u 

U 

0) 

Q 

Vl 

G 

M 

S 

•H 

(U 

i 

a 

a> 

rH 

Vi 

Q> 

rH 

c 

CO 

00 

M 

<0 

u 

*4 

c 

at 

aj 

X 

u 

a> 

M 

4J 

o 

rH 

i— ♦ 

<u 

CO 

a j3 

rH 

3 rH 

VI 

CO 

CTJ 

CO 

Vi 

43 

CO 

to 

o 

<u 

a> 

a 

c 

(I 

a 

c 

vi 

a> 

JO 

o 

CO 

uh  <u 

OHM 

a 

>>  co  x> 

« 4) 

XI  M 00 
■H  C 
emu 

OXH 


o u jq 

■h  a c3 


J«!  XI 
U U 0) 
U > H 
» -H  J= 
U 

vO  U OO 
I U 
-J  HO 

a* 

mo  } 
U to  o 
■h  rn 
Boh 


u o 
it  me  o 
T>  C to 
u US 
C rH 
O rH 
to 

H J3  « 

u cj  a 
u h 


U *H  PS 

CJ 

PS 

cj 

to  to  u 

"***«» 

u 

V 

3 tH  M 

CQ 

H 

CQ 

O 4J 

J 

J 

S3  <0 

< 

3 

CQ 

3 to 

CO 

4-1  T3 

3 U 

Cfl  > 


0) 

u 

\ u 

X 

3 

M H P 

4J 

>a  a o 

o 

< c 

Vi 

j= 

m me  c 

CO 

3 

C X) 

-h 

o > o 

in  H s. 


CJ  rH 

•H 

a 

> 

CO 

o 

•o 

B 

•H 

X3 

|H 

H (0 

<u 

8 

u 

3 

•3 

a to 

4J 

U 

HI 

to 

co 

•H  3 

Vi 

0 

VI 

o 

o 

c 

C 

O 

<4H 

XI 

u x) 

Cl 

o 

0) 

a 

o 

u 

IH  U 

<D 

TO 

•H 

u 

N 

4J 

Vi 

a 

|H 

u 

•H 

(0  CO 

MH 

iH 

to 

g 

to  u 

Vi 

0 

CJ 

c 

3 

4J 

0) 

0) 

u 

o 

i 

X3 

Vi 

0) 

V 

u 

a 

a 

O 

u 4-1 

>,  a 

cO 

0) 

^ 3 

X>  Cfl 

T3 

"O 

rH 

u 

a rH 

o u 

01 

o 

co 

a 

X 'rH 

J3  M 

Vi 

J5 

V 

o 

0) 

U XJ 

•H 

Vi 

•H 

Q 

Vi 

a 

4J  rH 

0) 

4-1 

s 

4h 

tH 

CO  4-1 

C <0 

t+H 

c 

9 

B 

u co 

cfl  M 

CO 

CO 

X 

CO 

u u 

O 

c 

rH 

rH 

4J  3 

<u  i 

CO 

u 

0) 

rH 

rH 

•H  O 

fi  3 

Vi 

fi 

43 

<U 

< 

H rJ 

H JS 

VI 

H 

VI 

U 

• u,  < .n.  aitt>  i-  r - --- Md 


■^71— 


causes  less  structural  damage  to  peripheral  macromolecules  than  dose 
chemical  Inactivation,  thereby  allowing  a more  effective  response  by 
the  immune  system.  Alternatively,  it  is  possible  that  scrub  typhus 
rickettsiae  inactivated  by  exposure  to  ionizing  radiation  retain 
some  physiological  capabilities  important  in  stimulating  host  defenses. 
Numerous  studies  have  shown  that  mice  surviving  active  infection  are 
solidly  immune  to  homologous  challenge  for  extended  periods  of  time 
and  to  heterologous  challenge  for  shorter  periods  of  time.  Recent 
studies  performed  in  this  laboratory  have  shown  that  cell-mediated 
immunity  plays  an  important  role  in  the  heterologous  protection. 

Our  spleen-cell  transfer  data  revealed  that  significant  levels  of 
homologous  protection  could  be  provided  to  recipients  by  injection  of 
cells  from  mice  vaccinated  with  irradiated  suspensions,  although  the 
failure  to  achieve  substantial  heterologous  protection  required  consid- 
eration of  the  possibility  that  some  transferred  cells  produced  antibody 
that  aided  in  protection  against  homologous  challenge.  No  protection 
was  observed  in  mice  receiving  cells  from  donors  vaccinated  with 
formalinized  suspensions  nor  is  cell-mediated  immunity  elicited  by 
killed  preparations  of  other  bacteria  capable  of  intracellular 
infection  (Mitsuhashi  e£  al . , 1961;  Blanden  £t  al. , 1966).  These 
observations,  taken  in  conjunction  with  the  low  antibody  titers  observed 
after  vaccination  with  either  y-irradiated  or  formalinized  rickettsiae, 
suggest  that  differences  in  immunogenlcity  are  related  to  stimulation 
of  cell  mediated  immunity  and  that  properties  shared  by  both  infectious 
and  Irradiated  rickettsiae  enhance  this  type  of  host  response. 


i 

. 


Project  3A762759A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  075  Rickettsial  Diseases  of  Military  Personnel 
Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Buhles,  W.C.,  Jr.,  Huxsoll,  D.L. , and  Elisberg,  B.L. 
Isolation  of  Rickettsia  rickettsli  in  primary  bone  marrow  cell  and 
circulating  monocyte  cultures  derived  from  experimentally  infected 
guinea  pigs.  Infect.  Immun.  _7;  1003-1005,  1973. 

2.  Gambrill,  M.R.  , and  Wisseman,  C.L.,  Jr.  Mechanisiis  of 

immunity  in  typhus  infections.  II.  Multiplication  of  typhus 
rirxettsiae  in  human  macrophage  cell  cultures  in  the  nonimmune 
system:  influence  of  virulence  of  rickettsial  strains  and  of 

chloramphenicol.  Infect.  Immun.  ji: 519-52 7,  1973. 

3.  Badger,  L.F.  An  infection  of  the  Rocky  Mountain  spotted 
fever  type.  Public  Health  Reports  48:463-470,  1933. 

4.  Saslaw,  S. , Carlisle,  H.N.,  Wolf,  G.L. , and  Cole,  C.R. 

Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever:  Clinical  and  laboratory  observations 

of  monkeys  after  respiratory  exposure.  J.  Infect.  Dis.  116:243- 
255,  1966. 

5.  Nyindo,  M.B.A. , Ristic,  M. , Huxsoll,  D.L. , and  Smith,  A.R. 

Tropical  canine  pancytopenia:  JLn  vitro  cultivation  of  the  causative 

agent  - Ehrlichia  canis.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  J32: 1651-1658,  1971. 

6.  Blanden,  R.V.,  Mackaness,  G.B.,  and  Collins,  F.M. 

Mechanisms  of  acquired  resistance  in  mouse  typhoid.  J.  Exp.  Med. 
124:585-600,  1966. 


7.  Jackson,  E.B.,  and  Smadel,  J.E.  Immunization  against  scrub 
typhus.  II.  Preparation  of  lyophilized  living  vaccine.  Am.  J. 

Hyg.  53:  326-331,  1951. 

8.  Mitsuhashi,  S. , Sato,  I.,  and  Tanaka,  T.  Experimental 

salmonellosis.  Intracellular  growth  of  Salmonella  enteritidls 
Ingested  in  mononuclear  phagocytes  of  mice,  and  cellular  basis 
of  immunity.  J.  Bacteriol.  81:  863-868,  1961. 


wr"r--mrr-rxT*~ — - T?Tv:T  ->  Vjr-  3-5W*1 

* T"" ^ > _■  « - - ~ . -j I kk  1 


9.  Smadel,  J.E.,  Rights,  F.L. , and  Jackson,  E.B. 

Studies  on  scrub  typhus.  II.  Preparation  of  formalinized  vaccines 
from  tissues  of  infected  mice  and  rats.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med. 
61:308-313,  1946. 

Publications : 

1.  Shirai,  Akira,  Dietel,  J.W.,  and  Osterman,  J.V.  Indirect 
hemagglutination  test  for  human  antibody  to  typhus  and  spotted  fever 
group  rickettsiae.  J.  Clin.  Microbiol.  2_:430-437,  1975. 

2.  Catanzaro,  P.J.,  Shirai,  A.,  Hildebrandt,  P.K.,  and 

Osterman,  J.V.  Host  defenses  in  experimental  scrub  typhus:  Histo- 

pathologic correlates.  Infect.  Immun.  1^:861-875,  1976. 

3.  deShazo,  R.D. , Boyce,  J.R. , Osterman,  J.V. , and  Stephenson, 
E.H.  Early  diagnosis  of  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever  using  the 
primary  monocyte  culture  technique.  JAMA  235: 1353-1355,  1976. 

4.  Eisenberg,  G.H.G.,  Jr.,  and  Osterman,  J.V.  Scrub  typhus 
immunogens.  Abstracts  of  the  Annual  Mee'.  ng  of  the  American  Society 
for  Microbiology,  p.  85,  1976  (May). 

Presentations: 

1.  Eisenberg,  G.H.G.,  Jr.,  and  Osterman,  J.V.  Scrub  typhus 
immunogens.  Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Society  for  Microbiology, 
Atlantic  City,  N.J.,  1976  (May). 

2.  Eisenberg,  G.H.G. , Jr.,  and  Osterman,  J.V.  Experimental 
scrub  typhus  immunogens.  Army  Science  Conference,  West  Point,  N.Y., 
1976  (June). 

3.  Osterman,  J.V.,  Shirai,  A.,  and  Catanzaro,  P.J.  Mechanisms 
of  immunity  in  scrub  typhus.  Second  International  Symposium  on 
Rickettsiae  and  Rickettsial  Diseases,  Bratislava,  Czechoslovakia, 

1976  (June). 


*SL  , .T-  -T2T  r:  - 


Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 
T^unmTr^c^^ 

U 


I OA»E  RRlV  SUM'S 

75  07  01 


• KINO  OR  lUNMAR T 


10  NO  COOES*  PROGRAM (lIHINT 


h CURIRIIuTINQ 


.mam  i owns  ii4£ 


62758A 


t.  rork  sccui 

u 


iarr 


RROJECT  NUMKR 


3A762753A833 


_ ■ 'Rr»c»N  wftfi  €>•••!  tU*Um<  CaMaj* 

flJ)  Assay  Methodology  for  Drugs  of  Abuse 

I sciertific  ado  technological  ARIA? 

002800  Riochemistrv 

MIARY  (JATI  1 

72  07 


P^RC^CCEMtOM* 

I)A  OB  0491 


» VlORAOING* 

NA 


76  06  30 


_00_ 


•lM*r  control  i rnwoL 

on  nH&E(AK>bjt> 


»t  D*SB*M  IHITR'N 

•4  SPECIFIC  OAT  A 

WI. 

CON  TRACTOR  ACCESS 

E r«»  D mo 

A VONK  (MMT 


101 


IT  CONTRACT  ORANT 
A OA'E$/E*»tC*IVE: 
h.  nuMIIR  * 

C TYRE 

A «'»0  OP  AIARO 


U ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OAT* 

70  06 


NA 


■ ■RIRATION 


4 AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


* RClPOhUILl  OOO  OROANlIATlON 


M PERFORMING  OROANIIATIOM 


‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
“Washington,  DC  20012 


R* SRumi rl e individual 
am*. 


To>  , COL  R.J.T. 
2 )2- 576-8551 


1 GENERAL  USE 

oreign  intelligence  not  considered 

[y1  M.iSS  spcctrometrv;  (in  Drugs  of  Abuse; 

£U)  immunoassay. 


IS  RUNOINO  AGENCY 

DA  | 


•4  RE  IOURCII  ft  TIMA  Tt 


RISC  AL 
Y*AR 


PRKI&IUI 

75 


CURRENT 

76 


14  RERPONMAMCE  MCtMOO 

C.  In-llouse 


4 PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VNS 


4 FUND*  (Jn  PtMNNj 


280 


l -.0 


“‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Biochemistry 
.»««•  Washington,  DC  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IN  Vf  I T IGA  TOR  MAM  ll||  | 4cpRn.It  /n»UN.II«v 

RAMI*  Demaree,  LTC  fl.T. 

TELEPHONE  202-576-221 

KJCI*.  MCUM.Tr  .CCOUMT  .U.,(, 

.UOCIATI  mrtlTIO.TORI 


Bass,  B.C.,  MS 
...  Kazyalc,  L. , BS 


DA 


(II)  Tmtirnlnpy;  III)  T-SR;  (llj- Chromatography.: 

. . . . ,>u  ..  aann..,i  , m -A.  — l 


TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE^*  |A  ARPROACH.  IA  PROOREU  fPu*ni«A  lr>M rf*M>  N'TppA'  l^*il»f»#E  *T  "»N»  PNH*  -I  N«A  wim  M«PlN  C<*«all(Pllap  C«R*  > 

28.  (II)  The  technical  objective  of  this  work  unit  is  ' o develop  and  evaluate  analytical 
procedures  for  the  assay  of  drugs  and  their  metabolites  and  to  assess  the  applicability 
of  these  methods  to  drug  abuse  detection  and  treatment  urograms  in  the  armed  forces. 

24.  (IJ)  Efforts  will  he  concentrated  on  the  development  and  evaluation  of  simple,  rapid 
and  accurate  systems  of  drug  detection  for  the  operational  laboratory,  on  the  establish 
ment  of  appropriate  standardization  teclmiques  for  the  research  laboratory  as  well  as 
the  drug  screening  laboratory,  and  on  the  design  of  sophisticated,  highly  sensitive 
and  specific  analytical  methods  for  investigating  the  pharmacokinetics  of  drugs  of 
abuse. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  The  study  of  methaqualone  metabolism  in  humans  was  completed. 
These  data  reveal  a wide  individual  variation  in  the  patterns  and  rates  of  metabolism 
which  appears  to  he  independent  of  age  or  previous  drug  use.  These  results  affirm  the 
validity  of  using  the  chromatographic  patterns  of  several  methaqualone  metabolites  for 
confirmation  of  screening  results.  The  RIA  for  cocaine  metabolite  was  evaluated  and 
was  found  to  he  remarkably  sensitive  and  remarkably  specific  for  benzoyl  ccgonine,  the 
major  metabolite.  The  reagent  was  not  as  reactive  with  cocaine,  ccgonine,  norecgoninc 
or  nor  benzoyl  ccgonine.  Tor  technical  report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 80  .Jun  76. 


DD,”Vm1498 


PREVIOUS  EDIT  IONS  04  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I ESS  A I NOV 
ANO  1 ESS  t I MAR  AS  (FOR  ARMY  USE  I ABF  OBSOLETE 

1527 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  101  Assay  methodology  for  drugs  of  abuse 
Investigators. 

Principal:  LTC  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC 

Associate:  Billy  G.  Bass,  M.S.;  Ann  R.  Berman,  B.S.;  CPT  James  A. 

Celia,  MSC;  James  E.  Doolittle,  A. A.;  SP5  Richard  E. 
Droege,  B.S.;  MAJ  Thomas  P.  Gibson,  MC;  SP5  Piyush  K. 
Gandhi,  B.S;  Leo  Kazyak,  M.A.;  CPT  James  A.  Kelley,  MSC; 
SSG  Frank  E.  Johnson,  B.3.;  SP5  John  T.  McLennon; 

Edward  J.  Matusik,  B.S.;  SP5  Joseph  K.  Stafford; 

Robert  C.  Permisohn,  M.S. 

The  technical  objectives  of  this  work  unit  are  to  develop  and  evaluate 
analytical  methods  for  the  detection,  identification  and  quantification 
of  drugs  of  abuse,  pharmaceutical  compounds  and  their  metabolites  in 
biological  fluids  and  to  exploit  these  techniques  for  application  to 
the  study  of  the  pharmacokinetics  of  these  drugs,  to  mass  screening, 
rehabilitation  and  chemotherapy  management.  Technical  efforts  were 
focused  on  the  following  principal  areas  of  interest: 

1.  Metabolism  of  methaqualone 

Seven  volunteers  received  doses  of  methaqualone  according  to  the 
following  schedule: 

3 persons  received  a single  300  mg.  dose  of  methaqualone  base 
2 persons  received  300  mg.  doses  of  methaqualone  base  on  two 
consecutive  days  (600  mg.  total) 

2 persons  received  150  mg.  doses  of  methaqualone  base  on  four 
consecutive  days  (600  mg.  total) 

All  urine  specimens  were  collected  (casual  voiding)  beginning  with  the 
day  prior  to  the  dose  and  continuing  until  48  hours  after  the  final 
dose.  The  specimens  were  analyzed  according  to  the  procedure  given  by 
Permisohn,  Hilpert,  and  Kazyak  (J.  of  Forensic  Sciences,  21:1,  98-107) 
with  the  exception  that  enzymatic  hydrolysis  was  employed  instead  of 
acid  hydrolysis  to  convert  the  glucuronide  conjugate  to  the  hy- 
droxylated  metabolites.  Capillary  column  gas  chromatography  was 
utilized  throughout  to  separate  and  quantify  the  metabolite  isomers. 

Consistent  with  earlier  observations  on  the  initial  studies,  the 
2-methylhydroxy-3-0-tolyl-4(3H)  quinazolinone  decreased  twenty-four 
hours  after  the  last  dose  to  a concentration  that  was  of  the  same 
magnitude  as  the  methaqualone,  i.e.,  less  than  0.1  meg. /ml.,  in  marked 
contrast  to  much  larger  amounts  of  the  other  four  metabolites  under 


1528 


consideration.  (First  indications  were  that  the  2-methylhydroxy. . . 
metabolite  decreased  within  the  first  ten  hours  to  a barely  detectable 
level,  but  some  of  this  metabolite  may  have  been  destroyed  in  the  acid 
hydrolysis  employed  for  these  analyses). 

The  cummulative  effect  of  the  drug  was  most  evident  in  both  the 
physiological  response  and  the  urinary  excretion  of  the  metabolite  for 
the  individuals  who  were  given  150  mg.  of  methaqualone  on  the  four  con- 
secutive days.  In  these  individuals  a slight  incoordination  and  tired- 
ness and  malaise  were  the  only  effects  after  the  dose  on  the  first  two 
days.  Metabolites  were  excreted,  but  the  concentration  was  not  as  high 
as  this  time  as  evidenced  in  those  persons  who  received  a 300  mg.  dose. 
However,  on  the  fourth  day  and  following  the  dose  on  that  day,  the 
physiological  response  was  similar  to  that  of  a 300  mg.  dose,  and  the 
drug  metabolite  concentrations  in  the  urine  were  significantly  higher. 
For  example,  the  peak  concentration  of  the  2-methylhydroxy...  metabolite 
was  equivalent  to  that  of  the  individual  who  had  received  a second 
300  mg.  dose  of  methaqualone. 

All  analyses  of  specimens,  from  the  volunteers  have  been  completed,  and 
the  methaqualone  metabolite  data  are  being  evaluated  and  prepared  for 
publication. 

2.  Analysis  of  N-acetylprocainamide  in  patients  with  end-stage  renal 
failure. 

When  a therapeutic  drug  or  its  metabolites  can  be  eliminated  only  by 
the  kidneys,  patients  with  renal  failure  mav  become  toxic.  Using  an 
analytical  procedure  developed  in  this  la>'  ~atory,  serum  from  patients 
on  maintenance  hemodialysis  was  examined  a -er  a single  oral  dose  of 
procainamide.  Levels  of  N-acetylprocainamide  in  the  renal  failure 
patients  were  from  0.6  to  3.0  ug/ml  and  persisted  for  periods  of  over 
100  hours.  Since  this  metabolite  is  as  active  as  the  parent  compound 
levels  of  N-acetylprocainamide  must  be  monitored  in  renal  failure 
patients  to  avoid  drug  toxicity. 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  101  Assay  methodology  for  drugs  of  abuse 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications : 

1.  Permisohn,  R.C.,  Hilpert,  L.R.,  and  Kazyak,  L.:  Determination 

of  methaqualone  in  urine  by  metabolite  detection  via  gas  chromatography . 
J.  of  Forensic  Sciences.  _21:(6)*  98-107,  1976. 

2.  Matusik,  Edward  J and  Gibson,  Thomas  P.:  Fluorometric  assay 

for  N-Acetylprocainamide . Clin.  Chem.  21(13):  1899-1902  (December, 

1975). 


3.  Gibson,  Thomas  P.,  Matusik,  Edward  J.  and  Briggs,  William  R.: 
N-Acetylprocainamlde  levels  in  patients  with  end-stage  renal  failure. 
Clin.  Pharmacol.  Therap.  19(2):  206-212  (February  1976). 


1530 


~ ■ r.  kki. 


; — I---,  .4 — - - - - ' . • r.  .---..^-c..^-.  -*J=-  ^ 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  ROCK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1 ACCNCV  ACCESSION* 

DA  0B  6492 

a DATE  or  SMMMAMV* 

76  06  30 

toroar  comnnu.  irwool 

DP  nRlKfAKttJ* 

t CAT!  MfVlUlTRT  t MlNO  OR  SUMMANY  • SUMMARY  SC  T V*  A MR«  MCUCT** 

t RtaCAMNO*  It  OMrR  MITm  Efc  INECIRlC  DATA  |»  LEVEL  OR  SUM 

75  07  01 


013400  Psychology  012600  Pharmacology  012900  Physiology  003500  Clinical  Medicine 


72  07  76  06 

IS  RUNCMNC  AOENCY 

DA  | 

l«  riRRbRNANCfl  m«7hoo 

C.  In-House 

•»  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A OATCS/IRRECIIVl  N/A  EMRINATION 

hi  NUMIf  R * 

t TYRE  A AMOUNT 

tllROOl  AIARO  CUM.  AMT. 

IE  Rt  SOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A rnorcEEtONAi  man  vns 

A Run  OS  fi«  AminA) 

RISC  At. 

YEAN 

UH18W1 

75 

4 

240 

76 

2 

258 

>•  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OROANIIATlON  j j 

ION  T | 

[Pll  Redacted] 


i<  biNiati.  uti 


10  NO  COOfS  * 


N.  RNtMAMr 


t COMMIIu'ING 


PROGRAM  f. CMC NT 

62758A 


cani«<«v’>»<>  CARDS  114F 


..OjKCT  NUHM* 

3A767758AB33 — 


I T I . . 1 rwt*  iKwlIf  ClNHNulM  CM? 

(U)  Military  Performance  and  Drug  Abuse 


NA 


NL 


TAW  AREA  MUMtIR 

_0TJ 


GMN  T MAC TON  ACCESS 

urn  G mo 


A VOM  UMtT 


-rt rr 


MOMM  UNIT  NUMOER 


t ICKNTlRIC  AND  TICMNOcOOICAL  AREAS* 


oo«»*  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


NtkAQNliai.1  INDIVIDUAL 


....  JOY,  COL  R.  J.  T. 
(202)  576-3351 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

h awns  tbs ae  wa  wi  esn  n.\.nr.«  ~ as, 


Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
........Washington , D.C.  20012 


rOiNClEAL  IN  VIST  16  A TON  r^«NM«A  Mtf  If  V I 4u«Nh  /-.l« wiM>v 

.....  MANNING.  CPT  F.  J. 

(202  576-2483_ 


MCI..  ft.C.lf.  .CCOUMT  NU..C. 

AUOCI.T.  IMV.ITI.ATO.. 

....  ELSM0RE,  T.  F.  , Ph.D. 
....  BOREN,  M.C.  Ph.D. 


(U)  Drug  Abuse  (U)  Military  Performance  (U)  Drug  Tolerance  (U)  Psychology 


II  TtCNNICAL  OUICTIVI*  |l  AAMOACN,  IS  »NOONESA  .RwMM  t-mt+ml  <*■»»*•*> r mm*m  PN«»N  Nil  »l  (MA  M*  OW«lll»tt«  C«N  » , _ , 

23.  (U)  Specific  objective  of  studies  managed  within  the  work  unit  is  to  specify  the 

probable  impact  of  drug  abuse  on  military  performance  using  laboratory  models  and 
performance  measures  logically  equivalent  to  critical  aspects  of  military  performance. 
In  addition,  data  are  obtained  from  studies  managed  within  related  work  units.  These 
data  are  used  to  establish  the  significance  of  changes  in  endocrine  function,  physi- 
ology and  social  environment  brought  about  by  the  abuse  of  drugs  in  terms  of  their 
implications  for  the  performance  of  military  personnel. 


24.  (U)  The  techniques  of  experimental  psychology  and  behavioral  pharmacology  are 

applied  to  the  assessment  of  performance  decrements  associated  with  the  abuse  of  drugs. 
Important  data  are  derived  from  related  studies  employing  epidemiological,  neuroendo- 
crinological and  psychophysiological  methods  for  use  in  constructing  an  integrated 
concept  of  how  social,  pharmacological,  and  physiological  consequences  of  drug  abuse 
may  interact  to  alter  the  performance  of  military  personnel. 


25  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Studies  of  sel f-admini stration  of  drugs  by  baboons  Indicate 

that  heroin  is  preferred  over  morphine  infusions  even  when  the  unit  dose  of  morphine 
is  64X  that  of  heroin.  Saline  infusions  may  develop  conditioned  reinforcing  pro- 
perties, and  even  serve  as  partial  substitutes  for  heroin.  Some  behavioral  effects 
of  delta-9-THC  were  greatly  potentiated  by  ethanol,  even  in  ethanol-tolerant  subjects. 
Ethanol  effects  were  also  potentiated  by  THC,  even  in  THC-tolerant  animals.  Further 
work  by  this  unit  precluded  bv  deletion  of  drug  rbuse  research  funds  from  DA  budget . 
For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report 
1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


'j  Nll«M»  lo  INlHCWI  M 


i * 


DO,:o.VJ498 


nous  COITIONS  or  THIS  FORM  ARE  OllOLETE  DO  FORM*  l«f>A 
I ACC  I 1 MAN  «C  (CON  ARM*  USE  j>»SOL  ITI 


. TV-J 


Mfifr'rSliNM  lM  lYlUrWiiflC  nil  IN  hi  Hi  mi 


- — C-- .......  .... . . . — • 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  102  Military  performances  and  drug  abuse 
Investigators . 

Principal:  CPT  Frederick  J.  Manning,  MSC 

Associate:  CPT  Steven  R.  Hursh,  MSC;  MAJ  Frank  J. 

Sodetz,  MSC;  James  Bonbright,  M.S.; 
Mary  Carol  P.  Boren,  Ph.D.;  Donald 
Conrad,  M.S.;  Timothy  F.  Elsmore, 
Ph.D.;  Gordon  V.  Fletcher;  Deborah 
M.  Rhodus,  M.A. 

Description. 


During  FY  76  funds  for  research  on  drug  abuse  were 
deleted  from  the  DA  budget.  The  experiments  reported 
here  are  thus  to  a large  extent  incomplete.  Specific 
objectives  of  this  work  unit  have  been  to  specify  the 
probable  impact  of  drug  abuse  on  military  performance 
by  means  of  laboratory  models  and  performance  measures 
logically  equivalent  to  critical  aspects  of  military 
performance.  Research  of  this  type  to  be  reported  here 
may  be  considered  in  two  general  categories:  drug-induced 
decrements  in  health  or  performance;  and  causes  of 
drug  self-administration.  Both  types  of  work  are  related 
to,  and  have  been  coordinated  with,  research  being 
conducted  in  Work  Units  103,  110,  and  111,  as  well  as 
certain  MRDC  contracts. 

DRUG- INDUCED  DECREMENTS  IN  HEALTH  OR  PERFORMANCE 

The  role  of  experience  in  acquisition  and  loss  of 
t o 1 e ranee  to  the  effect  of  W-Q-THC  on  spaced  responding . 


Albino  rats  were  given  extensive  training  in  spaced 
responding,  using  a DRL  30-sec  schedule  of  food  rein- 
forcement (only  lever  presses  occurring  30  or  more 
seconds  apart  produce  food).  All  rats  then  went  12 
days  without  behavioral  testing.  During  this  period 
half  the  rats  received  daily  intragastric  doses  of 
delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol  (THC,  the  major  active 
constituent  of  marihuana)  and  the  rest  equal  volumes 
of  the  THC  vehicle.  On  day  13,  all  rats  receiving  THC 


-W-  , -r- — r,-; — - { - —7-  % T"  :■>, 


3 hours  before  behavioral  testing  showed  a sharp  increase 
in  lever-press  rate,  over  baseline  levels  and  the  rates 
of  control  rats  receiving  only  vehicle  3 hrs  before 
the  session.  The  rats  with  12  prior  THC  doses  were  no 
less  affected  than  those  with  no  previous  drug  history. 
Continued  testing  resulted  in  recovery  of  baseline 
performance  by  both  groups,  within  5 sessions,  again 
with  no  group  differences.  Similar  results  were 
obtained  with  doses  of  4 mg/kg  and  16  mg/kg,  though  the 
drug's  effects  were  more  pronounced  at  the  higher  dose. 
The  results  demonstrate  that  performance  in  the  drug 
state  can  be  a far  more  important  determinant  of  tol- 
erance than  mere  exposure  to  THC.  Drug  administration 
was  then  suspended  for  one  week.  One  group  of  rats 
continued  to  receive  doses  of  vehicle  and  DRL  sessions, 
a second  received  DRL  sessions  without  vehicle,  and 
one  group  received  neither  vehicle  nor  DRL  sessions  for 
this  week.  Subsequent  DRL  testing  after  THC  admini- 
stration showed  only  the  groups  receiving  DRL  sessions 
in  the  intervening  week  lost  their  previously  acquired 
tolerance.  Experience  thus  appears  to  play  an  important 
role  in  loss  of  tolerance  to  THC  as  well  as  in  acqui- 
sition of  tolerance. 

Effects  of  delta-9-THC  on  Sidman  avoidance  performance  in 
the  rat 

Rats  trained  to  avoid  electric  shock  to  the  feet  by  lever 
pressing  under  a temporal  schedule  of  shock  presentation 
(Sidman  avoidance)  were  exposed  to  delta-9-THC  prior  to 
each  of  at  least  14  consecutive  daily  sessions.  The 
initial  effect  of  the  drug  was  to  elevate  shock  rates 
in  every  rat,  but  with  continued  drug  administration 
some  shock  rates  remained  elevated,  some  returned  to 
pre-drug  levels,  and  some  dropped  below  pre-drug  levels. 
The  degree  and  direction  of  this  chronic  effect  was 
related  to  the  pre-drug  performances  of  the  rats, 
though  not  in  a simple  manner.  Subjects  emitting  a 
high  proportion  of  their  presses  in  the  2 sec  immediately 
following  shocks  were  little  effect  by  chronic  THC; 
those  emitting  a very  low  proportion  of  their  re- 
sponses in  this  interval  showed  improved  performance 
under  chronic  THC  conditions;  and  those  with  intermediate 
proportions  were  impaired  by  the  drug. 


Some  behavioral  effects  in  rats  of  administering  delta-9- 
C and  Ethanol  in  combination. 

Albino  rats  were  trained  to  lever-press  under  a complex 
schedule  of  food  reinforcement  in  which  different 
f ixed- j nterval  schedules  were  associated  with  each  of 
two  levers,  but  no  stimuli  were  provided  to  indicate 
to  the  rat  which  schedule  (and  which  lever)  was  in 
effect  at  ary  given  time.  Both  ethanol  and  THC 
suppressed  responding  over  a wide  dose  range,  but 
the  effect  of  THC  was  much  larger  when  given  in  com- 
bination with  ethanol,  even  when  the  subjects  were 
made  tolerant  to  the  dose  of  ethanol  used  in  the 
combination  (2.5  g/kg).  The  converse  was  also  true: 

THC  greatly  potentiated  the  effects  of  ethanol  even 
though  all  rats  were  tolerant  to  the  dose  of  THC  that 
was  used  (16  mg/kg).  After  rats  became  tolerant  to  the 
ethanol-THC  combination,  drug  adminstration  was  suspended 
for  60  days.  After  this  period  rats  were  still  tolerant 
to  the  THC  and  ethanol  when  administrated  separately, 
but  were  no  longer  tolerant  to  the  combination. 

Chronic  administration  of  delta-9-THC:  ovarian  function  in 


the  rat. 

A number  of  recent  reports  have  called  attention  to 
the  possibility  of  detrimental  effects  of  THC  or  chronic 
marihuana  use  on  the  reproductive  system.  Lowered 
plasma  testosterone  in  humans  has  been  reported,  as  well 
as  pathology  of  the  secondary  sexual  organs  of  the  male 
rat.  Surprisingly,  there  has  been  little  published  on 
possible  effects  in  females,  although  it  is  known  that 
a single  10  mg/kg  dose  of  THC  on  the  afternoon  of 
proestrus  will  inhibit  the  normal  surge  of  LH  which 
triggers  ovulation  some  6-8  hrs  later.  We  have  given 
female  rats  10  mg/kg  THC  each  day  for  30  days  while 
monitoring  their  locomotor  activity.  The  latter  is 
a highly  reliable,  non- invasive , non-obtrusive  means  of 
checking  the  estrus  cycle,  for  female  rats  increase 
their  activity  by  as  much  as  lOOx  during  the  estrus 
portion  of  their  cycles.  This  rhythmicity  disappears 
after  ovariectomy  and  can  be  restored  only  by  estrogen 
injections  every  fourth  day.  THC  produced  large  drops 
in  the  activity  levels  of  all  four  rats  we  tested,  and 
in  no  case  was  any  tolerance  to  this  effect  noted  in 
the  thirty  days.  However,  a 4-day  cycle  was  still 
evident  in  this  diminished  activity,  suggesting  that 
THC  had  not  disturbed  the  basic  mechanisms  underlying 
the  estrus  cycle.  Microscopic  examination  of  the 
subjects'  reproductive  systems  is  now  underway. 


DRUG  SELF-ADMINISTRATION 


All  of  the  research  to  be  described  below  has 
employed  male  baboons  (Papio  anubis)  prepared  with 
chronic  venous  catheters  to  permit  the  infusion  of 
heroin  solutions  under  a variety  of  contingencies  with- 
out handling  or  interacting  with  the  subject  in  any  way. 
One  such  contingency  has  been  the  depression  of  a small 
lighted  disk  by  the  baboon  himself.  The  principal 
thrust  of  these  experiments  has  been  an  examination  of 
variables  controlling  the  acquisition  and  maintenance 
of  this  heroin  self -administration  by  the  baboons. 

It  is  thus  drug-taking  itself  which  is  the  target  of  these 
experiments  rather  than  the  disruption  of  some  model  of 
performance.  The  final  stage  of  this  program,  which  was 
to  be  directed  at  the  prevention  or  elimination  of  heroin- 
taking in  an  environment  in  which  heroin  is  freely 
available,  has  been  postponed  indefinitely  due  to  Con- 
gressional funding  decisions. 

Ad  libitum  self-administration  of  heroin;  effects  of 
heroin  dose. 


This  experiment  is  a continuation  of  an  earlier 
completed  study  on  the  acquisition  of  heroin  self-admini- 
stration under  conditions  of  free  access.  In  this  study, 
it  was  found  that  the  rate  of  acquisition  and  overall  fre- 
quency of  intravenous  heroin  self -administration  was  rel- 
atively insensitive  to  the  unit  dose  of  the  drug.  The 
present  study,  then,  was  an  attempt  to  further  explore 
effects  of  unit  dose.  Two  baboons  were  allowed  to  infuse 
heroin  for  20  to  22  hours  daily.  A single  press  on  the 
leftmost  of  three  response  keys  produced  a 0.1  ml  infusion 
of  heroin  dissolved  in  saline.  The  concentration  of 
heroin  was  adjusted  to  provide  unit  doses  fmicrograms/ 
kg/infusion)  ranging  from  0.0064  tc  500  meg/kg/inf. 

Each  unit  dose  was  in  effect  for  a minimum  of  20 
consecutive  days.  An  inverted  "U"  shaped  dose-response 
curve  was  obtained,  with  the  maximum  infusion  fre- 
quency occurring  between  .8  and  4 meg/kg/infusion. 

The  three  doses  used  in  the  prior  study,  20,  100  and 
500  meg/kg/inf.  were  all  shown  to  lie  at  the  upper  end 
of  the  dose-response  curve,  perhaps  accounting  lor 
the  apparent  lack  of  sensitivity  to  unit  dose  found 
in  that  study.  Even  the  lowest  doses  maintained  key- 
pressing rates  higher  than  that  for  saline.  Thus  heroin 
was  shown  to  maintain  operant  responding  even  at  unit 
doses  of  less  than  1/78,000  of  the  largest  employed  in 
this  study.  This  unit  dose  resulted  in  a total  daily 
heroin  intake  of  less  than  .01  mg.  These  results 
suggest  that  physical  dependence  on  heroin  is  not  a nec- 
essary condition  for  it  to  function  as  a reinforcer. 


1535 


mjiil.ii  II. vi  i - in 


The  acquisition  of  heroin  preference. 

The  first  experiments  conducted  in-house  with 
baboons  self -administering  freely  available  heroin 
suggested  that  the  rate  of  "drug"  key  pressing  for 
heroin  did  not  surpass  the  rate  of  "drug"  key  pressing 
for  saline  until  after  about  30  days  of  exposure  to 
heroin.  This  could  indicate  that  heroin  doec,  not 
immediately  reinforce  responding  but  requires  a period 
of  low  level  exposure  before  it  becomes  an  effective 
reinforcer.  This  observation  seems  to  square  well 
with  informal  accounts  of  heroin  use  with  humans.  How- 
ever, there  remained  alternative  explanations  of  the 
30  day  period  of  baseline  responding  for  heroin.  First, 
the  responding  on  the  "drug"  key  was  usually  above 
zero  so  that  some  drug  was  infused  immediately  after  it 
became  available.  This  was  usually  reflected  in  an 
immediate  drop  in  food  intake.  It  is  plausible  that 
heroin  intake  above  this  low  level  was  not  reinforcing 
but  that  the  few  infusions  that  were  taken  were  rein- 
forcers. Since  every  response  produced  an  infusion,  it 
was  impossible  for  responding  to  increase  (demonstrating 
reinforcement)  above  baseline  without  also  approaching 
the  subject's  physiological  limit  for  heroin.  This 
ceiling  could  have  "masked"  the  observation  of  rein- 
forcement. Second,  the  baseline  level  of  saline  in- 
fusions may  have  been  unusually  high  because  of  the 
sterility  of  the  environment  or  superstitious  associ- 
ation with  simultaneously  avaliable  food  and  water. 

In  order  to  observe  heroin  reinforcement  without 
these  potential  confounding  variables,  a procedure  was 
developed  that  permitted  two  measures  of  reinforcement 
that  do  not  require  the  subject  to  infuse  additional 
drug.  The  first  measure  was  obtained  by  scheduling 
infusions  for  responses  after  a variable  interval  of  time 
from  the  onset  of  a trial;  only  the  first  response  after 
that  unpredictable  interval  produced  an  infusion;  earlier 
responses  had  no  effect.  This  procedure  allowed  the 
rare  of  responding  to  increase  during  the  interval  with- 
out increasing  the  number  of  infusions,  which  was  fixed 
on  a random  time  schedule.  Experiments  with  monkeys 
working  for  food  scheduled  by  this  procedure  show  that 
as  a reinforcer  increases  in  value  more  responses  occur 
for  it  during  the  intervals  between  scheduled  deliveries 
of  the  reinforcer.  This  occurs  even  when  the  responses 
have  no  effect  as  far  as  increasing  the  frequency  of 
reinforcers.  The  second  measure  of  reinforcement  was 
obtained  by  providing,  simultaneously  with  the  drug  key, 


1536 


n 


t 


a second  key  that  delivered  saline  on  the  same  schedule. 
Pressing  either  the  drug  key  or  the  saline  key  would 
occasionally  produce  an  infusion  and  then  provide  the 
subject  access  to  food.  If  the  subject  was  indifferent 
between  drug  and  saline  it  would  press  the  two  keys 
equally  often  in  order  to  get  the  earliest  scheduled 
infusion  and  turn  on  the  food  condition.  If  heroin 
was  preferred  to  saline,  the  subject  would  distribute 
proportionally  more  responses  to  the  heroin  key.  This 
preference  would  indicate  reinforcement  even  if  the 
total  number  of  responses  did  not  exceed  baseline. 

Last  year  the  results  of  the  first  subject  were 
reported.  Evidence  for  a small  preference  for  heroin 
appeared  within  two  weeks  after  exposure  to  the  drug 
(the  exact  point  within  this  period  that  heroin  demon- 
strated reinforcement  was  obscured  by  a variable  baseline 
preference).  After  thirty-two  days  of  exposure  to  heroin, 
preference  increased  again  from  a stable  60%  level  to  70%. 
Analysis  of  absolute  response  rates  for  heroin  and  saline 
indicate  that  during  the  first  month  of  heroin  intake, 
responding  for  both  saline  and  heroin  tended  to  vary  to- 
gether even  though  more  responses  occurred  for  heroin. 
After  thirty-two  days,  saline  response  rate  went  into  a 
steady  decline  while  heroin  response  rate  remained  stable. 
It  appeared  that  during  the  early  period  of  heroin  intake 
the  subject  did  not  discriminate  well  between  the  heroin 
infusions  and  the  placebo  saline  infusions.  This  poor 
discrimination  may  have  acted  to  artificially  dampen  the 
observation  of  strong  heroin  preference  during  the  first 
thirty-two  days  of  exposure. 

This  experiment  was  replicated  in  a second  baboon, 
with  the  provision  that  the  alternative  to  heroin,  while 
still  functional  in  leading  to  food,  did  not  provide  any 
infusion  or  other  external  stimulation  similar  to  an 
infusion.  During  the  first  fifteen  days  after  introduction 
of  heroin  no  evidence  of  heroin  preference  was  observed 
nor  was  there  any  general  increase  in  drug  or  placebo 
key  responding.  Between  the  16th  and  24th  sessions,  the 
"placebo"  key  response  rate  dropped  62%  and  the  heroin 
key  response  rate  increased  10%.  As  a consequence,  by 
the  24th  day  of  heroin  availability,  heroin  preference 
was  nearly  80%.  This  preference  was  stable  for  twelve 
sessions  before  the  animal  was  removed  from  the  experi- 
ment. This  result  confirms  the  conjecture  based  on  the 
results  of  the  f\rst  subject  that  the  initial  increase 
in  placebo  reinforcers  was  based  upon  similarity  with 


2 


v q c v ■* 


1537 


■»  1-  II  I IIJ'il  II  I I IK  i>| 


the  heroin  infusions.  When  the  placebo  alternative 
was  made  more  distinct  no  increase  in  placebo  responding 
occurred  during  the  acquisition  of  heroin  preference. 

In  addition,  the  acquisition  of  a strong  preference 
for  heroin  (801)  appeared  much  sooner,  after  24  days 
for  this  subject  compared  to  48  days  for  the  first 
subject.  Thus,  the  speed  of  acquisition  of  heroin  pre- 
ference is  in  part  a function  of  the  nature  of  the 
alternative  reinforcers.  The  more  similar  the  alter- 
natives to  actual  heroin  infusions  the  slower  the  pro- 
gress of  acquisition.  It  is  not  at  this  time  clear 
whether  the  mechanism  involved  is  stimulus  general- 
ization, the  stimulus  properties  of  the  "placebo" 
alternative  being  confused  with  the  actual  heroin  rein- 
forcer, or  the  mechanism  may  be  conditioned  reinforce- 
ment, with  the  "placebo"  alternative  acting  as  a rein- 
forcer owing  to  its  external  similarity  to  heroin. 

In  either  case,  increasing  the  difference  between  the 
stimulus  properties  of  the  alternatives  reduces  the 
amount  of  responding  for  the  "placebo". 

These  above  experiments  confirmed  that  a reliable 
preference  for  heroin  requires  a period  of  time  to  develop 
and  that  this  "incubation"  period  varies  between  subjects 
and  appears  related  to  the  nature  of  alternative  con- 
sequences for  responding.  The  delay  in  acquisition  thus 
appeared  to  be  a learning  phenomenon- i . e . acquisition  of 
a heroin  seeking  response  required  the  development  of  a 
discrimination  between  that  response  and  other  responses 
which  yield  similar  immediate  but  dissimilar  delayed  con- 
sequences (the  pharmacological  effect).  An  alternative 
account  might  rely  on  the  phenomonon  of  tolerance-i.e. , 
the  value  of  our  heroin  dose  was  low,  if  not  aversive, 
early  in  the  experiment,  until  the  subjects  developed 
tolerance  to  some  of  the  aversive  effects  of  the 
drug.  At  this  point  the  rewarding  properties  pre- 
dominated and  the  behavioral  preference  emerged.  One 
strategy  to  separate  these  two  accounts  would  be  to  re- 
verse the  consequences  of  the  previous  heroin  and  placebo 
responses  thus  requiring  reacquisition  of  the  discrimin- 
ation between  these  two  responses.  If  this  learning  pro- 
cess is  the  basis  for  the  first  acquisition  period,  than 
reacquisition  of  this  reversed  discrimination  should 
be  slow  also.  If  pharmacological  tolerance  was 
responsible,  then  reacquisition  in  a drug  experienced 
animal  should  be  rapid.  Reacquisition  with  the  one  animal 
receiving  saline  placebo  infusions  versus  heroin  infusions 


was  slow,  requiring  approximately  40  days  to  reach 
the  previous  801  level  of  preference.  A replication 
with  the  second  animal  was  attempted  repeatedly 
but  in  every  case  failed  because  of  difficulties 
with  his  catheters.  On  the  basis  of  one  subject, 
we  would  make  the  tentative  judgement  that  the 
acquisition  of  heroin  preference  is  a learning 
or  behavioral  phenomenon,  not  a pharmacological 
phenomenon. 

The  maintenance  of  heroin  preference. 


The  control  of  heroin  preference  once  established 
became  the  focus  of  our  next  set  of  manipulations.  First, 
it  was  important  to  verify  the  strength  of  heroin  as  a 
reward  independent  of  the  other  consequence  for  responding, 
attainment  of  access  to  food.  Although  food  was  available 
after  either  choice,  placebo  or  heroin,  it  was  not  clear 
to  what  extent  the  food  consequence  control?* d 'he 
magnitude  of  preference.  This  problem  was  investigated 
by  removing  the  relationship  between  drug  key  responding 
and  onset  of  food  sessions.  In  this  new  experiment, 
each  odd  numbered  hour  provided  a single  choice  between 
heroin  and  saline  while  each  even  numbered  hour  provided 
access  to  food  independent  of  the  amount  or  distribution 
of  drug  responding  in  the  previous  hour.  As  a result 
of  this  change,  the  experience  subject  continued  to 
show  a strong  90%  preference  for  heroin,  about  the  same 
level  as  prior  to  the  change. 

This  result  established  that  our  dose  of  heroin 
(0.1  mg/kg)  was  a strong  motivator  independent  of  other 
consequences  for  responding.  The  next  question  was  the 
relationship  between  this  level  of  preference  and  the 
size  of  the  dose.  We  reported  above  that  animals  with 
continuous  or  free  access  to  heroin  emitted  more  responses 
per  day,  taking  more  infusions,  for  a 0.02  mg/kg  dose 
than  for  the  0.1  mg/kg  dose  used  in  the  preference  experi- 
ment. One  account  of  this  increased  responding  for 
a lower  dose  assumes  that  the  subjects  adjust  their 
responding  to  maintain,  as  far  as  possible,  some  ideal 
level  of  heroin  concentration  in  the  body.  When  the  dose 
is  lowered,  more  infusions  are  required  to  maintain  this 
concentration,  hence  the  increased  responding.  In  the 
preference  experiment,  this  factor  could  not  operate 
because  a fixed  number  of  heroin  infusions  were  available 
per  day  independent  of  the  rate  of  heroin  responding  or 


r TVTsi,  ■ .Tv ; ■ 1 


the  magnitude  of  heroin  preference.  This  factor,  by 
the  forgoing  account,  should  alter  the  dose-response 
rate  relationship. 


The  dose  of  heroin  offered  for  choice  was  lowered 
to  0.02  mg/kg,  then  to  0.0004  mg/kg.  Preference  (and 
response  rate)  for  heroin  dropped  from  90%  to  82%  to 
70%.  A further  reduction  from  0.004  mg/kg  to  0.0008 
mg/kg  did  not  produce  any  appreciable  change  in  heroin 
preference  but  further  reduced  both  heroin  and  placebo 
responding.  A further  reduction  ending  in  complete 
withdrawal  from  heroin  is  in  progress.  These  results 
suggest  that  the  value  of  heroin  as  a reinforcer  is  a 
direct  function  of  dose,  at  least  up  to  our  maximim 
of  0.1  mg/kg.  This  finding  also  lends  support  to  the 
general  account  of  free  access  responding  in  terms  of 
a behavioral  adjustment  mechanism  motivated  by  defense 
of  the  physiological  economy  of  drug  concentration. 

Conditioned  reinforcement  in  the  maintenance  of  heroin 
self -adminstration  in  baboons. 

Two  adult  baboons  were  surgically  prepared  with 
chronic  venous  catheters  and  afforded  an  opportunity  to 
infuse  heroin  (.1  mg/kg).  Heroin  infusicn  was  associated 
with  a compound  auditory  and  visual  stimulus.  Through  a 
second  catheter  inserted  in  the  same  vein,  each  animal 
could  also  infuse  an  equal  volume  of  saline  and  institute 
the  same  stimulus  conditions  associated  with  heroin  in- 
fusion. Heroin  infusions  were  limited  to  10  each  day,  but 
no  limit  was  placed  on  the  number  of  saline  infusions. 
After  about  12  days  of  exposure  to  this  procedure  heroin 
infusions  stabilized  at  their  limit  of  10  infusions/day . 
Over  about  30  days,  the  distribution  of  heroin  infusions 
had  gradually  shifted  until  all  10  occurred  within  5 min 
of  the  onset  of  each  daily  20  hr  period  during  which  drug 
and  saline  were  available.  Concurrently,  the  number  of 
saline  infusions  began  to  rise  markedly,  but  with  a dis- 
tribution that  concentrated  most  of  the  saline  infusions 
nearer  the  end  of  the  session.  Thus  the  longer  the  animal 
had  been  without  heroin,  the  more  probable  a saline  in- 
fusion. During  withdrawal  (substitution  of  saline  for 
heroin)  the  number  of  saline  infusions  increased  to 
several  hundred  each  day  and  then  gradually  fell  to  basal 
levels.  Responding  on  the  key  that  had  produced  heroin 
was  sustained  longer  than  responding  on  the  key  that  had 
only  produced  saline  infusions.  These  data  further 


exemplify  the  role  of  conditioning  in  the  maintenance 
of  drug-self  administration  behavior.  The  patterning 
of  saline  infusions  (with  their  associated  stimuli) 
strongly  suggest  that  they  serve  as  partial  substitutes 
for  infusions. 

Three  additional  baboons  have  been  trained  under 
experimental  conditions  designed  to  permit  parametric 
study  of  the  control  exerted  by  environmental  stimuli 
associated  with  self -administration  of  heroin.  During 
20-hour  daily  periods,  4 sets  of  stimulus-conditions, 
associated  with  food  or  water  delivery,  drug  or  saline 
infusion  respectively,  were  available  for  the  baboon 
to  select  by  pressing  an  illuminated  button.  Repeated 
button  presses  changed  the  stimulus  - conditions  se- 
quentially and  failure  to  press  the  condition-selecting 
button  left  the  animal  in  a neutral,  non-reinforcing, 
situation.  When  a given  reinforcement-associated 
stimulus  the  reinforcement  could  be  obtained  by  pressing 
a second  button  illuminated  with  one  of  the  associated 
stimuli.  After  acquisition  training  to  establish  base- 
line performances,  the  availability  of  stimulus -conditions 
associated  with  self - infusion  of  heroin  was  manipulated, 
while  the  other  conditions  continued  to  be  available. 

The  heroin- infusions  were  limited  to  a maximum  of  10 
per  day  for  a period  of  time,  eliminated  completely  to 
observe  the  effects  of  withdrawal,  and  then  reintroduced 
after  a number  of  days  during  which  the  heroin-related 
stimuli  were  unavailable.  For  example,  the  10  heroin 
infusions  might  be  made  available  only  after  1,  2,  4,  8, 
or  16  days  enforced  abstinence.  Food  and  water-associated 
performance  is  typically  suppressed  on  days  heroin  is 
available,  and  saline  infusions,  although  unlimited,  are 
few.  During  intervening  days  food  and  water  performances 
occur  in  relatively  stable  baseline  ranges  while  the 
frequency  of  saline  infusions  gradually  increase  day  by 
day  until  heroin  is  available  again. 

Choice  between  heroin  and  alternative  reinforcers. 


These  experiments  are  based  on  the  premise  that 
heroin  (or  drugs  in  general)  is  merely  one  of  many 
alternative  reinforcers  available  in  the  natural 
environment.  The  question  being  asked  is,  to  what 
extent  can  the  frequency  of  heroin  self -administration 


1541 


be  manipulated  by  varying  the  context  in  which  the 
choice  of  heroin  occurs.  A related  series  of  experi- 
ments examined  several  of  the  many  possible  variables 
controlling  choice  between  food  and  heroin.  In  all 
of  these  experiments  baboons  were  provided  the 
opportunity  to  choose  between  food,  and  100  mcg/kg  of 
heroin.  On  each  choice  opportunity  (trial)  two  response 
keys  were  illuminated.  One  was  always  associated  with 
food,  and  the  other  with  heroin  delivery.  A press  on 
one  key  darkened  the  other,  and  changed  the  key  that 
was  pressed  to  red  if  it  was  the  heroin  key,  or  green, 
if  it  was  the  food  key.  Completion  of  an  additional 
number  of  presses  (the  completion  ratio)  on  the  colored 
key  produced  the  reinforcer  associated  with  that  key. 
Choice  trials  were  presented  for  20  hou1  ; each  day. 

In  the  first  experiment,  the  amount  of  food  delivered 
per  reinforcer  was  manipulated  in  the  range  of  one  to 
four  pellets.  The  interval  between  choices  was  always 
two  minutes,  and  the  completion  ratio  was  one  response. 

As  the  amount  of  food  delivered  between  reinforcers  was 
increased,  the  total  number  of  food  choices  per  day 
decreased,  suggesting  that  since  the  animals  required 
fewer  food  choices  per  day  to  maintain  their  daily  food 
intake  at  a suitable  level,  more  time  was  available 
to  infuse  drugs. 

In  a second  experiment,  the  interval  between  choice 
opportunities  was  manipulated,  with  the  amount  of  food 
per  food  choice  held  constant  at  4 pellets.  Both  of 
the  animals  studied  under  these  circumstances  decreased 
total  daily  drug  intake  more  than  total  daily  food  intake 
as  the  interval  between  choices  was  increased.  These 
results,  and  those  of  the  first  experiment  can  be  analyzed 
in  economic  terms.  The  two  commodities,  food  and  drug, 
compete  for  the  available  time  and  behavior  of  the  animal. 
As  constraints  are  placed  on  the  amount  of  behavior  the 
animals  can  emit  (analogous  to  the  amount  of  money 
available  in  an  economy)  the  elasticity  of  the  commodities 
becomes  important  in  determining  how  the  behavior  is 
partitioned.  In  this  particular  case,  it  would  appear 
that  heroin  is  the  more  elastic  of  the  two  commodities, 
since  greater  proportional  decreases  were  seen  in  heroin 
intake  when  available  choices  were  restricted. 


Preliminary  data  are  available  from  a third  experi- 
ment, in  which  the  amount  of  work  required  to  obtain 
both  reinforcers  (the  completion  ratio)  was  simultaneously 
manipulated  for  both  of  the  alternatives,  over  the  range 


iX.  .A-  -T'1-"' 


1542 


from  1 to  80.  As  the  ratio  was  increased,  making  it 
more  difficult  to  obtain  either  of  the  reinforcers, 
intake  of  both  decreased  approximately  by  the  same 
amount . 

What  these  experiments  collectively  suggest  is 
that  heroin  intake  can  be  effectively  manipulated  by 
altering  the  context  within  which  choices  of  heroin 
occur.  The  experiments  are,  however,  only  suggestive, 
and  further  work  is  required  to  more  clearly  delineate 
the  circumstances  and  the  extent  to  which  heroin  intake 
can  be  altered  by  changing  the  context  within  which 
the  choice  of  the  drug  occurs.  Particularly,  in  light 
of  the  dose -response  experiment  cited  earlier,  it  would 
be  important  to  investigate  different  unit  doses  of 
heroin  as  the  alternative  to  food. 

Choice  between  heroin  and  morphine. 

The  drug  literature  contains  relatively  few  direct 
comparisons  between  heroin  and  morphine,  these  being 
largely  comparisons  of  analgesic  potency,  and  pharma- 
codynamic properties  relating  to  absorption,  distribution, 
and  elimination  of  the  compounds.  No  direct  comparisons 
of  the  reinforcing  properties  of  the  two  compounds  exist. 
Thus,  in  light  of  the  finding  that  heroin  penetrates 
the  blood-brain  barrier  much  more  quickly  than  morphine 
(due  to  its  greater  lipid  solubility),  and  the  well-known 
psychological  fact  that  immediacy  of  reinforcement  is 
one  of  its  most  important  dimensions,  the  present  study 
was  designed  to  directly  compare  the  reinforcing  pro- 
perties of  morphine  and  heroin. 

Two  baboons  were  each  prepared  with  two  venous 
catheters,  one  for  infusion  of  heroin,  and  the  other 
for  infusion  of  morphine.  Trials  were  provided  four 
times  each  hour  for  20  hours  of  the  day.  Choice  trials 
consisted  of  the  illumination  of  two  keys,  one  red, 
and  one  green,  with  the  position  of  the  colors 
randomized.  A single  press  on  one  of  the  keys  turned 
the  other  key  off,  and  five  additional  presses  produced 
an  infusion  of  the  drug  associated  with  that  key 
color.  Following  a choice,  the  next  trial  was  a forced 
choice  of  the  non-chosen  drug,  thus  equalizing  the  total 
number  of  infusions  of  each  drug  each  day.  Initial 
training  was  begun  with  equimolar  doses  of  the  two  drugs 


1543 


for  both  animals  (0.1  umoles/kg/infusion) . Both 
animals  showed  a clear  preference  for  the  heroin 
solution  within  30  days,  choosing  the  heroin  on 
greater  than  901  of  all  free  choice  trials.  Several 
control  manipulations,  switching  the  catheters,  and 
switching  the  colors  associated  with  the  drugs,  failed 
to  disrupt  the  heroin  preference.  Within  two  weeks 
following  each  manipulation,  the  preference  for 
heroin  was  always  reestablshed.  With  one  animal,  it 
was  possible  to  conduct  a series  of  manipulations  of 
morphine  dose,  with  the  heroin  dose  held  constant. 

For  this  animal,  the  morphine  dose  was  quadrupled  three 
times  (0.4,  1.6,  and  6.4  umoles/kg/inf . ) with  no 
disruption  of  the  preference  for  heroin,  even  when  the 
unit  dose  of  morphine  was  64  times  that  of  heroin. 
Catheter  failures  and  physical  problems  with  the  animals 
precluded  further  data  acquisition  in  this  experiment, 
though  continuation  of  similar  work  is  clearly  warranted. 


1544 


; ! 

I ! 


: 


■ 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  102  Military  Performance  and  drug  abuse 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications : 


1.  Elsmore,  T.F.  Differential  tolerance  to  delta- 
9-THC  effect  on  performance  by  monkeys  on  FI  and  DRL 
reinforcement  schedules.  Bu'letin  of  the  Psychonomic 
Society,  1975,  6,  420. 


2.  Manning,  F.J.  Chronic  Delta-9-Tetrahydro- 
cannabinol.  Transient  and  Lasting  Effects  of  Avoidance 
Behavior.  Pharmacology,  Biochemistry,  fj  Behavior, 

1976,  4,  i7^ir: 


3.  Manning,  F.J.  Possible  serotonergic  involve- 
ment in  morphine-seeking  behavior  in  rats.  Bulletin  of 
Psychonomic  Society,  1975,  6,  419-420. 


1545 


1 


I 


r-Tla  ?s. . j 




Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 


Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  103  Drug  Abuse  Prevention  in  Military  Personnel 

Investigators. 

Principal:  COL  Harry  C.  Holloway,  MC 

Associate:  David  H.  Marlowe,  Ph.D.;  CPT  George  D.  Bishop,  MSC; 

MAJ  T.  Peter  Bridge,  MC;  E5  Joseph  Bruer;  MAJ 
Rodney  V.  Burbach,  MC;  Linda  J.  Cunningham,  BA; 
Rosemary  A.  Diliberto,  MSW;  MAJ  Steven  P.  Gilbert, 
MC;  CPT  Eugene  E.  Grossman,  MSC;  Glenn  T.  Gurley, 
BA;  E6  Nelson  S.  Henry,  MAJ  William  Hollinshead, 

MC;  MAJ  Larry  H.  Ingraham,  MSC;  Ellen  N.  Levine, 

MS;  E4  James  M.  Maedke;  MAJ  John  H.  Newby,  Jr., 

MSC;  William  G.  Palm,  MA;  MAJ  David  W.  Pearson, 

MC;  E4  Stephen  A.  Perkins;  E5  Alberto  J.  Rivas; 
Joseph  M.  Rothberg,  Ph.D.;  CPT  Robert  J.  Schneider, 
MSC;  Boyd  Stephenson,  SSG  Charles  I.  Taylor 


Description 

This  work  unit  has  been  terminated  due  to  withdrawal  of  funds. 
This  work  unit  consisted  of  a series  of  field  studies  of  the  epi- 
demiology of  drug  and  alcohol  use  at  an  army  post  in  CONUS.  The 
purpose  of  these  studies  was  to  determine  individual,  environmental, 
and  social  factors  that  contribute  to  the  initiation  and  maintenance 
of  drug  and  alcohol  abuse.  Quantitative  data  has  been  coded,  and 
transferred  to  magnetic  tape  for  analysis  that  is  essentially  com- 
pleted. Qualitative  data  has  been  reviewed.  Indexed,  abstracted 
and  analyzed. 

Progress 


1.  Repeated  interviews  with  both  illicit  drug  users  and  non- 
users were  used  to  trace  the  social  networks  and  contacts  critical 
to  the  transmission  and  maintenance  of  drug  and  alcohol  use  among 
individuals  in  social  groups.  Tape  recordings  of  the  unstructured 
interviews  have  been  reviewed,  indexed,  and  abstracted.  Working 
papers  have  been  written,  and  a final  report  of  this  phase  of  the 
project  is  being  prepared. 

2.  Participant  observers  collected  data  concerning  the  formal 
organization  of  company-sized  units;  the  sets  of  Informal  relations 
within  the  companies;  the  interactions  between  the  formal  and  infor- 
mal systems;  and  the  performance  of  both  indidivuals  and  units  in 
mission-relevant  tasks.  Abstracts  of  the  field  notes  and  working 


1547 


papers  have  been  prepared.  A draft  of  the  final  report  has  been 
prepared,  and  is  currently  being  revised  for  publication. 


3.  Observers  examined  treatment,  rehabilitation,  and  service 
systems  at  the  post  in  both  the  alcohol  and  drug  treatment  facili- 
ties. The  observers'  field  notes  have  been  reviewed,  indexed,  and 
abstracted.  Working  papers  have  been  prepared. 

4.  A health  diary  study  using  a random  sample  of  soldiers 
examined  health  problems  and  patterns  of  consultation  and  therapy 
that  do  not  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Army  medical  system. 

This  data  has  been  coded  and  transferred  to  magnetic  tape,  and 
their  analysis  is  essentially  complete.  Working  papers  have  been 
prepared,  and  a final  report  of  this  study  is  in  the  final  stages 
of  preparation  for  publication. 


i 


i 


5.  A random  sample  of  700  soldiers  completed  survey  instru- 
ments designed  to  map  cognitive  and  organizational  factors,  atti- 
tudes, behavioral  repetoires,  and  patterns  of  drug  and  alcohol  use. 
Analysis  of  these  data  is  essentially  complete,  and  a final  report 
is  currently  being  prepared. 


6.  Certaiu  jgnclusions  have  been  drawn  from  our  data  and  are 
presented  here.  Our  field  studies  have  found  that  the  relation- 

ships between  young  soldiers  are  determined  by  organizational 
factors  such  as  barracks  of  residence,  platoons  and  company.  Bar- 
racks residence  or  residence  with  fellow  soldiers  in  an  off-post 
situation  seem  to  provide  optimal  conditions  for  peer  group  rela- 
tions to  influence  an  individual's  behavior,  including  behaviors 
relating  to  illicit  use  of  drugs.  The  data  suggest  that  these 
basic  living  arrangements  consistently  affect  such  behavior.  Thus, 
married  men  living  with  their  wives  are  a low  risk  group  for  drug 
abuse,  while  married  men  living  in  barracks  behave  very  much  like 
their  single  barracks  mates  and  are  at  high  risk. 


Such  barracks  living  arrangements  have  considerable  influence 
, upon  the  ease  with  which  drugs  are  obtained  and  distributed.  Men 

> acquire  their  drugs  largely  from  their  barracks  mates,  platoon 

mates  or  from  fellow  members  of  their  companies.  Soldiers  who 
] can  be  considered  pushers  or  who  specialize  as  dealers  in  drugs 

are  rare.  Rather,  members  of  the  group  informally  provide  access 
1 to  drugs  depending  upon  the  individual  supplies  that  ekist  at  a 

I given  moment.  The  drugs  which  they  distribute  are  often  obtained 

$ in  their  home  towns  while  on  pass  or  leave,  in  the  surrounding 

j civilian  community,  and  from  other  individuals  on  post.  Opportuni- 

* ties  for  drug  acquisition  and  for  the  introduction  of  new  drugs 


* 


a 


are  maximized  in  this  environment.  When  one  man's  source  of  supply 
disappears  one  can  almost  be  certain  that  friends  will  be  able  to 
supply  his  regular  and  casual  requirements  for  drugs. 

It  is  important  to  note  that  the  same  groups  in  which  drugs  are 
used  also  support  and  encourage  their  fellows  to  perform  as  good 
soldiers.  They  encourage  them  to  show  up  for  duty  on  time  and 
teach  them  various  ways  to  improve  performance  as  acceptable  soldiers. 
Most  of  the  activities  of  such  groups  do  not  center  around  drugs 
but  around  more  mundane  everyday  social  activities.  Since  these 
activities  do  not  draw  attention  to  those  individuals  who  illicitly 
use  drugs  on  a regular  basis  during  off-duty  time,  they  provide  a 
mantle  of  invisibility  for  endemic  drug  using  groups.  The  satis- 
factory performance  of  men  in  such  groups  makes  them  invisible  to 
their  commanders,  who  often  underestimate  the  extent  of  drug  use 
in  their  companies  and  battalions.  A given  individual  who  uses 
drugs  in  an  overly  blatant  manner  or  performs  so  poorly  as  to  draw 
attention  to  himself  is  frequently  excluded  from  such  groups.  Occa- 
sionally, such  drug  users  are  identified  to  authorities  by  their 
fellow  users  because  they  are  seen  as  a danger  to  the  general  well- 
being of  the  barracks  living  group.  Informants  or  undercover  agents 
are  identified  by  such  groups  and  then  isolated  or  threatened  into 
silence. 

Prevalence  data  demonstrate  that  the  Army,  at  present,  has  an 
endemic  drug  problem.  There  are  a large  number  of  men  versed  in 
the  use  and  acquisition  of  drugs,  positively  disposed  to  drugs  as 
a normal  aspect  of  their  recreational  life,  and  skilled  in  the  dis- 
creet use  of  drugs  in  a fashion  that  does  not  interfere  with  their 
routine  behavior  in  garrison.  Since  they  are  not  addicted,  they  do 
not  have  a fixed  physiological  requirement  for  the  drugs.  They 
can,  therefore,  modify  their  drug  usage  in  response  to  other  social 
and  routine  military  demands  as  long  as  they  and  their  social  organ- 
ization are  not  stressed  by  a sudden  deployment  for  operations. 
Soldiers  using  drugs  in  this  manner  are  rarely  identified  by  their 
superiors  as  drug  users.  They  regulate  the  timing  of  their  drug 
use  and  choose  drugs  which  minimize  the  possibility  of  urine  de- 
tection A study  of  soldiers  referred  for  treatment  demonstrates 
that  these  men,  unlike  those  just  described,  have  poor  work  habits, 
absent  themselves  from  duty,  or  make  a flagrant  point  of  their  use 
of  drugs.  Thus,  in  our  experience,  those  soldiers  who  actually 
reach  treatment  facilities  represent  a popu^jtjgn  of  relatively 
poor  soldiers  who  also  happen  to  use  drugs. 

7.  The  Behavioral  Mathematics  section  has  continued  efforts 
to  secure  an  adequate  data  base  for  alcohol  and  drug  related  dys- 


1549 


function.  Tabulation  of  IDPS  records  is  in  progress,^  ^^n<Jg 
new  predictive  and  analytic  techniques  are  being  explored. 

8.  In  anticipation  of  continued  drug  and  alcohol  funding, 
a series  of  life  history  interviews  was  conducted  with  residents 
of  the  U.S.  Soldiers'  and  Airmens'  Home  in  Washington,  DC  in  an 
attempt  to  survey  drinking  patterns  as  they  relate  to  life  in  the 
Army  under  various  conditions  during  the  period  1900  to  1975.  The 
initial  interviews  included  Army  careers  that  extended  from  1900 
to  the  end  of  WWII.  The  data  from  this  preliminary  effort  has 
been  indexed  and  abstracted,  and  suggest,  impressionistically  to 
be  sure,  that  despite  the  radical  changes  in  formal  structure  and 
operations  following  WWII  that  the  patterns  of  alcohol  use  among 
lower  ranking  enlisted  men  have  remained  remarkably  consistent. 

This  project  has  also  been  abandoned. 

9.  Progress  reports  of  the  drug  abuse  research  effort  have 
been  communicated  to  appropriate  army  agencies,  DCSPER  has  tasked 
the  Division  of  NP,  WRAIR  to  provide  a training  manual  suitable  for 
company  commanders  informing  them  of  drug  and  alcohol  use  patterns 
as  they  relate  to  company  organization  and  administration.  This 
outline  is  currently  being  revised  for  submission  in  compliance  with 
the  request. 

10.  As  the  final  reports  are  completed  the  results  will  be 
published  in  a series  of  articles  in  the  professional  literature. 

A projected  volume  detailing  the  history,  scope,  methods  and  results 
of  the  comprehensive  project  has  been  abandoned  because  of  drastic 
changes  in  personnel  that  resulted  from  the  loss  of  drug  and  alcohol 
research  fund  for  FY77.  For  the  same  reasons,  projected  studies 
of  the  military  community  with  a continuing  focus  on  drug  and  alcohol 
use  have  also  been  abandoned. 

11.  Elements  of  the  data  and  techniques  developed  in  the  course 
of  this  terminated  work  unit  will  be  carried  forward  in  the  new  pre- 
ventive psychiatry  and  psychiatric  epidemiology  work  units  of  the 
department. 


1550 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 


Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  103  Drug  Abuse  Prevention  in  Military  Personnel 

Literature  Cited 


References: 

1.  Diliberto,  R.A.  Specialist  Caesar:  A Case  Study  of  Drug  Use 

and  Successful  Military  Performance.  Working  paper,  Psychiatry 
Department,  WRAIR,  1976 

2.  Newby,  J.  Specialist  Topman:  A Case  Study  of  Drug  Use  and 

Outstanding  Military  Performance.  Working  paper.  Psychiatry  De- 
partment, WRAIR,  1975. 

3.  Newby,  Jr.  and  Diliberto,  R.A.  Sickleside:  Behavior  Themes 

and  Drug  Use  Variations.  A Study  of  Social  Network  Relationships  at 
an  Army  Post.  Working  paper.  Psychiatry  Department,  WRAIR,  1976. 

4.  Ingraham,  L.H.  The  Boys  in  the  Barracks:  An  Ethnography  of 

Common  American  Soldiers.  Working  paper.  Psychiatry  Department,  WRAIR, 
1976. 


5.  Marlowe,  D.H.,  Holloway,  H.C.  and  Hegge,  F.W.  The  Military 
Environment  and  Drug  Abuse.  Working  paper,  Psychiatry  Department, 
WRAIR,  1975,  prepared  for  the  U.S.  House  of  Representatives  Appropria- 
tions Committee. 

6.  Way,  S.W.  Mary  Jane:  A Case  Study  of  Civilian/Military 

Interaction  in  a Military  "Strip"  Milieu.  Working  paper.  Psychiatry 
Department,  WRAIR,  1975. 

7.  Way,  S.W.  Notes  from  the  Inferno:  Experiences  of  a Partici- 

pant Observer.  Paper  delivered  at  the  American  Psychological  Associa- 
tion Convention,  Chicago,  Illinois,  1975. 

8.  Ingraham,  L.H.  Idols  of  the  Experimental  Mind.  Paper 
delivered  at  the  American  Psychological  Association  Convention, 
Chicago,  Illinois,  1975. 

9.  Grossman,  E.E.  Nonexperimental  Field  Research:  Science  or 

Siolism?  Paper  presented  at  the  American  Psychological  Association 
Convention,  Chicago,  Illinois,  1975. 


1551 


10.  Matthews,  R.W.  Coming  in  From  the  Cold:  Graduate  Study 

Following  Field  Experience.  Paper  delivered  at  the  American  Psycho- 
logical Association  Convention,  Chicago,  Illinois,  1975. 

11.  Cunningham,  L.  Background  and  History  of  an  Alcohol  Reha- 
biliation  Cetner  at  an  Army  Post.  Working  paper,  Psychiatry  Department, 
WRAIR,  1975. 

12.  Palm,  W.  The  Acceptance  of  the  Sick  Role  at  an  Army  Drug 
Rehabilitation  Program.  Working  paper,  Psychiatry  Department,  WRAIR, 
1975. 

13.  Palm,  W.  The  Processes  of  Social  Incorporation  and  Extrusion 
in  an  Army  Drug  Rehabilitation  Program.  Working  paper.  Psychiatry 
Department,  WRAIR,  1975. 

14.  Palm,  W.  Notes  on  the  Organization  and  Operation  of  an  Army 
Drug  Rehabilitation  Center.  Working  paper,  Psychiatry  Department, 

WRAIR,  1975. 

15.  Rothberg,  J.M.  Alcohol,  Drug  and  Psychiatric  Data  Summary. 
Working  paper.  Psychiatry  Department,  WRAIR,  1975. 

16.  Rothberg,  J.M.  Drug/Alcohol  Disease/Symptom  Data  Summary. 
Working  paper,  Psychiatry  Department,  WRAIR,  1976. 

17.  Rothberg,  J.M.  A Small  Sample  Application  of  Discriminant 
Analysis.  Presented  at  the  Advanced  Seminar  on  Classification  and 
Clustering,  Madison,  Wisconsin,  University  of  Wisconsin  Mathematics 
Research  Center,  1976. 

18.  Rothberg,  J.M.;  Holloway,  H.C.;  Nace,  E.P.;  Meyers,  A.L.: 

An  Application  of  Stepwise  Discriminant  Analysis  to  the  Characterization 
of  Military  Heroin  Dependent,  Illicit  Drug  Users,  and  Psychiatric 
Patients.  In  press.  International  Journal  of  the  Addictions,  Vol 
11,  No.  5,  1975. 

19.  Schneider,  R.J.  and  Rothberg,  J.M.  Predicting  Involvement 

with  Illicit  Drugs,  Part  I:  Development  of  the  Instrument.  In 

press,  Educational  and  Psychological  Measurements,  Fall,  1976 
Biannual  Test  Development  issue. 

Publications 

1.  Rothberg,  J.M.  Alcoholism  and  the  U.S.  Army  (cont.)  Corres- 
pondence New  England  Journal  of  Medicine,  294 : 343,  1976. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

^iunZanyT^^^ 


t OAT ■ RRIV  IUITNV 

75  07  01 


4 KINO  OR  RAJ  MM  ANY 

K.  T iir.f  . 


10  MO  coots  * 


PROGRAM  CLIMCNT 


4.  PRIMARY 


S.  CONTNtOUTIMO 


c maxKiucHKx 


62758A 


CARDS  114F 


U 


A PORK  SCCUMTV1 

u 


1.  RCORAOtNO* 

NA 


PNOJICT  NUMDKN 


3A762758A833 


DA  OB  6498 


76  06  30 


TASK  ANCA  NUUKR 


00 


atpoirr  cortsoi  iyvk 

DDDRhE(AR)*.1t 


IA  0*4 I'M  MITR'D 

*A  INCCIFIC  OATA- 

NL 

CONTRACTOR ACCftl 

Qy«i  D no 

A.  mi  WMT 


WORK  UNIT  MUMDCN 


105 


t TITLt  >(•  |m rlty  CImaIHmiIm  C**r 

(U)  Cellular  Aspects  of  the  Metabolism  of  Drugs  of  Abuse 


II.  ICIKNTIRIC  AMO  TICHMOLOOICAL  ANCAI 


ha™colQw  ..?.168Qi9> j 


72  10 


IT  CONTRACT  OMAN T 
A DAriS/KRRtCTWf:  fJA 

A NUMIIR  * 

A TV  Ml: 


76  06 


4 AMOUNT 
I.CUM.  AMT. 


II  RCIPONtlOlC  OOQ  ORDAMIlATtON 


I 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


RtlPONIlDLt  INDIVIDUAL 


I BINCRAL  Ufl 


Joy,  COL  R.J.T, 
202-576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 


II  WIYDOAOi  IACM  MppIV  CUWR»«H«*. 


DA 


M MSOUNCIt  tSTIMATK 


Riical 

Yt  AN 


ID  MR  FORM  ARC  I HttNOO 

C.  In-House 


A PROFf-OMAI 


NS  A FUNDS  CM  • 


pneiBiNi 

75 

2.0 

175  j 

76 

2.0 

I 


•*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  ResearcF 
Div.  of  Medicine 

Washington,  DC  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VIST  ID  A TON  (Fmmlm A SCAN  II  v.S.  AM 

Glinos,  A.D.  MD 
202-427-5284 . 

SOCIAL  SICUNITT  ACCOUNT  SIMMS: 

ASSOC!  AT  § IN  V SITU  A TONS 

*“•  Bartos,  E.M.  PhD 
RQbinsQ,n«  R.C. 


DA 


(U)  Cholinergic  fibroblasts,  (u5  Cultured  cells  acetyl- 


choline. ILL)  Cultured  cells  acetylcholinesterase.  (Ul  Morphine  tolerance. 


» TCCNNICAL  ODJICTi VS.*  IS  APPROACH,  IS  PRODRCM  fPMRfaR  IrMMDMI 


Mai  ml  • 


k Mft  $mmmitr  Clmmmlttmtlm  C«M»  > 


23.  (U)  To  investigate  the  alterations  of  cellular  metabolism  underlying  the  develop- 
ment of  tolerance  to  and  dependence  on  drugs  of  abuse,  an  Important  military  problems. 

24.  (U)  The  possibility  that  non-neuronal  cells  may  develop  tolerance  to  opiates  is 
investigated  by  using  WRL-10A  mouse  fibroblasts. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  We  have  previously  reported  the  development  of  a cell  culture 

system  with  demonstratable  tolerance  to  morphine  both  in  terms  of  respiratory  activity 
and  of  survival.  We  have  further  reported  that  although  of  connective  tissue  origin 
the  phenotype  of  the  cells  capable  of  developing  tolerance  expresses  acetylcholines- 
terase (AChE)  activity,  In  all  respects  similar  to  the  activity  exhibited  by  cells  of 
neural  origin,  provided  that  the  cells  are  maintained  as  high  density  growth  Inhibited 
populations.  We  are  now  reporting  that  under  these  conditions  in  addition  to  AChE 
these  cells  contain  also  acetylcholine  (ACh)  in  concentrations  approximately  20  percent 
of  the  concentration  of  this  neurotransmitter  in  the  b-ain.  These  results  were 
obtained  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  and  established  the  phenotype  of  WRL-10A 
cells  as  truly  unique,  because  under  conditions  of  exponential  growth  these  cells  have 
the  properties  of  fibroblasts  while  in  the  high  density  growth  inhabited  phase  they 
express  neuronal  characteristics.  Plans  to  exploit  these  exceptional  properties  for 
studying  further  pharmarcologlcal  responses  of  Interest  to  the  Army  were  abandoned  when 
commitment  of  funds  for  this  project  was  ordered  discontinued,  (cf.  Memo  for  Record 
from  Deputy  Director,  WRAIR,  dated  24  Sep  75).  For  technical  reports  see  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  progress  Report  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


mll»M»  to  CM Ilf  cl—  I 


DD,:°“J498 


Ml  V IOUS  EDITION*  Of-'  THIS  FORM  ARK  OMOLITI  DD  TORMI  l«DDA.  I NOV  •• 
AND  I MOD  1 . 1 MAN  «•  i F ON  ANMV  UDC)  ANK  OIIOLKTI 


1553 


I 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  105  Cellular  aspects  of  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 
Investigators . 

Principal:  Andre  D.  Glinos , M.D. 

Associate:  Edwin  M.  Bartos,  Ph.D. j Richard  C.  Robinson,  B.A. 

Description 

Attempts  to  reproduce  the  phenomena  of  drug  tolerance  and  dependence 
in  cultured  cells  thus  paving  the  way  for  the  eventual  uncovering 
of  the  metabolic  processes  involved  in  drug  abuse  are  not  new.  Be- 
ginning with  the  prewar  heroic  period  of  tissue  culture1  and  up  to  the 
present  time2  a sizeable  number  of  reports  on  the  subject  have  accumu- 
lated with  an  approximately  equal  distribution  of  positive  and  nega- 
tive results.  Thus,  it  is  characteristic  that  recently  one  group  of 
investigators  reported  that  levorphanol  prevented  the  induction  of 
acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  in  cultures  of  mouse  neuroblastoma  cells 
without  development  of  either  tolerance  or  dependence2,  a second  group 
found  that  in  a human  neuroblastoma  cell  line  acute  exposure  to  mor- 
phine decreased  acetylcholine  (ACh)  2evels  with  no  effects  on  choline 
acetylase  (ChAc)  or  AChE  while  chronic  exposure  resulted  in  a signifi- 
cant decrease  of  ChAc  and  an  increase  in  AChE3'1*,  and  a third  obtained 
elevation  of  the  activity  of  both  ChAc  and  ChE  by  adding  morphine  to 
7-day  chick  embryo  neurons  in  culture  but  failed  to  do  so  if  either  the 
embryo  or  the  cultures  were  pre-exposed  to  the  drug?  on  the  other  hand, 
when  the  same  experiment  was  performed  with  mouse  neuroblastoma  cells 
exactly  the  opposite  effect  was  obtained,  i.e.,  morphine  had  no  effect 
on  the  enzymes  of  naive  cells  but  did  increase  both  ChAc  and  AChE  ac- 
tivities when  the  cells  were  obtained  from  tumours  born  by  mice  treated 
with  the  drug5'6'7.  The  multitude  of  cell  types,  culture  methods, 
treatment  schedules  and  observational  criteria  used  as  well  as  the 
rather  large  variance  inherent  in  long-term  linear  tissue  culture  ex- 
periments are  undoubtedly  responsible  for  these  inconsistencies.  I 
follows  that  to  answer  unequivocally  the  question  as  to  whether  it  is 
possible  to  reproduce  the  phenomena  of  drug  tolerance  and  dependence  in 
vitro  there  is  an  urgent  need  to  use  a well  characterized  cell  culture 
system  in  conjunction  with  a rigorously  standardized  methology.  At 
this; point,  the  system  does  not  need  to  be  neuronal  as  opiate  tolerance 
and  dependence  have  been  reported  in  other  cell  types  with  no  greater 
inconsistency  than  described  above  for  neuronal  cells8,  9.  Accordingly, 
we  undertook  a study  of  tolerance  to  morphine  using  WRL-10A  cells,  a 
subline  of  L-929  mouse  fibroblasts,  developed  in  our  laboratory18. 


It  was  found  that  continuous  culture  of  WRL-10A  cells  in  progressively 
increasing  concentrations  of  morphine  resulted  in  the  development  of  a 


^ ■*  * --  y --  _•  ! 4i  - -.O  ; V ^ . W ■ • t i i 


cell  population  which  after  15  months  of  exposure  to  1.0  mM  morphine 
remains  fully  viable,  has  a slightly  depressed  growth  rate  and  exhibits 
only  minor  cytopathology.  Control  cells  cultured  in  the  same  concen- 
tration of  the  drug  without  pre-exposure,  die  within  3 weeks.  Toler- 
ance to  morphine  extended  also  to  the  respiratory  activity  of  the  cells 
which  upon  addition  of  1.0  mM  morphine  to  the  control  cells  was  de- 
pressed by  30  - 40%  but  remained  unchanged  in  cells  pre-exposed  to 
0.75  mM  of  the  drug.  As  with  neuronal  tissues,  morphine  had  no  effect 
on  basal  respiratory  rates  such  as  exhibited  by  high  density  growth 
inhibited  populations.  In  terms  of  survival,  however,  such  populations 
exhibited  cons  Herat  ly  greater  sensitivity  than  low  density  growing 
cultures.  High  density  populations  are  characterized  by  the  presence 
of  AChE  located  on  the  external  surface  of  the  cell  membrane  and  also 
released  into  the  media.  It  was  further  found  that  addition  of  mor- 
phine inhibits  AChE  activity  in  the  media  while  cellular  synthesis  of 
AChE  is  enhanced.  These  findings  are  interpreted  in  terms  of  a homeo- 
static mechanism  whereby  syntheses  and  release  of  AChE  would  be  second- 
ary to  synthesis  and  release  of  ACh  and  would  represent  an  adaptive 
process  preventing  the  accumulation  of  toxic  levels  of  ACh  with  in- 
creasing cell  density.  By  inhibiting  AChE  activity,  morphine  in  high 
doses  it  would  induce  a compensatory  increase  of  the  rate  of  AChE 
synthesis . 

Progress  and  Results 

The  concept  outlined  above  is  based  on  the  postulate  that  WRI/-10A 
cells  of  fibroblastic  origin  are  capable  of  synthesizing  not  only 
AChE  but  also  ACh.  To  test  the  validity  of  this  postulate  suspension 
cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells  were  sanpled  at  different  time  intervals 
during  their  progression  from  low  density  exponentially  growing  popu- 
lations through  the  transition  phase  to  high  density  stationary  popu- 
lations as  previously  described^1.  Since  the  density  of  the  cultures 
varied,  sample  volume  was  adjusted  to  yield  at  all  times  5 X 106 
cells/ml  to  which  paraoxonf  a potent  anticholinesterase  agent  was  added 
at  a final  concentration  of  10“^M  to  prevent  the  hydrolysis  of  any  ACh 
present  by  AChE  previously  shown  to  be  released  by  these  cells  in  their 
media(l).  The  samples  were  then  centrifuged  for  5 min.  at  300g  in  room 
temperature,  the  cells  separated  from  the  media  and  washed  3 times 
with  Earle's  balanced  salt  solution  also  containing  10~^  M paraoxon. 

To  the  cell  pellet  remaining  after  the  last  centrifugation  were  added 
0.5  ml  of  formic  acid  (IN, 15  vol)-acetone  (85  vol)  mixture.  The  cells 
were  then  sonicated  in  a salt  ice  bath  using  5 sec  bursts  with  a 15-20 
sec  cooling  period  between  bursts.  The  sonicate  was  then  centrifuged 
at  500g  for  15  min  and  measured  0.95  ml  aliquots  of  the  sipernatant 
removed  and  assayed  for  ACh  according  to  the  method  described  by  Gold- 
berg and  McCaman^2.  The  results  obtained  are  shown  in  the  following 
table. 


1555 


I 


Acetylcholine  (ACh)  content  and  acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  activity 
during  the  development  of  high  density  stationary  suspension 
cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells 


Growth 

Culture 

age 

Cell  density 
(cells/ml  X 10"5) 

nmol/gm 
of  cells 

nmol 

product/min 

phase 

(days) 

Initial 

Final 

(wet  wt) 

/mg  protein 

Log 

1-3 

5.0 

21.2 

0 

Traces 

Early  Transition 

4-6 

53.2 

98.0 

0 

Traces 

Late  Transition 

7-10 

107.3 

110.2 

0 

.5-1.8 

Stationary 

11-18 

100.1 

100.8 

4.0-8. 5 

2. 0-6.0 

The  phenotype  reprogramming  of  WRL-10A  cells  previously  described  in 
regard  to  only  one  component  of  the  cholinergic  system,  i.e.  AChE^,  is 
thus  demonstrated  to  extend  to  a second,  ACh  which  is  synthesized  by 
these  cells  in  amounts  comparable  to  the  brain  since  the  latter  con- 
tains an  average  of  18  nmol/g  of  ACh.  In  turn,  this  implies  that  the 
cells  are  capable  of  synthesizing  the  enzyme  choline  acetyl-transferase 
since  its  presence  <s  an  absolute  requirement  for  the  synthesis  of  ACh. 
It  is  of  particular  interest  that  the  synthesis  of  AChE  appears  to 
precede  the  synthesis  of  ACh. 

The  table  also  shows  that  the  synthesis  of  both  components  of  the 
cholinergic  system  takes  place  only  after  growth  has  ceased  and  is 
therefore  an  expression  of  the  maturation  of  the  cells.  Control  ex- 
periments carried  out  with  the  parent  L-929  cell  line,  from  which 
WRL-10A  cells  were  derived,  showed  absence  of  ACh  and  AChE  in  both 
low  density  exponentially  growing  cultures  as  well  as  in  high  density 
growth  inhibited  populations  and  the  same  negative  results  were 
obtained  in  attached  cultures  of  3T3  and  WI-38  fibroblasts.  These 
results  therefore  establish  the  WRL-10A  phenotype  as  unique  among 
fibroblastic  lines  in  its  capacity  to  express  components  of  the 
cholinergic  system  when  quiescent  in  high  density  populations,  while 
behaving  as  typical  cultured  fibroblasts  of  and  long  established  line 
when  growing  exponentially  in  low  density  cultures.  Plans  to  exploit 
these  exceptional  characteristics  in  investigating  further  pharmacolo- 
gical responses  of  military  interest  were  cancelled  when,  at  the  end 
of  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  further  commitient  of  funds  for 
this  project  was  terminated  (cf.  Memo  for  Record  from  Deputy  Director, 
WRAIR,  dated  24  Sep  75). 

Summary  and  Conclusions 

We  have  previously  reported  the  development  of  a cell  culture  system 
with  demonstrable  tolerance  to  morphine  both  in  terms  of  respiratory 


tif 


activity  and  of  survival.  We  have  further  reported  that  although  of 
connective  tissue  origin  the  phenotype  of  the  cells  capable  of  develop- 
ing tolerance  expresses  AChE  activity,  in  all  respects  similar  to  the 
activity  exhibited  by  cells  of  neuronal  origin,  provided  that  the  cells 
are  maintained  as  high  density  growth  inhibited  populations.  We  are 
now  reporting  that  under  these  conditions  in  addition  to  AChE  these 
cells  contain  also  ACh  in  concentrations  approximately  20%  of  the  con- 
centration of  this  neurotransmitter  in  the  brain.  These  results  were 
obtained  during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  and  established  the 
phenotype  of  WRL-10A  cells  as  truly  unique,  because  under  conditions  of 
exponential  growth  these  cells  have  the  properties  of  fibroblasts  while 
in  the  high  density  growth  inhibited  phase  they  express  neuronal 
characteristics.  Plans  to  exploit  these  exceptional  properties  for 
studying  further  pharmacological  responses  of  interest  to  the  Army  were 
abandoned  when  commitment  of  funds  for  the  project  was  ordered  dis- 
continued. 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  105  Cellular  aspects  of  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 
Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1 Sasaki,  M.:  Studies  on  phenomena  of  morphine  abstinence  of  cul- 

tures in  vitro  of  fibroblasts  and  on  curative  effect  of  morphine  and 
its  derivatives  on  them.  Arch.  Exp.  Zellforsch.  21:  289,  1938. 

2Hiller,  J.M.  and  Simon,  E.J.:  Effect  of  levorphanol  on  the 

induction  of  acetylcholinesterase  in  a mouse  neuroblastoma  cell  line. 
Fed.  Proc.  31:  757,  1973. 

^Manner,  G.,  Foldes,  F.F.,  Kuleba,  M.  and  Deery,  A.M.:  Morphine 

tolerance  in  a human  neuroblastoma  line:  Changes  in  choline  acetylase 

and  cholinesterase  activities.  Experientia  15^:  137,  1974. 

“♦Manner,  G.,  Foldes,  F.F.,  Kuleba,  M.  and  Deery,  A.M.:  Opiate 

agonist  and  antagonist  effects  on  acetylcholine  metabolism  in  cultured 
neurogenic  cells.  In  Vitro  10:  365,  1974. 

^Peterson,  G.R.  and  Shuster,  L.:  Effects  of  morphine  on  choline 

acetyltransferase  and  acetylcholinesterase  in  cultured  mouse  neuro- 
blastoma. Proc.  West.  Pharmacol.  Soc.  lf>:  129,  1973. 

6 Peterson,  G.R.  and  Shuster,  L.:  Effects  of  narcotic  analgesics 

on  enzymes  of  acetylcholine  metabolism  in  cultured  chick  brain  cells. 
Fed.  Proc.  32:  757,  1973. 

7Peterson,  G.R.,  Webster,  G.W.  and  Shuster,  L:  Effect  of  narco- 

tics on  enzymes  of  acetylcholine  metabolism  in  cultured  cells  from 
embryonic  chick  brains.  Neuropharmacology  _13:  365,  1974. 

8Corssen,  G.  and  Skora,  I. A.:  "Addiction"  reactions  in  cultured 

human  cells.  J.  Amer.  Med.  Assoc.  187:  328,  1964. 

^Ruffin,  N.E.,  Reed,  B.L.  and  Finnin,  B.C.:  Effects  of  morphine 

withdrawal  on  cells  in  continuous  culture.  Life  Sciences  £ (II):  671, 
1969. 

10Glinos,  A.D.  and  Hargrove,  D.D.:  Interrelations  among  chromo- 

some number,  type  and  size  in  L strain  cells.  Exp.  Cell  Res.  39:  249, 
1965. 


1558 


^Glinos,  A.D.  and  Werrlein,  R.J.:  Density  dependent  regulation 

of  growth  in  suspension  cultures  of  L-929  cells.  J.  Cell  Phys.  79: 

79,  1972. 

12Goldberg,  A.M.  and  McCaman,  R.E.:  An  enzymatic  method  for  the 

determination  of  picomole  amounts  of  choline  and  acetylcholine.  In 
Choline  and  Acetylcholine : Handbook  of  Chemical  Assay  Methods , I.  Hanin, 
ed.,  Raven  Press,  New  York,  p.  47,  1974. 

13Glinos,  A.D.  and  Bartos,  E.M.:  Density  dependent  regulation  of 

growth  in  L cell  suspension  cultures  III.  Elevation  of  specific  activ- 
ity of  acetylcholinesterase.  J.  Cell.  Physiol.  83:  478,  1974. 


Publications: 


1.  Bartos,  E.M.  and  Glinos,  A.D.:  Properties  of  growth  related 

acetylcholinesterase  in  a cell  line  of  fibroblastic  origin.  J.  Cell 
Biol.,  69:  638,  1976. 


1559 


l 1 


10  wo  cooes  • 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

» lUNMAN^O^" 


I 0*T*  Al(  V SUNDRY 


75  07  01 


« KINO  OR  tUMMARY 


PROGRAM EiCMEN Y 


b CONTRIgUTING 


f ONT  RiauTlNG 


627 58A 


Cards  1 14F 


A NO**  tC CUM 


7T 


RROjtCT  NUMBER 


3A7627  58A833 


» RBIHCY  ACC II 

DA  OB  6499 


REGRADING* 

NA 


It  ONIR  IMBTB'N 


I DATS  OP ■ 

76  06  30 


NL 


T*»M  AREA  NUMBER 


00 


ibport  comtwol  trmmuL 

PD  DK*E<AH)tJ6 


irecific  OAT*- 
C ON  TRACTOR  ACCtU 

Qtci  D mo 


B UtvEL  OP  SUM 
A.  nil  UMT 


MONK  UNIT  NUMBER 


106 


(U)  Clinical  and  Demographic  Studies  of  Military  Drug  Abusers 


1 SCUNTIPlC  ANQ  TICmNOlOQICAL  arias' 


003500  Clinical  Medicine  012600  Pharmacology  016800  Toxicology 


I START  OATf 

73  07 


« Estimated  completion  oat t 

76  06 


ON  TRACT  GRANT 

A OMTCS/tMECTlVl 

h.  NuMBE  A * 

C TYPE 

NO  OP  AIARO 


N/A 


I M PIMA  T ION 


4 AMOUNT 
I.  CUM.  AMT. 


1*  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

4 FMOFIBAIOM AL  MAN  VRi 

4 fund*  (f»  #»•»*) 

FISCAL 

TSAR 

75 

1.5 

70 

76 

.5 

8 

[ OOO  OR  G AN  I I A T ION 


BB  PtRPORAMNG  ORGANIIATIOM 


Walter  Reed  Army  Lnstltute  of  Research 
4ashington,  D.C.  20012 


RE  SPONSI  Ml  ( INDIVIDUAL 

name  Joy,  COL  R.J.T. 
TiLtPHONE.  (202) 576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

AfTtORW  irNti*  M*CH  VSSSnTmiSm  C*A») 


IB  FUNDING  AGENCY 


DA 


IB  PIRPONMANCC  MV  VnOO 

C.  In-House 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
pivlslon  of  Neuropsychiatry 
""Washington,  D.C.  20012 

FRIMClFAL  INVESTIGATOR  fpMNMa*  MAM  If  u t AcaPnR  /mIINMMB 

«••• ‘Marlowe , D.H.  , Ph.D. 

(301)  427  — 52 10 

HCIH  MCUNtVT  ACCOUNT  NUNOIN 


Ream,  LTC  N.W. 
nani  Blanck,  I.TC  R.R. 


(1)  Hepatitis  B Antigen  and  Antibody;  (U)  Pulmonary 

. Fund  ions;  (U)  Xmmuao&iabullas ; (U)  flanagraBhic  Variables 


» TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE  * 14  APPROACH,  IS  PBOORE  U ( PinnIrA  Iit«  rlBw«l  p*H 


PNIAM  Nil  •»  *•«*  BRCiMlfp  ClMAlltHlNI  CAlT'J 


23.  (U)  Drug  abuse  has  recently  been  a major  problem  in  military  populations.  The 

objectives  of  these  studies  ar  t>  obtain  information  on  medical  problems  related  to 
drug  abuse  and  to  examine  demographic  variables  and  drug  use  histories  of  a military 
popu lat ion. 


of  drug  abuse  by  extracting 
death  in  USARV  was  done, 
in  heroin  and  non-heroin  usinf 
s by  procedures  according  to 
radioimmunoassay;  determina- 
pulmonary  functions  by  means 
bles  and  drug  use  histories  ol 
is  in  progress  by  frequency 


24.  (U)  Clinical  studies  evaluated  medical  complications 

data  from  clinical  records.  A review  of  drug  associated 
Clinical  laboratory  studies  done  and/or  results  analyzed 
military  populations  (USARV)  include:  biochemical  studie 

Hycel;  hepatitis  B antigen  and  antibody  determination  by 
tion  of  immunoglobulins  by  the  immunod i f f ision  technique; 
of  an  electric  spirometer.  Analysis  of  demographic  varia 
heroin  and  non-heroin  using  military  (USARV)  populations 
analysis  and  cross-tabuiat ion. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  This  work  unit  has  been  terminated  following  the  withdrawal  of 
funds  for  drug  research  and  the  reorganization  of  the  Department  of  Psychiatry.  A 
study  of  clinical  aspects  of  acute  abstinence  in  320  heroin  dependent  USARV  soldiers 
and  a review  of  drug  associated  deaths  in  USARV  has  been  completed.  Data  from  labora- 
tory studies  In  heroin  and  non-heroin  using  soldiers  (USARV)  were  analyzed.  Frequency 
analyses  and  cross  tabs  have  been  completed  on  demographic  variables  and  drug  use 
histories  in  3484  non-heroin  using  soldiers  (USARV).  Equivalent  data  on  users  is 
being  card  punched.  The  analysis  data  and  materials  gathered  in  this  work  are  utilize: 
within  the  work  units  032  and  079.  For  technical  reports  see  WRAIR  Annual  Report 
1 duly  75  - 30  June  76. 


DD.r;J498 


PREVlOUl  EDITION*  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBIOLCTE  DD  FORMS  I 4 BB  A 
AND  I ASS-  I I MAM  SB  (FOR  ARMY  US  *1560  I T ■ 


-.-.aT7‘T. 

— ••  ■ — ~- 


' . jr  S*>-V  • vr-*’*?-  '•-■NKS*®.- ' 


iiflVMii  IPTR-IA-Ninr-.  ■ -A* 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  106  Clinical  and  Demographic  Studies  of  Military  Drug 
Abusers 


Investigators. 

Principal:  David  H.  Marlowe,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  LTC  R.  R.  Blanck,  MAJ  Willima  Hollinshead, 

MC;  LTC  Norman  W.  Ream,  MC 


Description 

These  studies  involved  demographic  analyses  of  drug  users 
and  non-users  in  Viet  Nam. 


Progress 

These  studies  have  now  been  terminated.  At  present,  following 
the  transfer  of  the  principal  investigator  during  the  past  year, 
the  materials  have  been  put  on  punch  cards  and  further  analysis 
will  take  place  on  those  segments  of  the  data  pertinent  to  Psychia- 
tric Epidemiology  and  Preventive  Psychiatry. 


1561 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1 AMHCV  ACCeiAIOM* 

DA  0B  6505 

t-  DATS  OF  SUMMARY*  | REPORT  COUTMOL  irumOL 

76  06  30  lU>-i>KhEtAhHJ6 

1 OATI  MREV  1UM*MT  J«  KINO  OP  IUMMARY 

74  07  01  | . • ■ 

1 lUNMAAV  ICTY*  ’4  HONK  IECURITY* 

U i u 

*T  RE  G A A CNN G*  Wk  CMtrN  IMITR'N  14  IMCIMr  UATA  • LlVtL  Of  |UH 

...  ...  CONTHAC’ON  ACCIII 

NA  | NL  IDrti  D«o  *•  u»! 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

62/btiA 

3A/b2758A833 

mo 

TOT 

V CONTRIBUTING 

C.  CONY  HlBvl  TING 

CARDS  1 14F 

M tITLI  P>«c«A>  •!«  tttf  CIMAIMmIIMI  C •*•)* 

( U ) Neurophysiological  Localization  of  Sites  of  Action  of  Drugs  of  Abuse 

[Pll  Redacted] 


012600  Pharmacology  012900  Physiology 


II  JTANT  DA  Tt 


73  07 


t«  tlTIMATID  CONPLf  YlOW  OAT* 

76  06 


IV  CONTRACT  OAANT 
A OIT||/tM|CTlVl 
a number  * 

t Ttp« 

A KINO  0»  ANANO 


N/A 


t ANIMATION 


A AMOUNT 

f.  CUM.  AMT 


E OOO  ORGANIZATION 


‘’waiter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 


REIMONllBVl  INOIWIOWAL 

“"  JOY,  COL  R.J.7. 
th.i',«o"  202-576-3551 


14  fUNtNNC  AOtNCT 

DA  | 


At  A A OHM  AMCC  MIT  MOO 

■ C.  In-House 


It  RE40URCEI  El  TIMA  Tt  I A PMOPIMIONAL  HAM  VRI 

* 

75  | 2 

y k AN  ’TunWiat 


J 76 


k TUMM  fix  AMMMAj 


121 


71 


M NEAPONMINO  ORGANIZATION 


>•  GENERAL  UIC 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


’Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
uJ)iv  of  Neuropsychiatry 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 

MRINCINAl  l«v(ITl6AIO«ir»WM  UM  III/  I 4 <•«•••'< 

Spector,  N.H. , Ph.D. 
ttLiNNO.1 202— 576— 3457 

IOC  I A L IECURIT  » ACCOUk  * NUMBER 
AMOCIATC  INVESTIGATOR! 

Koob,  G.F.,  CPT 

■-Martin.  S.E..  Ph.D. 


Heroin;  (u)  Temperature  Regulation;  (U)  Feeding 
Behavior;  (U)  Intracranial  Self-Stimulation:  (LI)  Catecholamines:  Hl-Utorphine 


II  T E CN NIC  L OBJECTIVE*  14  A AMMO  ACM.  14  MOOktU  fPuml«A  M.IA4I  tdumtllft  At  ">—k»r  PMM*  Mil  •»  <*•*  A -IP  *•(«•!*  CAM*  J 

23.  (U)  This  research  attempts  to  identify  areas  of  the  central  nervous  system  which 
are  most  affected  by  drugs  of  abuse.  These  physiological  studies  may  provide  a basic 
understanding  of  the  mechanisms  of  drug-induced  alterations  in  the  functioning  of  the 
nervous  system  and  eventually  lead  to  effective  treatment  of  military  personnel  using 
and  misusing  drugs. 

24.  (U)  The  techniques  of  neurophysiology , neuropharmacology  and  physiological 
psychology  are  used. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Effects  of  restraint  on  the  alterations  in  body  temperature  in 

the  rat  caused  by  systemic  and  intracerebral  injection  of  morphine  and  heroin  have  been 
examined:  these  opiates  were  found  to  cause  increased  body  temperature  in  free-moving 

rats  but  a temperature  decrease  in  restrained  rats.  Microinjection  of  morphine  into 
the  rat  hypothalamus,  and  related  areas,  made  to  localize  the  anatomic  site  of  the 
effects,  also  showed  dissimilar  results  dependent  on  the  rat's  mobility:  marked  temper- 
ature increases  accompany  injections  in  a subsequently  free-moving  animal  while  lesser 
temperature  rises  were  seen  after  inejctions  in  subsequently  restrained  animals,  b^th 
effects  were  blocked  by  microinjection  of  morphine  antagonist  in  the  same  brain  regions. 
Further  work  in  this  unit  precluded  by  deletion  of  drug  abuse  research  funds  from  DA 
budget.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress 
Report  01  July  75  - 30  June  76. 


I*  A tv  lotm  m 


i «*-'A*T*ror*« 


OD,:°.*;j498 


1562 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 


Work  Unit  109  Neurophysiological  localization  of  sites  of  action  of 
drugs  of  abuse 

Investigators 

Principal:  N.H.  Spector,  Ph.D. 

George  F.  Koob,  CPT,  MSC;  Gregory  E.  Martin,  Ph.D. 

DESCRIPTION 

This  research  has  continued  to  pursue  the  objective  of  a neuro- 
physiological localization  of  sites  of  action  of  drugs  of  abuse  and 
related  compounds  using  behavioral  and  physiological  techniques. 

PROGRESS 

Effects  of  Opiates  and  Restraint  on  Body  Temperature 

Two  studies  have  been  completed  concerning  the  effects  of  re- 
straint on  the  body  temperature  changes  which  occur  following  adminis- 
tration of  morphine  sulfate  (MS)  or  heroin  hydrochloride  (H)  to  the 
rat.  In  the  first,  the  effect  of  an  intraperitoneal  (IP)  injection  of 
MS  or  H on  body  temperature  in  restrained  and  free-moving  rats  was  com- 
pared; this  work  involved  development  of  a chronically  implanted  tem- 
perature measuring  system  which  does  not  impair  the  rat's  movement  (A  j 

method  for  the  continuous  chronic  measurement  of  core  temperature  in 
J small  animals  - Pryzbyllk,  A.T.,  G.E.  Martin,  and  N.H.  Spector,  1976, 

j submitted  to  J.  App.  Physiol.)  Results  show  that  30  mg/kg  of  MS  or  5 

mg/kg  of  H cause  severe  hypothermia  in  restrained  rats  but  hyperthermia 

• in  free-moving  rats.  Furthermore,  the  hyperthermic  response  in  the 

free-moving  rats  Is  relatively  difficult  to  suppress  with  Naloxone  and 

? shows  no  development  of  tolerance  with  repeated  MS  injections,  while 

’ the  hypothermic  response  of  the  restrained  rats  is  more  easily  sup- 

pressed with  Naloxone  and  on  repeated  injections  becomes  a hyperthermic 
j response. 

j In  the  second  study,  the  effect  of  restraint  on  these  body  tempera- 

• ture  changes  was  examined  after  microinjection  of  MS  directly  into  the 

hypothalamic  areas  Implicated  in  temperature  control.  In  free-moving 

* rats,  a wide  range  of  directly-injected  MS  doses  caused  subsequent  hyper- 

* thermia,  but  In  restrained  rats  the  same  doses  produced  attentuated 

i hyperthermia  or  hypothermia.  In  collaboration  with  the  Department  of 

» Experimental  Psychology,  an  attempt  was  made  to  determine  whether  the 


hyperthermic  responses  could  be  secondary  to  generally  increased  motor 
activity.  Using  standard  behavioral  techniques  for  monitoring  activity, 
experiments  showed  that  the  initial  temperature  rise  following  ip  in- 
jections of  MS  is  accompanied  by  a period  of  increased  activity,  but 
that  a second  episode  of  hyperthermia  which  starts  about  3 hours  post- 
injection is  not.  When  MS  is  injected  directly  into  the  hypothalamus, 
an  immediate  body  temperature  rise  is  seen  in  company  with  an  immediate 
increase  in  body  activity. 

These  studies  indicate  the  importance  of  assessing  general  body  activity 
or  inactivity,  including  restraint,  when  examining  the  effects  of  drugs 
of  abuse  on  behavior  and  body  physiology. 

Effects  of  Clonidine  on  Systemic  Blood  Pressure 

Earlier  studies  in  this  Department  have  examined  the  effects  of 
clonidine  — a potent  agonist  of  central  adrenergic  receptors  — on 
several  behavioral  measures  (food  and  water  intake,  lever-pressing  to 
obtain  rewarding  intra-cranial  stimulation,  locomotor  activity)  and  on 
body  temperature.  Those  studies  indicated  that  low  doses  of  the  drug 
produce  increased  food  and  water  intake  and  lever  pressing,  plus  a slight 
rise  in  body  temperature;  but  that  higher  doses  of  the  drug  cause  a fall 
In  body  temperature  and  inhibition  of  the  behavioral  variables  noted. 

In  an  effort  to  determine  whether  the  reduced  behavior  following  high 
doses  is  a specific  inhibition  of  some  adrenergic  system,  or  a general 
depression  of  the  brain  and  body,  the  blood  pressure  of  unanesthetized 
rats  was  measured  following  administration  of  several  different  doses  of 
the  drug.  The  results  corroborate  the  earlier  findings  concerning  body 
temperature:  high  doses  of  clonidine  produce  dramatic  decreases  in  sys- 
temic blood  pressure.  These  experiments  indicate  that  the  sharp  fall  in 
body  temperature  and  blood  pressure  underlie  the  reduction  of  behavior 
following  high  doses  of  the  drug. 


Research  in  this  work  unit  was  terminated  30  June  1976. 


1564 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  109  Neurophysiological  localization  of  sites  of  action  of 
drugs  of  abuse 


Literature  Cited. 

Publications: 

1.  Koob,  G.F.,  Spector,  N.H.,  and  Meyerhoff,  J.L.:  Effects  of 

heroin  on  lever  pressing  for  intracranial  self-stimulation,  food  and 
water  in  the  rat.  Psychopharmacologia  42:  231-234,  1975. 

14 

2.  Martin,  G.E.  and  Myers,  R.D.:  Evoked  release  of  [ C]  nore- 

pinephrine from  the  rat  hypothalamus  during  feeding.  Am.  J.  Physiol. 
229:  1547-1555,  1975. 

3.  Martin,  G.E.,  Myers,  R.D.,  and  Newberg,  D.C.  : Catecholamine 

release  by  intracerebral  perfusion  of  6-hydroxydopamine  and  deslpra- 
mine.  European  J.  Pharmacol.  36.:  299-311,  1976. 

4.  Martin,  G.E.  and  Myers,  R.D.:  Dopamine  efflux  from  the  brain 

stem  of  the  rat  during  feeding,  drinking,  and  lever-pressing  for  food. 
Pharmacol.  Brochem.  Behav.  ki  551-560,  1976. 

5.  Martin,  G.E.,  Pryzbylik,  A.T. , and  Spector,  N.H.:  Morphine: 

rise  or  fall  in  core  temperature  as  a function  of  restraint.  Fed. 

Proc.  35:  530,  1976. 

6.  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  Martin,  G.E.,  and  Koob,  G.F.:  Effects  of 

Clonidine  on  self-stimulation,  eating,  drinking  and  body  temperature 
in  the  rat.  Proc.  Soc.  Neuroscience  _1:  479,  1975. 

7.  Waller,  M.B.,  Myers,  R.D.,  and  Martin,  G.E.:  Thermoregulatory 

deficits  in  the  monkey  produced  by  5,  6-dehydroxytryptomine  injected 
into  the  hypothalamus.  Neuropharmacology  JL5:  61-68,  1975. 


1565 


■In 

(U)  Binr hythm  Studies  in  Drug  Abuse 


1 DAT*  RMv  SUM"NY 

75  07  01 

4 KIND  Of  iUMMARf 

» SUMMARY  KIT1 

u 

4 IONA  SECURITY* 

1) 

un,  UU  LU  U, 

» MIGR  A OING* 

NA 

— 

14  04 

N 

i U U a 

S**N  IMITR'N  Mb.  SPECIFIC  DATA  • LEVEL  Of  SUM 

■COM  TRACT  OR  ACCtSS 

□«  *"**“•’ 

10  NO  r OUE  S • 

PROGRAM  E LI MEN  T 

PHOif.CT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

•OAK  UNIT  NUMBER 

1L  MIMINI 

T275AA 

3A762758AR33 

00 

no 

b CON' HIRu  TING 

1 lONTH.BJY.NG 

[Pll  Redacted] 


11  START  riATI 

73  07 

14  flTIMA  T«  D COMfL  t TlON  OATT 

76  06 

IS  fUNCHMG  AGENCY 

DA  1 

IS  PE  NFORNANC  E METHOO 

C.  In-House 

r, -TRACT  GRANT  J^A 

* RESOURCES  (STIMA  Tf 

A PROFESSIONAL  NAN  TRS 

b.  FUNDS  (l«  AtutwRj 

A OATIS/I  I f ac  TIV« 

K NuMNI  N * 

CMRIRATION 

FISCAL 

75 

4 

240 

• . I»P# 

♦.  ■ INO  Of  AMAHO 

4 AMOUNT 

(.  CUM.  AMT  . 

TEAR 

76 

4 

279 

i«  HI  SPOnSIRL  f DOO  ORGANIZATION 

I . 

M PERFORMING  ORGARItATKM 

1 

1 

"‘"'‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 

HI  SI-,  HSINl  | INO!  VI  Ou  A L 

"“Walter  Reed  -my  Institute  of  Research 
^.pjyision  of  Neuropsychiatry 
Washington,  DC  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  TPiMWaA  MM  l»l/  S 4UfM<  |mUI vMA^ 

■**«"  Hegge,  F.  W.  Ph.D. 

RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I AMKY  ACfll 


MWRf  comtwgl  i rmm>L 


ECHNOLOGIC  ML 


Joy,  COL  R.  J.  T. 
202-576-3551 


I MMljNl 

I I PHI  N A i 111 


202-427-5521 


SOCIAL  KCURIlY  ACCOUNT  NUMRt  N 
AUOCIAK  INVESTIGATORS 

Ream,  LTC  N.  W. 

^ — Iaiunauslu  LTC  A. 


(U)  Drug  Abuse;  4Q  Biorhythms;  (U)  Heroin;  (U)  Abstinence  Syndrome 

\ TECHNICAL  OMAfCTiVt  * 14  ARRMOACH,  !•  RROGRIU  (RkhJMI  InAtllMl  N « 


PH»*4|  Nil  •'  H*A  HdMHp  ClNll*l«H«  C«N  ) 


23.  (U)  Achievement  of  an  understanding  of  changes  in  the  temporal  organization  of 
biological  functions  attendent  upon  sustained  use  of  drugs  of  abuse  and  upon  cessa- 
tion of  drug  use  in  military  personnel.  Information  developed  serves  to  explicate 
mechanisms  of  drug  action,  biomedical  consequences  of  sustained  abuse,  and  post- 
detoxification readdiction  liability.  Therapeutic  implications  are  explored. 

24.  (U)  Sophisticated  electronic  monitoring  and  bioproduct  sampling  techniques  are 
employed  to  qenerate  long,  nearly  continuous  electrophysiological , behavioral,  and 
biochemical  measures  of  biologic  functioning  during  periods  of  sustained  drug  use 
and  abstinence.  Time  series  analysis  techniques  are  applied  to  these  data  to 
achieve  a full  characterization  of  similarities  and  differences  between  normal  and 
drug  abusing  individuals. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  This  work  unit  has  been  terminated  as  a result  of  the  re- 

organization of  the  Division  of  Neuropsychiatry.  The  analysis  of  electrophysioloqi- 
cal,  biochemical,  and  behavioral  data  derived  from  heroin  users  undergoing  complete 
abstinence  continued.  The  abstinence  ...etric  previously  developed  was  Improved  and 
techniques  for  quantifying  abnormalities  in  biorhythmic  functions  related  to  sleep, 
activity,  and  heart  rate  were  further  developed  and  applied.  For  technical  report, 
see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 JUL  75  - 

30  JUN  76. 


DD,"A“J498 


■ as  at 


>n«lor*i  a£gtoval 


IONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I4QIA 
A < «•  I F OR  ARM*  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1566 


nov  et 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  110  Biorhythm  studies  in  drug  abuse 
Investigators. 

Principal:  Frederick  W.  Hegge,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  LTC  Norman  W.  Ream,  MC ; LTC  Albert  J.  Tahmoush, 

MC:  CPT  John  G.  Varni,  MSC;  Paul  Kasper,  B.S.; 
Jeanne  C.  Stringfellow,  B.A. 


Description 


This  work  unit  is  directed  at  the  understanding  of  changes  in  the 
temporal  organization  of  biological  functions  attendant  upon  sustained 
use  of  drugs  of  abuse.  To  date,  principal  emphasis  has  been  focused 
on  the  sequelae  of  heroin  abstinence.  The  information  developed  serves 
to  explicate  mechanisms  of  drug  action,  to  delineate  the  functional 
consequences  of  sustained  abuse,  and  to  assist  in  the  assessment  of 
post-detoxification  readdiction  liability.  The  technology  employed 
involves  a variety  of  techniques  for  continuously  monitoring  electro- 
physiological  variables  and  for  sampling  behaviors,  clinical  parameters, 
and  biological  fluids.  Data  are  analyzed  using  a variety  of  time 
series  statistical  procedures. 

Progress 

As  a result  of  the  non-appropriation  of  funds  in  support  of  drug 
abuse  research,  this  research  was  terminated  at  the  end  of  the  first 
quarter  of  the  fiscal  year.  Personnel  associated  with  this  research 
were  reassigned  to  the  Follow-up  Study  of  Soldiers  Given  LSD  and  to 
studies  of  military  stress. 

In  order  to  save  portions  of  the  technology  developed  under  this 
work  unit,  an  interagency  agreement  was  reached  with  the  National 
Institute  of  Drug  Abuse.  Work  on  the  development  and  application  of 
a scaling  metric  for  opiate  abstinence  has  been  transferred  to  this 
Agency.  Other  efforts,  dealing  with  the  assessment  of  chronobiolo- 
glcal  factors  In  human  psychophysiology  has  been  applied  to  the 
development  of  a realistic  simulation  of  military  stress  using  an 
artillery  fire  direction  center  model. 


1 


: 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 
*.  luwSTZ^cTw®1 

u 


i.  oate  RRiv  suiwny 

75  07  01 


« KIND  OR  SUMMARY 

. V.f:;|  . 


SO  NO  COOII:'  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 


& ANHI A A Y 


fc.  CONTMItUTINO 


62758A 


C,  CONTRUUTUia  CARDS  11 4F  T 

1 Tl  CmAw;*' 


U 


PROJECT  NUNKR 


3A762758A833 


I AMNCT  ACCE1 

DA  OB  6509 


REORAOINO* 

NA 


76  06  30 


t MirM  MiTm 

NL 


TASK  AREA  NUMBER 


00 


MRM IT  CONTROL  IHMOL 

DD-DRhE(AR)tJ  6 


•A  SPECIFIC  OATA  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACC  I At 

D(t«»  D wo 


>.  LIVIL  OR  BUM 

A mi  UMT 


■OAK  UNIT  NUHMR 


111 


(U)  Neuroendocrinology  and  N'curochemistrv  of  Urues  of  Abuse 

It  ICICMTIRIC  AND  TtCMMOLOOICAL  ARIAS* 


»»  ICICMTIRIC  AMO  TtCMMOLOOICAL  AREAS 

003500  Clinical  Medicine 


ITAR11  bATt 

73  07 


IT  COM TflACT  4 RAM T 
A DATII/f  RRtCTIVK;  NA 

K NUMBER  * 

C TV  At: 


012900  Physiology  016200  Stress  Physiology 

14  ESTIMATED  CORRAL  I TIOM  DATE  fl|  RUMOIMO  AOCMCV  |M  # 

76  06 


A AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


It  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OROAMlXATlON 


«•  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A A NOR  SEASONAL  MAM  YRS 

fc  RUM  OS  (7^  MmmAJ 

RISCAL 

YEAR 

75 

1.5 

105 

76 

4 

380 

».  PKRRORMMO  ORSANItATKM 


"‘Walter  Reed  Amy  Institute  of  Research 
Washington.  DC  20012 


NCtAOMIIOLK  IMOIVIOUAL 

Joy,  COL.  RJT 

TELEPHONE 


(20?)  576.3551 


IK  RUMOIMO  AOIMC V 

DA 


SO  PERFORMANCE  MftNOO 

C.  In-House 


““•‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
"•“‘•Washington,  DC  20012 

AMMCiAAL  IMVEITIOATP  .♦  fP^Nl»A  MART  II  V I.  AuArK  i»m 


Meyerhoff,  JL,  MD 
(202)  576-3559 


TELEPHONE 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  MUM  OEM 


NAME:  Lenox  MAJ  RH 
Kant  GJ 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

(U)  Drug  Abuse;  (U)  Psychophysiology;  (U)  Treatment/ 
Rehabilitation;  (H)  Npurnenrtnrrinnlngy ; (II)  Stress 

23.  (U)  Principal  objective  is  to  establish  the  neurochemical  and  endocrinological 
consequences  of  the  abuse  of  psychoactive  compounds,  including  such  phenomena  as 
tolerance  and  withdrawal.  The  over-all  objective  is  to  better  specify  the  impact  of 
drug  abuse  on  the  integrated  functions  of  the  organism  Including  military  performance. 

24.  (U)  Methods  include  measurements  of  urinary  and  plasma  hormone  levels  in  humans 
and  non-human  primates.  Animal  models  are  utilized  to  substantiate  and  interpret 
data  obtained  from  humans  and  the  techniques  of  experimental  psychology  are  applied 
to  produce  critical  features  of  the  behavior  of  drug  abuse. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Levels  of  cGMP  are  one-fourth  of  control  levels  in  cerebellum 
of  rats  following  chronic  administration  of  sodium  barbital.  Comparable  changes  occur 
in  nine  of  fifteen  brain  regions  studied.  Levels  of  GABA  do  not  change.  Project 
terminated  due  to  termination  of  the  drug  abuse  mission  by  congressional  action. 

For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Re- 
port, 1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


DD.S7J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  l»C»  FORME  I SOB  A , I NOV  EE 
AND  14ES-1  t MAR  «E  (FOR  ARMY  USE  I ARC  OBSOLETE 


1568 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  111  Neuroendocrinology  and  Neuroch.-.mistry  of  drugs  of 
abuse 


Investigators. 

Principal:  James  L.  Meyerhoff,  M.D. 

Associate:  G.  Jean  Kant,  Ph.D.;  John  W.  Holaday,  M.S.; 

MAJ  Robert  H.  Lenox,  MC. 

I.  DRUGS  OF  ABUSE  ON  BRAIN  CHEMISTRY  AND  ON  BEHAVIOR 

Studies  are  in  progress  on  the  mechanism  of  action  of  various 
drugs  of  abuse  on  brain  chemistry  and  on  behavior.  These  include 
the  acute  and  chronic  effects  of  opiates,  stimulants,  alcohol,  and 
barbiturates  on  neurotransmitter  chemicals  in  the  brain.  Research 
methods  employed  include  neurochemistry,  neuroanatomy,  pharmacology, 
neuroendocrinology  and  physiological  psychology.  Specific  approaches 
include : 

1.  Effects  of  drugs  of  abuse  on  intracranial  self-stimulation: 

neuroanatomical  and  neurochemical  substrate. 

2.  Release  of  endogenous  catecholamine  from  brain. 

3.  Effects  of  drugs  of  abuse  on  cyclic  nucleotides,  amino  acids 

and  neurotransmitters  as  measured  in  brain  regions  follow- 
ing microwave  fixation. 

a.  chronic  drug  administration. 

b.  abrupt  withdrawal  following  chronic  administration. 

Effects  of  amphetamine  on  intracranial  self -stimulation:  neuro- 

anatomical and  neurochemical  substrates. 

Previously  reported  work  from  this  laboratory  (Koob,  1974)  has 
employed  the  intracranial  self-stimulation  (ICS)  model  to  assess 
the  neurochemical  and  neuroanatomical  substrates  of  amphetamine 
effects  on  behavior.  Postulated  central  mechanisms  of  action  of 
amphetamine  have  included  facilitation  of  dopaminergic  and  nor- 
adrenergic neurotransraission.  Because  stimulation  of  central  alpha 
noradrenergic  receptors  has  been  termed  critical  in  mediating  ICS 
(Wise,  1973)  and  because  of  reports  of  similar  effects  of  amphetamine 
and  clonidine  on  firing  rates  of  locus  coeruleus  (Graham,  1971; 
Svensson,  1975),  it  was  decided  to  examine  the  effects  on  ICS  of 
clonidine,  a potent  centrally-acting  alpha  noradrenergic  receptor 
stimulator. 

Clonidine  facilitates  ICS  at  one-hundreth  of  the  dose  of  amphet- 
amine typically  used.  Hij.ii  doses  of  clonidine  disrupt  ICS  as  do  high 
doses  of  amphetamine.  There  are  important  differences: 


1569 


ICS-facilitating  doses  of  amphetamine  (1-5  mg/kg)  cause  in- 
creased locomotor  activity  and  anorexia;  ICS-facilitating  doses  of 
clonidine  (12.5-50  pg/kg)  stimulate  feeding,  drinking,  and  cause 
elevations  in  body  temperature  but  do  not  significantly  affect 
locomotor  activity. 

Doses  of  clonidine  greater  than  100  Pg/kg  produce  prostration 
and  markedly  depress  locomotor  activity,  body  temperature,  blood 
pressure,  feeding,  drinking  and  ICS. 

Release  of  endogenous  catecholamine  from  brain:  the  effect  of 

amphetamine. 

Previously  this  laboratory  has  reported  enhanced  release  of 
endogenous  norepinephrine  and  dopamine  with  amphetamine.  Recent 
experiments  have  determined  that  the  release  of  endogenous  dopamine 
from  corpus  striatum  is  not  calcium-dependent.  The  measurement  of 
release  of  endogenous  (rather  than  of  exogenous,  radioactively- 
labelled  transmitter)  represents  a significant  technical  advance 
which  has  become  feasible  through  modification  of  an  extremely 
sensitive  enzymatic-isotopic  assay  (Coyle,  1973). 

Effects  of  drugs  of  abuse  on  cyclic  nucleotides,  amino  acids  and  neuro- 
transmitters as  measured  in  brain  regions  following  microwave  fixation. 

A number  of  projects  have  been  initiated  to  test  the  effects  of 
drugs  of  abuse  on  neurotransmitters  and  cyclic  nucleotides  in  speci- 
fic brain  regions.  A method  has  been  established  which  permits  assay 
of  gamma-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA) , glutamic  acid  (GLU) , cyclic  adeno- 
sine 3*5*,  monophosphate  (cAMP) , and  cyclic  guanosine  3*5'  monophos- 
phate (cGMP)  in  the  same  sample  of  brain  tissue  after  microwave 
inactivation  of  enzymes,  thereby  increasing  the  amount  of  information 
obtainable  from  a single  experiment.  The  assays  employed  are  the 
radioimmunoassay  of  Steiner  (1969,  1972)  for  cyclic  nucleotides  and 
the  enzymaf-.ic  method  of  Graham  and  Aprison  (1966)  for  GABA  and  GLU. 

It  is  thought  that  cGMP  is  responsive  to  cholinergic  transmission 
(Ferendelli. , 1972)  and  under  various  conditions,  brain  tissue  cAMP 
is  stimulated  by  norepinephrine,  dopamine,  serotonin  and  histamine 
(Huang,  1972;  Brown,  1971;  Kebabian,  1972).  Emphasis  in  the  field 
has  shifted  to  cAMP/cGMP  ratios,  and  the  capacity  to  study  both  is 
essential.  GABA  and  GLU  are  considered  to  be,  respectively,  inhi- 
bitory and  excitatory  transmitters  (Krnjevic,  1966).  The  tentative 
implication  (Schumann,  1962)  of  GABA  deficiency  in  convulsions 
suggests  that  it  is  an  important  variable  to  monitor  in  studies 
involving  administration  of  or  withdrawal  from  ethanol  or  barbiturates 
(Patel,  1973). 


1570 


In  conjunction  with  the  foregoing,  previous  studies  have  demon- 
strated that  the  technique  of  using  high- intensity  microwave  irradia- 
tion for  enzyme  inactivation  as  indispensable  for  determining  levels 
of  cAMP,  cGMP  and  GABA  in  brain  regions  (Lenox,  Meyerhof f and  Wray, 
1974);  (Balcom,  Lenox  and  Meyerhof f,  1975).  The  elimination  of 
artifact  has  permitted  the  establishment  of  new  levels  of  these 
substances  in  the  regions  studied  previously.  The  previously  re- 
ported preliminary  study  of  effects  of  chronic  barbiturate  adminis- 
tration was  replicated  with  the  addition  of  a tolerant-dependent 
group  withdrawn  from  drug.  Measurements  were  made  of  a time 
independently  determined  to  correspond  to  maximum  sensitivity  to 
audiogenic  seizure  in  barbiturate-withdrawn  subjects.  In  barbiturate- 
dependent  subjects,  a marked  depression  of  cGMP  values  in  9 brain 
regions  was  confirmed,  the  effects  being  most  striking  in  brainstem, 
cerebellum  and  midbrain.  Values  were  unchanged  in  four  brain  regions. 
During  withdrawal,  cGMP  levels  in  all  brain  regions  were  equal  to  or 
higher  than  control  values.  These  data  suggest  a possible  relation- 
ship between  the  state  of  excitability  in  the  CNS  and  cGMP  levels 
in  specific  brain  regions. 

It  is  known  that  amphetamine  has  a "paradoxical"  effect  in 
certain  conditions  associated  with  hyperactivity.  We  decided  to 
compare  the  neurochemical  responses  to  amphetamine  in  hyperactive 
vs  normal  subjects.  Data  from  a preliminary  study  show  a high 
degree  of  variability  between  subjects  that  may  be  due  to  stress 
interactions. 


Several  laboratories  have  attempted  to  use  in-vivo  incorporation 
of  radioactive  precursors  into  amino-acid  pools  as  a means  of  study- 
ing mechanism  of  action  of  drugs  of  abuse.  A number  of  amino  acids 
are  rapidly  metabolized,  however,  and  are  closely  linked  metabolically 
with  pyruvate  or  Krebs  cycle  intermediates.  Studies  using  liquid  ni- 
trogen immersion  have  reported  post-mortem  changes  occurring  in  amino 
acid  levels  in  rat  brain.  We  decided  to  examine  the  effect  of  micro- 
wave  fixation  on  levels  of  a range  of  amino  acids  in  mouse  brain. 

Swiss  Webster  Walter  Reed  strain  mice  weighing  approximately  25  grams 
each  were  sacrificed  by  decapitation  into  liquid  nitrogen,  by  decapi- 
tation at  room  temperature  or  by  exposure  to  microwave  irradiation  at 
a frequency  of  2450  MHZ,  at  2.5  KW  for  1 second.  Samples  were  soni- 
cated in  10%  trichloroacetic  acid  and  analyzed  for  amino  acids  by 
auto  analyzer  in  collaboration  with  the  Division  of  Biochemistry,  WRAIR. 
The  following  amino  acids  were  measured:  alanine,  taurine,  aspartic 

acid,  threonine,  serine,  GABA,  glutamine,  lysine,  histidine,  arginine, 
glutamic  acid,  glycine,  valine,  leucine,  tyrosine  and  phenylalanine. 
There  was  a very  marked  post-mortem  increase  in  levels  of  alanine  in 
brains  of  mice  decapitated  at  room  temperature.  The  significant 
post-mortem  elevation  in  GABA  as  well  as  absence  of  change  in  gluta- 
mate previously  demonstrated  in  rats  was  also  observed  in  this  study. 


\stssab. 


Glycine  levels  were  not  affected  by  method  of  sacrifice.  It  would 
appear  that-  the  microwave  technique  has  applicability  to  the  study 
of  amino  acids  in  brain,  and  may  have  important  implications  for 
studies  of  effects  of  drugs  on  in-vivo  incorporation  of  labelled 
precursors  into  brain  amino  acid  pools. 

Studies  of  neurochemical  mechanisms  of  action  of  drugs  of 
abuse  are  terminated  as  of  30  June  1976,  by  congressional  action. 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 


Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  111  Neuroendocrinology  and  Neurochemistry  of  drugs  of 
abuse 

Literature  Cited. 

References : 


1.  Koob,  G.G. , Winger,  G.D.,  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  and  Annau,  Z.: 

Concurrent  self-stimulation  in  the  medial  forebrain  bundle  ventral 
tegmentum  and  locus  coeruleus:  the  effects  of  d-amphet amine. 

Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Neurosciences,  1974. 

2.  Wise,  C.D.,  Berger,  B.D.  , and  Stein,  L. : Evidence  of 

a-noradrenergic  reward  receptors  and  serotonergic  punishment  recep- 
tors in  the  rat  brain.  Biol.  Psychiatry  6.:  3-21,  1973. 

3.  Graham,  A.W. , and  Aghajanian,  G.K.  : Effects  of  amphetamine 

on  single  cell  activity  in  a catecholamine  nucleus,  the  locus 
coeruleu?.  Nature  (Lond)  234:100-102.  1971. 

4.  Svensson,  T.H. , Bunney,  B.S.,  and  Aghajanian,  G.K. : 
Inhibition  of  both  noradrenergic  and  serotonergic  neurons  in  brain 
by  the  a-adrenergic  agonist  clonidine.  Brain  Research  92:291-306. 
1975. 


5.  Coyle,  J.T.,  and  Henry,  D.:  Catecholamines  in  fetal  and 

newborn  rat  brain.  J.  Neurochem.  2!l:61-68,  1973. 

6.  Steiner,  A.L.,  Kipnis,  D.M.,  Utiger,  R.,  and  Parker,  C.W. : 
Radioimmunoassay  for  the  measurement  of  adenosine  3',5'-cyclic 
phosphate.  Proceedings  of  the  National  Academy  of  Sciences  64 : 

367  (1969). 

7.  Steiner,  A.L.,  Wehmann,  R.E.,  Parker,  C.W. , and  Kipnis, 

D.M. : Radioimmunoassay  for  the  measurement  of  cyclic  nucleotides. 

In  Advances  in  Cyclic  Nucleotide  Research,  Vol.  12,  Edited  by 

P.  Greengard,  G.  Alan  Robison  and  R.  Paoletti.  Raven  Press, 

New  York,  1972. 

8.  Graham,  L.T.,  and  Aprison,  M.H.:  Fluorometric  determination 

of  aspartate  gluatmate  ana  gamma-amino  butyrate  in  nerve  tissue  using 
enzymatic  methods.  Analytical  Biochem.  JJ>:487-497,  1966. 


1573 


9.  Ferrendelli,  D.A. , et  al:  The  effect  of  oxotremorine  and 

atropine  on  cGMP  and  cAMP  in  mouse  cerebral  cortex  and  cerebellum. 
Biochemical  and  Biophysical  Rsch  Communications  41/4) : 1061-1067 , 1970. 

10.  Huang,  M.J.:  Accumulation  of  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate 

in  incubated  slices  of  brain  tissue.  Medicinal  Chem.  1^5:458,  1972. 

11.  Brown,  J.H.:  Stimulation  by  dopamine  of  adenylate  cyclase 

in  retinal  homogenates  and  of  adenosine  3' 5'  cyclic  monophosphate 
formation  in  intact  retina.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  69(3) :539-543. 

March  1971. 

12.  Kebabian,  J.W.,  Petzold,  G.L.,  and  Greengard,  P. : 
Dopamine-sensitive  adenylate  cyclase  in  caudate  nucleus  of  rat  brain 
and  its  similarity  to  the  "dopamine  receptor."  Proc.  of  the  Nat. 

Acad,  of  Sci.  69:2145-2149,  1972. 

13.  Krnjevic,  K.:  An  inhibitory  process  in  the  cerebral  cortex. 

J.  Physiol.  (London),  184:16-48.  1966. 

14.  Schumann,  E.L. : The  synthesis  and  gamma  aminobutyric  acid 

transaminase  inhibition  of  aminoxy  acids  and  related  compounds. 

J.  Med.  Pharm.  Chem.  5:464-477,  1962. 

15.  Patel,  G.J.,  and  Lai,  H. : Reduction  in  brain  gamma  amino- 

butvric  acid  and  in  barbital  narcosis  during  ethanol  withdrawal. 

J.  Pharm.  Exp.  Ther.  186:625-629,  1973. 

16.  Lenox,  R.H. , Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  and  Wray,  H.L. : Regional 

distribution  of  cyclic  nucleotide  in  rat  brain  as  determined  after 
microwave  fixation  technique.  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  for  Neuro- 
sciences Fourth  Annual  Meeting,  1974. 

17.  Balcom,  G.J.,  Lenox,  R.L.,  and  Meyerhoff,  J.L.:  Regional 

gamma-aminobutyric  acid  levels  in  rat  brain  determined  after  micro- 
wave  fixation.  J.  Neurochem.  24^609-613,  1975. 

Publications : 


1.  Koob,  G.F.,  Spector,  N.H.,  and  Meyerhoff,  J.L.:  Effects 

of  heroin  on  lever  pressing  for  intracranial  self-stimulation  of 
food  and  water  in  the  rat.  Psychopharmacologia  42^:231-234,  1975. 

2.  Koob,  G.F.,  Balcom,  G.J. , and  Meyerhoff,  J.L.:  Dopamine 

and  norepinephrine  levels  in  the  nucleus  accumbens,  olfactory 
tubercle  and  corpus  striatum  following  lesions  in  the  ventral 
tegmental  area.  Brain  Research  94_:45-55,  1975. 


1574 


I 


3.  Koob,  G.F.,  Balcom,  G.J.,  and  Meyerhoff,  J.L. : Increases  in 

intracranial  self-stimulation  in  the  posterior  hypothalamus  followir.g 
unilateral  lesions  in  the  locus  coeruleus.  Brain  Research  101:554- 
560,  1976. 

4.  Balcom,  G.J.,  Lenox,  R.H.,  and  Meyerhoff,  J.L. : Regional 

glutamate  levels  in  rat  brain  determined  after  microwave  fixation. 

J.  Neurochem.  2^:423-425,  1976. 

5.  Lenox,  R.H.,  Wray,  H.L.,  Balcom,  G.J.,  Hawkins,  T.D.,  and 

Meyerhoff,  J.L.:  Regional  brain  levels  of  cyclic  nucleotides,  gamma 

aminobutyric  acid  (GABA)  and  glutamate  during  chronic  barbiturate 
ingestion  and  withdrawal.  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  for  Neurosciences 
Fifth  Annual  Meeting,  1975. 

6.  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  Martin,  G.E.,  and  Koob,  G.F.:  Effects  of 

clonidine  on  self-stimulation,  eating,  drinking  and  body  temperature 
in  the  rat.  Proceedings  of  the  Soc.  for  Neurosciences  Fifth  Annual 
Meeting,  1975. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


L DATE  RR(V  SU«*AV 

7 5 07  01 


«.  KINO  OR  SUMMARY 

r*  • ' ;:4  • 


10  NO  COOES:* 


I* NOONAN  CLEMEN  T 


fc.  CONTmauTIMO 


62758A 


U 


S.  ■ONt^JcuWTt^ 

u 


NNOitCT  MUMHN 

3A763758AS33 


«cxw«iiwctkx  CARDS  114F 
(T)  Metabolism  of  Drugs  of  Abuse 


I AMMCV  ACCESSION* 

DA  OB  6515 


r RI«R AMMO* 

NA 


76  06  30 


IN  DMm  tMtTN*N 

NI, 


TASK  ANCA  NUMBER 

m 


«caont  cmtiol  itwbm, 

DD-DRkE(AR)636 


U ERBCIFIC  DATA- 
CON  T A AC TOW  Access 

Dm  D iso 


S.  LEVEL  OR  SUM 
A.  VOtl  UNIT 


WORK  UNIT  NUMHR 


113 


U SCIINTtRIC  AAO  TECMNOLOOICAL  AREAS® 

002300  Biochemistry  003500  Clinical  Medicine 


r Fsmnr 

73  07 


IT  CONTRACT  SCANT 
A OATEE/ERRBCTIVE;  NA 

A NUMSIA  * 

C TV  AM 


TCTiTi57Fnrc557tVT5«  bate  ' 

76  06 


111  NINA  TIOA: 


4 ASSOUAN; 

I.  CUM.  AMT. 


IE  RSSF-OAHSLS  OOO  ORCANllATION  J | ^ 

Walter  Reed  Array  Institute  of  Research 
«oo«n4:*Washlngton,  DC  20012 


IS  NCIOUACtl  ESTREATS 

A NAORSSSlONAL  MAN  VNS 

4 FUNDS  On  AtMlAj 

FISCAL 

75 

3 

125 

YEAR 

76 

3 

95 

'( 

NAMfe  Joy.  COI.  R . -I . T . 

202-576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered 


II  IlMDINt  ASIMCT 

DA  I 


is.  Haroanaaci  NCTnOO 

C.  In-House 


fRRSRMM  OAAAHIIA  ION 

l:* Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  o 


A 


eseahch 


■dmh:*  Washington,  DC  20012 

AMMCIAAI.  IN  Vt.TiaATQR  Ntf  II  (I  1.  A..  Oil.  I—H—MM. 

-uma  Demaree,  I.TC  G.E. 
202-576-2211 

■OCIAL  If  CUIIIT  V ACCOUNT  NIMH. 


Sleeman,  H.K. , Ph.D. 
l.ofberg,  R.T.,  Ph.D. 


DA 


II  A WO AOA  IPA.U.  lACJI  «IU  lAuUII,  CIamI^mHaA  C^.| 

(U)  Drug  Metabolism;  (U)  Drugs  of  Abuse;  (U)  Enzyme  Induction;  (U)  Microsomal  Enzymes 


S TECHNICAL  OSJICYIWE,'  I A ANNNQACN.  IS-  NNOSASSS  fNMNM  MmrIIMmM  Mr  mm* wt.  RNHA  Nil  1 IMS  MR  Nwl  * CImmINiaMmi  C«*»  > 

23.  (U)  The  technical  objective  of  this  work  unit  Is  to  determine  sites,  modes  and 
mechanisms  of  biotransformation  of  the  principal  drugs  of  abuse  In  man  and  animal  and 
to  develop  a suitable  animal  model  to  study  the  Influence  of  other  drugs  on  the  bio- 
transformation of  drugs  of  abuse  in  order  to  evaluate  the  Impact  of  these  interactions 
on  drug  abuse  detection  and  on  toxicity  of  drugs  of  military  importance. 

24.  (It)  Analytical  and  chromatographic  methods  will  be  used  to  study  quantitatively 
and  qualitatively  the  effects  of  environmental  changes  on  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of 
abuse  In  Intact  animals  and  isolated  organ  preparations.  Human  body  fluids  will  be 
studied  for  presence  of  drug  metabolites  and  other  substances  which  Interfere  with  drug 
abuse  detection  methods. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Rats  receiving  high  dose3  of  pyrldoxlne  and  pyridoxal  showed 
less  severe  withdrawal  from  morphine  dependence  than  aminals  on  normal  diets.  A con- 
densation product  of  pyridoxal  and  dopamine  given  just  before  naloxone  challenge  in 
dependent  rats  also  decreased  the  severity  of  withdrawal.  The  significance  of  these 
findings  should  be  investigated  further.  The  levels  of  benzoyl  ecognine  were  measured 
in  plasma  of  patients  receiving  cocaine  for  surgical  anesthesia.  Peak  levels  were 
reached  in  about  one  hour  and  decayed  with  a halflife  in  plasma  of  about  5 hours.  This 
indicates  that  plasma  levels  of  this  metabolite  are  not  correlated  with  anesthetic 
action  of  cocaine.  For  technical  report,  see  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


PAIVIOUl  EDITIONS  ON  THIS  ROMM  ARC  OBSOLETE  OD  FORMS  I4SSA.  t NOV  SS 
And  14SS-1  I MAR  SS  IFOR  ARMY  USE)  ARC  OBSOLETE 

1576 


iimip.iiiijwl 


niiinymii'i 


' .... 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOCHEMICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  113  Metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 
Investigators. 

Principal:  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC 

Associate:  Jeffrey  A.  Lyon,  Ph.D;  SP5  Ronald  W.  Hill;  Earl 

C.  Richardson,  M.A.;  Donald  E.  Mahan,  Ph.D;Mary 
A.  Sodd,  M.S.;  B.P.  Doctor,  Ph.D. 

During  this  period  the  objective  of  the  work  was  to  provide  a 
rapid,  sensitive,  specific,  precise  and  inexpensive  assay  for  the 
detection  of  opiates  and  their  metabolites  in  human  urine  and  serum. 

To  this  end  a method  was  established  based  upon  the  following 
hypothesis: 

Nitrocellulose  filters,  bearing  a net  negative  charge,  will  bind 
a limited  amount  of  protein  quantitatively.  Using  this  property,  a 
radioimmunoassay  was  developed  which  allowed  a rapid  separation  of 
free  from  bound  ligand,  consequently  permitting  the  detection  of 
morphine  at  concentration  less  than  2 pmoles/ml  of  serum  (0.7  ng/ml) 
and  less  than  1 pmole/ml  of  urine.  The  methodology  can  also  be  used 
to  detect  morphine-specific  antibody  in  either  crude  serum  or 
fractionated  IgG  at  concentration  less  than  0.01  pmoles  morphine 
antibody  per  mg  of  protein  (0.5  pmoles/ml  serum).  It  is  possible  to 
apply  1.5  mg  of  serum  protein  to  the  filter  with  no  loss  of  antibody- 
hapten  complex  binding  by  the  filter.  Increasing  the  concentration  of 
total  protein  above  this  threshold  invalidates  this  assay.  It  is 
possible  to  process  100  samples  in  a three  hour  period.  Due  to  the 
minimal  requirement  of  reagent  (1  to  20  pi  crude  serum)  the  assay  is 
useful  in  following  the  day  to  day  antibody  titer  of  an  individual 
animal;  and  finally,  the  assay  is  sensitive  enough  to  be  useful  in 
detecting  antibody  produced  in  lymphocyte  culture  as  well  as  that 
translated  from  mRNA  to  cell-free  protein  synthesizing  systems.  The 
summary  of  accomplishments  are  as  follows: 

1.  6-succinyl  morphine  - BSA  conjugate  was  synthesized  and  the  free 
derivative  was  separated  from  the  conjugate  by  gel  filtration  using 
Sephadex  G-100  column. 

The  rabbits  were  immunized  with  750  pg  of  conjugate  in  Freund's 
complete  adjuvant  (multiple  sites).  The  animals  were  tested  for  12 
weeks  and  were  then  boosted  with  10  pg  of  conjugate  in  Freund's  in- 
complete adjuvant.  The  immune  sera  thus  obtained  were  of  high  titer. 
The  serum  was  subjected  to  0-521  (NH^) £ SC^  to  precipitate 


1577 


the  immunoglobulins.  The  precipitates  were  dissolved  and  subjected  to 
Sephadex  G-200  column  gel  filtration.  IgG  essentially  free  of  other 
immunoglobulins  was  thus  obtained.  Using  either  the  immune  sera  or 
the  purified  IgG  fraction  and  the  following  procedure  for  the  hapten- 
antibody  interaction  characterization  was  carried  out. 

Thirty  pi  of  ^H-Morphine  (500  nCi/ml;  30  Ci/mole),  was  mixed  with 
20  pi  of  urine  or  serum  sample.  To  this,  50  pi  antibody  diluted  ir. 

40  mMolar  PO^,  300  mMolar  KC1  at  pH  6.5.  (The  antibody  should  be 
diluted  to  such  an  extent  that  50  pi  of  diluted  antibody  solution 
binds  approximately  6000  cpm  or  (36%  of  ^H-Morphine) . The  reaction 
mixture  was  incubated  for  30  minutes  at  4°C  in  the  dark.  The 
samples  were  diluted  with  3 ml  of  cold  20  mMolar  P0*  pH  6.5  and 
300  jiM  KC1  and  filtered  through  a 0.22  p millipore  filter.  The 
sample  container  was  washed  twice  with  the  same  amount  of  buffer  and 
applied  to  the  filter.  The  filter  was  dissolved  in  instabray  and 
counted.  A standard  curve  was  generated  with  each  set  of  samples 
analyzed. 

2.  Titration  of  the  morphine  antibody  with  ^H-Morphine. 

Using  the  following  equations,  the  amount  of  IgG  produced  by  im- 
munizing the  animals  was  calculated. 

a.  pmoles  ^H-Morphine  = 150  pmoles  IgG 

(pi  serum)  (2  binding  sites)  ml  serum 


b.  (150  pinoles  IgG/ml)  (150,000  mg  ) = mg  

antibody  ml',  in'  serum 

The  most  significant  attribute  of  this  assay  procedure  is  that  the 
non-specific  binding  of  ^H-Morphine  accounts  for  less  than  10%  of  the 
total  binding. 

3.  Effect  of  concentration  of  reagents  on  extent  of  complex  formation. 

The  morphine  antibody  complex  formation,  as  expected  is  dependent 
on  the  concentration  of  reagents.  Optimal  binding  in  50  pi  reaction 
mixtures  and  minimal  binding  in  200  pi  was  found.  For  practical 
purposes,  100  pi  reaction  mixture  was  found  to  be  acceptable  for  this 
assay. 

4.  Saturation  of  0.22  p and  0.45  p millipore  filters  with  serum 
proteins . 

The  serum  protein  retention  capacity  of  0.22  p millipore  filter  is 
approximately  1.5  mg  whereas  that  of  0.45  p filter  is  about  60%  of 


1578 


the  former.  The  IgG  retention  capacity  of  0.22  u filter  is 
approximately  0.8  mg,  the  amount  is  twice  as  much  as  the  IgG  present 
in  1.5  ml  serum.  Thus  the  proteins  other  than  IgG  in  serum  appear 
to  compete  with  IgG  for  binding  to  filters.  The  morphine- antibody 
complex  does  not  appear  to  change  upon  application  to  the  filter, 
because  the  filtered  complex  (from  a saturated  filter)  binds  upon 
refiltration  of  another  filter.  The  results  indicate  that  25  yl  of 
immune  serum  or  0.8  mg  IgG  can  be  used  in  the  reaction  mixture  for 
quantitative  results.  More  than  these  amounts  of  proteins  invali- 
dates the  results  by  this  method. 

5.  Effect  of  pH,  ionic  strength,  temperature  and  time  dependence 
on  morphine -antibody  complex  formation. 

Altering  pH  of  the  reaction  mixture  between  6 and  7.5  indicated  that, 
within  cnis  range,  changes  only  the  background  binding  of  morphine 
and  not  the  complex  formation.  For  this  reason  pH  6.5  was  selected 
as  an  ideal  one  for  this  assay  procedure. 

The  reaction  is  realtively  independent  of  ionic  strength  as  judged 
by  binding  of  complex  to  filters  at  concentrations  of  KC1  up  to  5.00  mM. 
However,  it  is  dependent  on  temperature  and  time  of  incubation.  At 
0-4°C  the  reaction  is  complete  in  20  minutes  whereas  at  25°C, 

5 minutes  incubation  is  sufficient  to  complete  the  reaction.  Also 
the  reaction  mixture  at  0-4°C  after  completion  can  be  diluted  up  to 
40  fold  without  any  dissociation  of  complex  for  up  to  30  minutes. 

Systematic  investigation  of  all  variable  parameters  related  to  hapten- 
antibody  interaction  was  essential  for  not  only  developing  a highly 
sensitive,  reliable  and  rapid  method  of  measurement  of  hapten  con- 
centration in  biological  and  clinical  specimen  but  also  for  measure- 
ment cf  trace  amounts  of  antibody  synthesized  by  lymphocytes  in 
response  to  antigen.  The  assay  procedure  is  being  employed  for 
serum  of  the  patients  undergoing  ipen  heart  and  other  surgery.  These 
patients  are  given  morphine  in  addition  to  other  anesthetics  such  as 
nitrous  oxide  or  halothane.  The  application  of  this  assay  procedure 
for  the  measurement  of  De  Novo  synthesized  immunoglobulins  by  lympho- 
cytes is  described  elsewEere  in  this  report  (see  Work  Unit  075). 


1579 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  113  Metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 
Literature  Cited. 

Publications: 

1.  Lyon,  J.A. , Hill,  R.W. , Mahan,  D.E.,  Richardson,  E.C.,  Sodd, 
M.A.,  and  Doctor,  B.P.:  A novel  RIA  for  the  detection  of  hapten 

antibody  complexes  using  nitrocellulose  filters.  Fed.  Proc.  35: 
1651,  1976.  ~ 


1580 


.. ,.J  _ .jmmwmH ■■  '!'H" m ■ ;M»*a  j:  ■■•■■"u  J,un  iMi.u.mi  1 JU-U—n  Him  l!.n  ' 'U 


"!'  L M 


<•  Mtfomiakl  OOO  OMMIUTI9II 


It  »YART  BATE 

it  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  DATE- 

IS  FUNCMNO  AGENCY 

is  fenformance  mbtnoo 

73  07 

76  06 

DA 

1 

C.  In-House 

l»  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A OATfci/V  WWEC*IVE.  NA 

l«  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

k FUNDS  fjm  AMNAj 

Fiscal 

75 

2 

75 

c.  TYRE 

4 AMOUNT' 

YEAR 

A AINO  OF  ABANO 

(.CUM.  AMT. 

76 

6 1 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

i^unnaryT^^^^ 


t DAf|  R»!v  SUM** 

7 5 07  01 


« MIND  OF  iUMMAN* 

. ’ I'  t . 


10  MO  COOfS  • PROGRAM  tUMENT 


1.  CONY  RIIUTIMQ 


62758A 


U 


PROJECT  NUMBER 


3A762758A833 


CARDS  11 4F 

I TITLE  fF»A««R»  mt*>  Nellis' 

(U)  Pharmacokinetics  of  Drugs  of  Abuse 

l kCIENTIFlC  MM  0 TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 

002300  Biochemistry 


^k«BNC^CCEASIO«T 

DA  OB  6516 


rsnnrrssjr 

76  06  30 


TASK  AREA  NUMBER 


00 


MPORT  COM  TWO L tTHWOL 

DD-DRhE(AR)6J6 


S NORM  SECURITY* 

» REGRAWNO* 

14  M 

SrN  INSTR'N 

•k  SFECIFIC  DATA  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

» LEVEL  OF  SUM 

U 

NA 

Nl. 

Qtei  D no 

A.  BOBS  OMIT 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


1 1 A 


M FCRFORMINa  ORGANISATION 


name  * Walter  Reed  An;.y  Institute  of  Research 
AoDRiti * Washington,  DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

name,  Joy,  COL  R.J.T. 
TtLlPHOMI  202-576-3551 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


Dlv  Biochemistry 
• Washington,  DC  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VEST  IS  A TON  fPMMMA  MAR  H U . 

rame:*  Demaree,  LTC  C.E. 


TELEPHONE  202-576-2211 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  HUMBER 


ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOA TORS 

•mi:  Lofberg,  R.T.,  Ph.D. 
■«.!:  Demaree,  LTC  O.K. 


DA 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

ITOIB  ,.C  ...  VSW  TOSIKSIS  c.i»  (u)  Drug  Excretion;  (II)  Pharmacodynamics: 

(U)  Pharmacokinetics;  (U)  Drugs  of  Abuse;  (U)  Drug  Absorption;  (U)  Drug  Distribution 


I TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  14  APPROACH,  IS  PROORESS  fPu*N*aA  HMlISwl  IRmn»»«#V  *f  a*Nf.  FM«*P  MiINmM  MO  ft*  tty  CIammI  A*a«f«»  CaM*  J 

23.  (U)  The  technical  objective  of  this  work  unit  is  to  determine  the  rates  and  modes 
of  absorption,  distribution,  biotransformation,  binding  and  excretion  of  principal  drugs 
of  abuse  in  animals  to  predict  these  parameters  in  military  personnel. 

24.  (U)  Biochemical  analytical  and  pharmacological  techniques  are  employed  to  assess 
the  Influences  of  diet,  environment  and  chemicals  on  the  pharmacokinetics  of  drugs  of 
abuse.  Correlations  of  binding  and  distribution  with  pharmacodynamic  effects  will  be 
used  to  study  mechan’sms  of  dependence  and  tolerance. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  Treatment  of  morphine  dependent  rats  with  large  excess  of  pyri- 
doxine  or  pyridoxal  alone  or  in  combination  reduced  naloxone-induced  withdrawal  symp- 
toms. An  isolated  product  which  resulted  from  the  condensation  reaction  of  pyridoxal 
and  dopamine  also  reduced  naloxone  induced  withdrawal  symptoms  in  morphine  dependent 
rats.  Investigations  were  '.entinu^d  on  the  role  of  the  plasticizer,  diethylhexylphtha- 
late  and  its  metabolites,  in  ptoducie.g  atherosclerosis  in  patients  undergoing  hemo- 
dialysis. For  technical  report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Pro- 
gress Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


'iinllwN*  to  c— life l«n  < 


DD,1#.VJ498 


PREVIOUI  EDITION*  OK  THIt  FORM  ARE  OIIOLITC  OD  FORME  I AREA  I NOV  *• 
AND  14RE  I 1 MAR  *•  | FOR  ARMY  UBCl  *•*  OBSOLETE 

1581 


% NWk AMWR-tFY’<NWM<»i'i>*"|w 'A. wtyiMw -aw .,»w.  »u-ii.pi«w.,-ipw.wj»mj!w.iupi'.»i,nilAI-1I'KIii 


"BWP BPW 


I I 


! 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 

Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  114  Pharmacokinetics  of  drugs  of  abuse 


Investigators. 
Principal: 
Asso.  ‘ate: 


LTC  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC 

Ann  R.  Berman,  B.S;  Clarence  E.  Emery,  B.S;  CPT  James 
A.  Celia,  Ph.D.;  Seymour  Garson,  Ph.D.;  SP4  James  W. 
Nitchkey;  SP4  Steven  E.  Engelsen;  SP5  James  P.  McGrath; 
SP5  El-Soukkary;  Patrick  M.L.  Siu,  Ph.D.;  Nesbitt  D. 
Brown,  M.S.:  SFC  Mary  J.  Dowery;  SP4  Edward  J. 

Michalski;  H.  Kenneth  Sleeman,  Ph.D. 

The  technical  objectives  of  this  work  unit  are  to  develop  and  evaluate 
analytical  methods  for  the  detection,  identification,  and  quantitation 
of  drugs  of  abuse,  pharmaceutical  compounds  and  their  metabolites  in 
biological  fluids  and  tissues  and  to  exploit  these  techniques  for 
application  to  rehabilitation  and  chemotherapy  management;  to  determine 
sites,  modes  and  mechanism  of  biotrans format ion  and  to  determine  the 
rateosand  modes  of  absorption  and  excretion.  Efforts  were  concentrated 
in  the  areas  of: 

1.  Radioimmunoassay  for  cocaine:  Evaluation 

2.  Cocaine  levels  in  biological  fluid  (Joint  with  ENT,  WRAMC) . 

3.  Latex  agglutination  - inhibition  test  for  barbiturates. 

4.  Radioimmunoassay  for  morphine  (Technology). 

5.  Studies  on  morphine  dependency. 

6.  HPLC  method  for  p-aminobenzoic  acid  and  metabolites. 

7.  Hydrolysis  of  N-acetyl-p-aminohippuric  acid. 

1 . Radioimmunoassay  for  cocaine:  Evaluation. 

The  Roche  Diagnostics  radioimmunoassay  (RIA)  kit  for  cocaine  deter- 
mination was  evaluated  for  use  in  the  Tri- Service  drug  screening 
program.  Since  cocaine  is  rapidly  metabolized  in  the  body,  the  test  is 
based  on  the  detection  of  one  of  the  major  metabolites  of  cocaine, 
benzoylecgonine , in  biological  specimens.  The  assay  was  evaluated  with 
respect  to  technical  variation,  specificity,  sensitivity,  and  appli- 
cation. 


1582 


— • y.jr 


Modifications  of  the  methodology  described  in  the  company's  brochure 
were  evaluated  before  sample  analysis.  Changes  in  incubation,  pre- 
cipitation, and  centrifugation  times  showed  no  significant  effects 
and  separate  pipetting  or  premixing  of  test  reagents  produced  no 
effects  on  the  assay.  The  standard  curves  prepared  in  the  laboratory 
from  benzoylecgonine  showed  excellent  agreement  with  those  prepared 
from  kit  reagents. 

The  specificity  of  the  assay  for  the  cocaine  metabolite,  benzoyl- 
ecgonine was  good.  When  cocaine  and  some  of  its  metabolites  were  com- 
pared to  benzoylecgonine,  cocaine  reacted  slightly  at  500  ng/ml  and 
gave  approximately  63®  of  the  reactivity  of  benzoylecgonine  at 
1000  ng/ml.  Ecgonine  reacted  slightly  at  1000  ng/ml,  nor-benzoyl- 
ecgonine  reacted  very  slightly,  and  nor-ecgonine  did  not  react. 

Urine  specimens  from  persons  receiving  no  medication  or  receiving 
known  medications  other  than  cocaine  were  negative  in  the  assay. 

Normal  urine  with  added  other  drugs  of  abuse  (morphine,  codeine, 
amphetamines,  barbiturates)  also  showed  no  cross  reactivity.  The 
sensitivity  of  the  assay  for  benzoylecgonine  in  urine  v .s  50  ng/ml. 

The  assay  was  applied  to  urine  samples  collected  from  5 monkeys  for  72 
hours  after  the  administration  of  cocaine  (1  mg/IV).  All  specimens 
were  positive  by  RIA.  The  peak  concentration  occurred  between  4 and  7 
hours  after  drug  administration,  and  evidnece  of  drug  excretion  was 
still  present  at  72  hours  after  drug  administration.  Urine  collected 
from  surgical  patients  for  24  hours  following  the  topical  application 
of  cocaine  for  local  anesthesia  also  gave  positive  results. 

The  RIA  for  cocaine  is  highly  specific  and  sensitive  for  routine 
screening  for  cocaine  usage.  The  test  is  technically  simple  to  per- 
form, and  adaptable  to  large  volume  drug  screening.  There  appears  to 
be  no  cross  reactivity  with  other  drugs  of  abuse  or  selected  chemo- 
therapeutic agents. 

2.  Radioimmunoassay  for  cocaine  in  serum  of  ENT  surgical  patients. 

This  project  is  a collaborative  study  with  the  ENT  service,  WRAMC.  The 
cocaine  RIA  was  used  to  determine  if  the  anesthetic  dose  and  mode  of 
application  of  cocaine  to  the  nasal  mucosa  during  surgery  results  in 
different  blood  levels,  clearance  time  and  whether  these  levels 
correlated  with  observed  side  effects.  The  objective  of  the  study  was 
to  establish  a safe,  effective  anesthetic  dose  of  cocaine  and  to 
acquire  basic  data  on  cocaine  metabolism  in  humans. 

The  RIA  for  cocaine,  which  was  originally  designed  for  urine  analyses, 
was  adapted  to  the  detection  of  benzoylecgonine  in  serum.  A total  of 
13  patients  have  been  studied.  Serial  blood  samples  have  been  collect- 
ed for  baseline  and  from  15  minutes  to  24  hours  after  the  topical 


1583 


administration  of  200  ng  of  cocaine  to  the  nasal  muscosa.  Analyses 
of  the  samples  showed  peak  serum  levels  of  benzoylecgonine  at  4 to  6 
hours  after  the  administration  of  cocaine.  The  half-time  for  plasma 
levels  was  5.5  +_  0.30  hours.  The  24  hour  sample  still  contained  an 
appreciable  amount  of  benzoylecgonine  (89.4  + 14.2  ng/ml). 

This  project  is  being  continued  using  different  methods  of  application 
and  different  amounts  of  cocaine.  Gas-liquid  chromatography  will  be 
used  as  a confirmatory  analytical  procedure. 

3.  Latex  agglutination  - inhibition  test  barbiturates:  Evaluation: 

The  Roche  Diagnostics  Latex  flocculation  test  for  barbiturates  was 
evaluated  for  its  efficacy  in  the  detection  of  barbiturates  in  urine. 
Flocculation  of  a latex-barbiturate  complex  occurs  with  the  addition 
of  barbiturates  free  urine;  the  reaction  is  inhibited  by  urine  con- 
taining barbiturates.  The  test  was  evaluated  with  respect  to 
sensitivity,  specificity,  and  ease  of  performance. 

Urine  samples  from  various  sources  was  assayed  in  duplicate.  These  in- 
cluded normal  urine  (120)  with  added  barbiturates  and  other  drugs  of 
abuse  and  urines  (54)  from  laboratory  personnel  and  hospital  patients. 
Urines  with  added  barbiturates  showed  that  secobarital  gave  a positive 
test  at  2.5,  5,  and  10  p/ml,  apobarbital  and  sodium  pentobarbital 
were  positive  at  10  pg/ml,  Phenobarbital  and  amobarbital  gave  a nega- 
tive response  at  10  pg/ml.  Other  drugs  of  abuse  gave  negative  tests. 

The  54  urines  from  laboratory  personnel  and  hospital  patients  gave  13 
positive  reactions.  All  of  the  positive  reactions  were  from  patients 
who  had  received  eith  secobarbital  or  pentobarbital  . The  54  urines 
were  tested  also  by  another  laboratory  with  identical  results. 

The  latex  test  was  found  to  be  applicable  for  the  assay  of  barbiturates 
in  serum.  Sera  from  surgical  patients  (81)  were  assayed.  Positive  re- 
sults were  found  only  in  the  sera  of  those  patients  (64)  who  had  re- 
ceived barbiturates.  No  cross  reactivity  was  found  with  patients  re- 
ceiving other  drugs  of  abuse  of  selected  medication. 

Conclusions:  Tne  test  appeared  to  be  good  for  secobarbital  (2  pg/ml), 

pentobarbital  (10  pg/ml)  and  apobarbital  (10  pg/ml).  The  test  is  simple 
to  perform,  fast  (3  hrs.),  relatively  low  in  cost,  and  has  a long 
shelf-life.  The  fact  that  serum  reacts  equally  as  well  as  urine  makes 
the  test  applicable  in  emergency  roan  situations.  No  evidence  of  cross 
reactivity  with  other  drugs  was  found. 

4.  Radioimmunoassay  for  morphine:  Technical  Evaluation. 

The  double  antibody  technique  used  in  the  radioimmunoassay  for  morphine 


p.,,.  I ..  w 13.  U'U  M . 

ww'iwuwiim  - .. 


is  accurate  and  precise  but  tedious  and  very  time  consuming.  A study 
was  initiated  in  an  attempt  to  shorten  the  assay  time  by  using  poly- 
ethylene glycol  (PEG)  as  a co-precipitant  with  the  second  antibody. 

The  addition  of  a cold  4%  aqueous  solution  of  PEG,  immediately  follow- 
ing the  second  antibody,  produced  a rapid,  complete  precipitation  of 
the  globulin  proteins.  This  was  in  contrast  with  the  18  hour  in- 
cubation required  without  PEG.  The  addition  of  PEG  reduced  also  the 
non-specific  binding.  The  standard  curves  for  the  two  procedures 
were  essentially  the  same. 


The  within  run  precision  on  three  different  days 
morphine)  was,  expressed  as  percent  bound  + 


(50  tuber  of  200  pg 
SEM: 


38.264  + 0.149 
38.414  + 0.131 
37.775  + 0.184 


CV  = 2.7% 
CV  = 2.2% 
CV  = 3.4% 


The  optimum  size  of  each  run  with  this  method  is  50  samples.  If  over 
50  tubes  are  used,  an  error  will  be  introduced  due  to  the  slow  dis- 
solving of  the  precipitate  while  decanting  the  supernatant  solution. 

5.  Studies  on  morphine  dependency. 

Studies  were  continued  on  the  biochemistry  of  morphine  dependency. 

Rats  were  made  morphine  dependent  by  implanting  morphine  pellets. 
Morphine  dependency  was  measured  by  counting  the  number  of  wet  dog 
shake  episodes  that  occurred  the  first  10  minutes  after  naloxone  in- 
jection 3 days  after  morphine  pellet  implantation. 

Rats  placed  on  a Vitamin  deficient  diet  and  then  made  morphine  de- 
pendent had  fewer  espsodes  of  naloxone- induced  wet  dog  shakes  than  a 
similar  group  of  morphine  dependent  rats  on  a normal  Purina  chow  diet. 
A group  of  rats  on  a Vitamin  B,  repleted  diet,  treated  in  the  same 
manner,  were  comparable  to  the°normal  Purina  chow  group.  Also,  the 
injection  of  Vitamin  B.  (4  to  100  mg/Kg  body  wt.)  into  morphine  de- 
pendent rats  maintainea  on  a normal  Purina  chow  diet  had  no  effect  on 
the  number  of  wet  dog  shake  episodes  during  naloxone- induced  with- 
drawal. However,  when  morphine  dependent  rats  on  a Purina  chow  diet, 
were  given  a large  excess  of  Vitamin  B5  (200  mg/Kg)  the  frequency  of 
the  wet  dog  shake  episodes  was  reduced  during  naloxone- induced  with- 
drawal . 

Further  studies  showed  that,  when  morphine  dependent  rats  were  given 
40  or  60  mg/Kg  of  pyridoxal,  the  wet  dog  shake  episodes  were  reduced 
60%  to  78%  when  compared  to  morphine  dependent  rats  receiving  only 
saline.  The  combination  of  40  or  60  mg/Kg  of  pyridoxal  and  100  mg/Kg 
of  Vitamin  Bg  when  given  to  morphine  dependent  rats,  produced  no  wet 


1585 


dog  shake  episodes  during  naloxone- induced  withdrawal,  while  100  mg/Kg 
of  Vitamin  or  saline  had  no  observable  effect  on  decreasing  the 
number  of  wet  dog  shake  episodes. 

The  mechanism  involved  in  the  reduction  of  the  wet  dog  shake  episodes 
in  morphine  dependent  rats  by  pyridoxal  was  investigated.  Preliminary 
studies  showed  that  the  injection  of  a condensation  product  of 
pyridoxal  and  dopamine  reduced  the  frequency  of  the  wet  dog  shake 
episodes  in  morphine  dependent  rats  subjected  to  naloxone  withdrawal. 
Further  studies  are  required  on  the  identification  of  this  condensation 
product  and  its  mechanism  of  action. 

6.  UPLC  method  for  p-Aminobenzoic  acid  and  metabolites. 

An  improved  high  performance  liquid  chromatographic  (HPLC)  method  for 
determining  p-aminobenzoic  acid  and  its  metabolites  in  physiologic 
fluids  was  developed.  The  new  method  is  simple  and  specific  and  offers 
increased  sensitivity,  higher  resolution,  and  shorter  analysis  time. 

A Varian  LC  series  4100  liquid  chromatograph  with  a 10  pm-size  Partisil- 
10-SAX  (anion)  column  was  used  for  all  separations.  The  buffer  system 
for  elution  was  0.1  M sodiun  formate- formic  acid,  pH  3.50,  at  a flow 
rate  of  40  ml/hr. 

The  separation  of  p-aminobenzoic  acid,  p-aminohippuric  acid,  n-acteyl- 
p-aminobenzoic  acid,  and  n-acetly-p-aminohippuric  acid  was  accomplished 
in  10  minutes.  Serum  or  urine  specimens  (2  pi)  were  analyzed  directly 
without  pretreatment.  The  detection  limit  for  each  compound  was  1 ng  on 
column,  and  the  peak  height  produced  for  standards  was  proportional  to 
the  quantity  on  column. 

The  n- acetyl -p-aminohippuric  acid  was  prepared  and  chaiacterized  by  the 
organic  chemistry  section  of  the  Department  of  Physiological  Chmistry. 

7.  Hydrolysis  of  N-acetyl -p-aminohippuric  acid. 

Most  analytical  methods  for  conjugated  aromatic  amines  require  hydrolysis 
to  free  the  amine  group.  The  rate  of  conversion  of  N - acetyl -p- amino - 
hippuric  (PAAHA)  acid  to  its  deacetylated  and  deglycinated  derivatives 
is  directly  related  to  the  hydrolysis  reaction  time  and  the  concen- 
tration of  hydrochloric  acid  used  in  the  reaction.  Variations  in 
methodology  involving  either  of  these  hydrolysis  parameters  produced 
artifacts  which  are  not  detectable  by  standard  colorimetric  procedures. 

High  performance  liquid  chromatography  offers  an  improved  tool  for  de- 
tecting and  quantitating  the  change  produced  during  hydrolysis. 

The  optimium  conditions  for  hydrolyzing  N-acetyl -p-aminohippuric  acid 


1586 


in  urine  was  with  0.8N  HC1  for  30  minutes.  The  formation  of  p-amino- 
hippuric  acid  (PAHA)  began  within  5 minutes  and  was  completed  within 
25  minutes.  Approximately  971  of  the  PAAHA  was  concerted  to  PAHA 
during  this  time  period  and  only  1 to  2%  p-aminobenzoic  acid 
(degregration  product)  was  formed.  The  hydrolyzed  sample  was 
chromatographed  on  a 1 -meter  X 2 mm  ID  316  stainless  steel  column,  dry- 
packed  with  Whatman  AS-Pellionex-SAX  anion  exchanger.  The  eluting 
solution  was  0.005  M formate  buffer,  pH  3.50  + .05.  Excellent 
separation  was  obtained  at  a flow  rate  of  40  ml/hr  and  PABA  and  PAHA 
were  eluted  within  10  minutes.  The  detection  limit  (ultraviolet,  254nm) 
was  5 nanograms  on  column.  The  relationship  of  peak  height  to  quantity 
of  compounds  was  linera  from  5 nanograms  to  5 micrograms  on  column. 

The  method  was  superioR  in  both  sensitivity  and  specificity  to  the 
conmonly  used  colorimeter  procedures.  These  studies  revealed  that 
artifacts  are  introduced  into  the  analyses  of  PAH  when  hydrolysis 
conditions  are  excessive. 


1 

3 

i 

4 


Project  3A762758A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  114  Pharmacokinetics  of  drugs  of  abuse 

r 

Literature  Cited. 

Publications: 

1.  Siu,  P.M.L.,  West,  S.,  and  Bogdanove,  A.J.:  Morphine 
dependency  in  rats  on  a pridoxine-deficient,  a pridoxine-repleted, 
and  a normal  chow  diet  plus  pyridoxine  injections.  Jour.  Neuro- 
chemistry.  26:  633,  1976. 

[• 

2.  Berman,  A.R. , McGrath,  J.P.,  Permisohn,  R.C.,  and  Celia, 

J.A.:  Radioimmunoassay  of  methaqualone  and  its  monohydroxy  meta- 

bolites in  urine.  Clin.  Chan.  21_:  1878,  1975. 

3.  Gibson,  T.P.,  Briggs,  W.A.,  Boone,  B.J.:  Delivery  of  di-2- 

ethylhexyl  phthalate  to  patients  during  hemodialysis.  J.  Clin.  Lab» 

Med.  87:  519,  1976. 

I 

| 


i 


I ’ 


1588 


% 


f 


»u — 


.....  Task  00 

Military  Animal  Resources  Development 


1 OAT  I Pit  V S UN*  N V 

75  07  01 

• AINU  OP  IUMM«l» 

I Summary  utv* 

u 

A ROHM  SECURITY* 

U 

I REGRADING* 

LLQ 

1 A O* 

IE!  INBTH'N 

-ID 

Bh>  SRECIFIC  DATA  - 
CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Kl.it  Dm 

f LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A BORE  UNIT 

TO  NO  COOES  * 

PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PRO  JE C T NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

[Pll  Redacted] 


!'  GENCNAL  USE 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


b COWfAIMUIlMG 


621 10A 


LARDS  IMF 


3A76276QA837 


1 AMKCV  Acrawo7 

DA  0B6441 


76  On  jo 


mar  out  comrmoL  tram 

Dl)  nH&E<AH)6Jb 


_QD_ 


H2L 


t pimeAm  1A  J.cu»I(7  ClMtlllMIlai  C»A«J* 

(u)  Development  and  Evaluation  of  Improved  Bioloqicdl  Sensor  Systems 


7 scientific  amq  technological  arias* 


00 1 700  An iinal  Husbandry  01180  Operations 


I ST  AN  T oa  ti 

67  09 


l«  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  DATE 


76  06 


CONTRACT  GRANT 


t . mo  OF  AWARD: 


NA 


A AMOUNT 
f.CUM.  AMT. 


t NISPONSIMLE  OOO  OMGANIIATlON 


ao  RERFC  AMPNG  ORCARIIATMJM 


“"’Walter  Reed  Ariny  Institute  of  Research 
ADDRESS  * Washington  , DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 


...i-  Joy,  COL  R.J.T, 
TELEPHONE.  202-576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


n-  iy words  fr—cwJm  ajkCti  »ib  aSSSHf  ?7*I«7WT77T«w  cISJ 


1 S FUNOTNG  AGENCY 


_DA_ 


IE  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 
RAEC  EblMt 


E ISC  AL 
YEAR 


75 

TUMiUT — 


JL. 


IE.  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 


C , In.Hpuse 


k PRO  E EES  ION  A L MAN  YRS 


T 


. FUNDS  fin  WmimbiAj 


jzm 


■ •Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  Bio  Sensor  Research 
•■“’Aberdeen  Proving  Ground,  MD  21010 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  A MAN  If  U I AftamU  rnt  »*.>»«.) 

’ Castleberry,  COL  M.W. 

301-671-3312 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGA  TORE 

Linn,  MAJ,  J.M.;  Nyland,  CPT,  T .G. ; 
«♦**  I eiphtnn  rPT , F A 


TELEPHONE 


(U)  Detector  dog;  (U)  Selective  Rreedinq;  (l|)  Mines;  (U)  Explosives,  drugs;  (U)  Ambush 

II  T ¥ fMNir  AL  OllfTTIVT  * IA  APPROACH.  IS  PROORESA  fFwnIM  IiHIHAkI  II  ■ Ml  — fl  I IMnllflaA  N AimM  Ini  ml  M«A  MA  lacalN  ria**fBc*ffaa  fa*  i 


II  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  IA  APPROACH,  IS  PROGRESS  fPwnl«P  l«Nrl*a«f  y/«»«RAi  lAmmilffmA  Mr  Tail  •<  Nrt  MB)  SAcwlfp  ClRAaTNcalfap  CaMa  > 

23.  (U)  To  better  protect  the  combat  soldier  by  genet’ c development  of  a more  intelli- 
gent and  sensually  acute  detector  dog  that  was  free  of  hip  dysplasia  and  was  temperamen- 
tally better  suited  for  detecting  the  presence  of  the  enemy  than  was  then  generally 
available. 

24.  (U)  Critically  evaluated  AKC  registered  German  Shepherd  Dogs  were  purchased  as 
foundation  stock.  The  progeny  of  these  and  subsequent  generations  were  closely  evalua 
ted  by  recognized  tests  designed  to  reveal  the  superior  individuals.  These  were  in  turn 
used  as  breeders. 

25.  (U)  75  07  - 76  06  During  the  past  two  years  the  breeding  colony  of  thirty-one 
animals  was  replaced  with  late  third  and  early  fourth  generation  offspring  of  the  orig- 
inal stock.  Almost  without  exception  these  were  proven,  progeny  tested  breeders  which 
produced  229  fourth  and  early  fifth  generation  animals.  With  the  establishment  of  a 
stable  gene  pool  producing  consistently  successful  military  working  dogs,  the  project 
passed  beyond  the  primary  development  stage  and  was  ordered  to  transfer  its  breeding 
stock  and  their  progeny  to  other  organizations  for  production  purposes.  This  was 
accomplished  with  distribution  of  322  dogs  during  the  past  year.  The  final  shipment, 
nade  on  22  June,  consisted  of  15  breeding  dogs  to  Lackland  Air  Force  Base,  Texas.  This 
organization  was  deactivated  30  June  1976.  Two  papers  were  written.  These  were  "A 
Genetic  Study  of  Canine  Hip  Dysplasia",  and  "The  Use  of  Frozen  Semen  in  Artificial 
Insemination  of  the  German  Shepherd  Doq".  A third  paper,  "Efficacy  of  Breeding  Pbeno- 
typically  Hip  Dysplasia-free  Doqs",  is  in  manuscript.  For  technical  report  see  Walter 
Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75  - 30  Jun  76. 


DD,'„0“J498 


orilRiloPiij 


'SSil 


1589 


IO  V SB 


Project  3A762760A837  MILITARY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT 


Task  00  Military  Animal  Resources  Development 


Work  Unit  055  Development  and  evaluation  of  improved  biological  sensor 
systems 


INVESTIGATORS. 


Principal 

Associates 


COL  Merida  W.  Castleberry,  VC 
MAJ  Jeffrey  M.  Linn,  VC 
CPT  Thomas  G.  Nyland,  VC 
CPT  El  din  A.  Leighton,  MSC 


OBJECTIVE . To  better  protect  the  combat  soldier  by  genetic  development 
of  a more  intelligent  and  sensually  acute  detector  dog  that  is  free  of 
hip  dysplasia  and  is  temperamentally  better  suited  for  detecting  the 
presence  of  the  enemy  than  is  now  generally  available. 


BACKGROUND.  Despite  the  large  number  of  pet  dogs  in  the  nation,  the 
acquisition  of  suitable  working  dogs  for  military  purposes  is  always  a 
problem.  This  is  especially  true  during  wartime  because  of  the  greatly 
increased  demand.  This  project  was  authorized  during  the  Vietnam  conflict 
for  the  purpose  of  developing  a line  of  more  proficient  military  working 
dogs  and  to  assist  in  relieving  the  shortage  of  acceptable  dogs 


APPROACH.  Critically  evaluated  AKC  registered  breeding  stock  purchased 
especially  for  this  purpose  was  selectively  bred  to  produce  superior 
progeny.  These  were  in  turn  closely  evaluated  by  recognized  tests  designed 
to  reveal  the  superior  individual.  Linebreeding  combined  with  progeny 
testing  of  each  generation  was  used  to  accomplish  the  objective. 


PROGRESS. 


A.  Breeding  Program. 


1.  Twenty-three  litters  produced  125  puppies. 

2.  Present  kennel  population  is  0. 

3.  Disposition  of  322  dogs  was  made  as  follows; 

DOD  Dog  Training  Center,  Lackland  AFB,  TX 

Military  working  dogs  8 months  or  older 
Puppies  less  than  8 months 
Breeding  stock 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


... 


p 


US  Customs  Service 

Puppies  less  than  8 months  of  age  10 

Breeders  6 

Working  Doqs  1 

The  Seeing  Eye*  Inc. 

Breeders  11 

Workinq  Doqs  5 

US  Army  Scout  Dog  Platoon,  Ft.  Benning,  GA  4 

US  Park  Police  3 

Civilian  Police  Departments  10 

B . Special  Projects. 

1.  Continuing  Projects 


a.  No  new  developments  occurred  in  the  puppy  diarrhea  study  con- 
ducted in  conjunction  with  Veterinary  Division,  WRAIR. 

b.  Surqical  repair  approach  to  canine  hip  dysplasia  did  not  prove 
to  be  of  significant  practical  value.  The  one  most  promisinq  of  this 
series  of  six  operated  dogs  was  sent  to  the  Air  Force  for  training  and, 
to  date,  is  a completely  functional  sentry  dog  in  Korea. 

2.  New  Projects . To  identify  those  puppies  with  exceptionally  keen 
nnses  and  to  maximize  their  explosive  detection  ability,  116  puppies  from 
21  litters  were  "pre-scented"  to  dynamite  twice  weekly  from  their  eighth 
week  to  their  fourteenth  week  of  life.  These  were  short  sessions  lasting 
from  five  to  ten  minutes  in  which  the  puppy  was  rewarded  with  a piece  of 
semi -moist  dog  food  for  successfully  locating  a small  amount  of  commercial 
dynamite.  This  procedure  provided  a high  degree  of  motivation  despite  the 
puppies  having  access  to  dry  dog  food  ad  libidum.  Twenty-three  of  these 
puppies  were  identified  as  being  exceptional . The  Air  Force  and  Customs 
dog  training  sections  were  alerted  to  such  of  these  young  dogs  as  they 
received.  None  of  these  is  yet  old  enough  to  demonstrate  their  capability 
as  trained  explosive  detectors. 

C.  Veterinary  Medicine.  Previously  reported  immunization  and 
husbandry  programs  remained  unchanged.  Quarterly  testing  of  breeding 
stock  for  B.  can is  and  D.  immitis  continued.  The  kennels  remained 
brucella-free  but  four  D.  l'mmi'tis  cases  were  diagnosed  and  treated. 

Major  surgical  procedures  during  the  past  fiscal  year  included  55 
ovario-hysterectomies , one  caesarean  section,  one  femoral  fracture  repair, 
one  abdominal  hernia  and  two  umbilical  hernia  repairs,  eight  patent  ductus 


1591 


arteriosus  surgeries  and  five  persistent  fourth  right  aortic  arch 
surqeries . 

D.  Geneti cs . 

1.  Data  derived  from  the  pelvic  radiographs  of  1186  German  Shepherd 
Dogs  bom  in  these  kennels  places  the  heritability  of  canine  hip  dysplasia 
in  this  colony  at  22.0%  --  a moderately  heritable  condition.  Progeny 
testing  to  identify  superior  replacement  breeders  with  final  selections 
being  limited,  as  far  as  possible,  to  individuals  from  dysplasia-free 
litters  gave  the  best  promise  for  breeding  dysplasia-free  dogs.  During 
the  last  twelve  months  of  this  organization's  operations,  of  the  72  fourth 
generation  dogs  receiving  at  least  their  eighth  month  radiograph,  only 

two  were  dysplastic.  Although  not  too  comparative  because  of  age  difference, 
the  63.4%  dysplasia  rate  encountered  in  230  one  to  three  year  old  civilian 
dogs  radiographed  for  Procurement  by-. the  Air  Force  at  Lackland  AFB,  TX  is 
at  least  indicative  of  the  problem.  ' 

The  exceptionally  low  rate  experienced  by  this  kennel  in  the  past 
12  months  is  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  sire  or  dam  of  15  of  the 
17  litters  producing  these  dogs  were  themselves  from  two  late  third  gener- 
ation almost  dysplasia-free  litters  (one  of  the  15  dogs  in  those  two 
litters  became  dysplastic).  Prior  to  this,  and  almost  without  exception, 
the  few  previous  dysplasia-free  litters  of  earlier  generations  were  not  of 
breeding  quality  because  of  undesirable  temperament,  heritable  physical 
defects,  or  combinations  of  these  qualities. 

2.  Analyses  of  unpublished  data  examined  the  degree  of  both  the 
phenotypic  and  genotypic  relationships  between  temperament  (measured  by 
intermediate  evaluation)  and  hip  dysplasia.  The  phenotypic  correlation 
between  temperament  and  hip  dysplasia  was  approximately  -0.25.  The  geno- 
typic correlation  was  approximately  -0.35.  The  significance  of  the  size 
and  direction  of  the  genotypic  correlation  became  apparent  when  the  selec- 
tion of  new  breeders  was  made.  As  selection  pressure  was  applied  to  improve 
the  overall  temperament  of  the  dogs,  there  was  a corresponding  increase  in 
the  rate  of  hip  dysplasia  among  the  offspring.  The  reverse  also  occurred 
when  selection  pressure  was  applied  to  reduce  hip  dysplasia.  Because 

of  this  correlation,  overall  progress  in  simultaneously  improving  both 
traits  in  this  colony  of  German  Shepherd  Dogs  was  made  more  difficult. 

3.  A review  was  completed  of  this  organization 's  progress  in  the 
abatement  of  canine  hip  dysplasia  by  mating  phenotypically  dysplasia-free 
dogs  through  four  generations.  This  was  based  upon  radiographic  examination 
of  the  progeny  of  each  succeeding  generation  as  initiated  by  the  original 
breeding  stock.  The  rate  of  dysplasia  experienced  by  each  generation  was 

as  shown  below. 


EV  Hi.  iV't- 


Rates  of  Dysplasia  Experienced  by  Generations 


Generation 

Number  normal 
at  shipment 

Number 

Dysplastic 

Total 

Rate 

1 

257 

84 

341 

24.6% 

2 

337 

120 

457 

26.3% 

3 

207 

74 

281 

26.3% 

4* 

139 

32 

171 

18.7% 

*Durng  the  final  twelve  months  of  this  organization's  operations,  only 
two  of  the  72  dogs  radiographed  during  their  eighth  month  or  beyond  were 
dysplastic.  A third  case  occurred  in  the  final  33  pups  receiving  their 
initial  five  month  radiograph.  None  of  these  33  are  included  in  the 
above  figures. 

Several  debatable  factors  surround  the  above  fiqures.  Questions 
concerning  the  number  of  puppies  rejected  prior  to  being  radiographed 
that  might  subsequently  have  become  dysplastic  and  the  number  of  dogs 
that  became  dysplastic  following  training  as  military  working  dogs  are 
examples.  Had  the  mission  of  this  project  been  concerned  solely  with 
dysplasia  eradication,  these  and  other  questions  would  have  been  answered. 
As  can  be  seen  no  noticable  progress  was  accomplished  during  the  first 
three  generations  because  of  the  interplay  of  jnacceptable  temperament, 
hip  dysplasia,  and  other  heritable  defects.  Two  third  generation  litters, 
the  S,,  consisting  of  8 pups,  and  the  V,,  consisting  of  7 pups,  more 
nearly  possessed  the  desired  qualities  Man  any  previous  litters.  With 
but  one  exception,  all  15  of  these  animals  possessed  excellent  hip  con- 
formation. One  male  and  two  bitches  from  each  litter  were  introduced 
to  the  breeding  line  in  April  1975.  These  animals  were  subsequently 
the  sire  or  dam  of  19  litters  consisting  of  92  progeny.  Twelve  of  these 
litters  and  their  59  progeny  received  at  least  their  eighth  month  radio- 
graph prior  to  this  organization's  cessation  of  operations . Only  one 
of  these  individuals  proved  dysplastic.  Since  approximately  80%  of  the 
dysplasia  rate  experienced  in  this  kennel  occurred  by  the  eighth  month 
of  age,  this  drop  was  most  encouraging.  Establishment  of  pedigree  depth 
of  freedom  from  hip  dysplasia,  progeny  testing,  and  breeding  only  from 
dysplasia-free  litters  will,  apparently,  greatly  abait  cr  perhaps  eliminate 
canine  hip  dysplasia. 

E . Visits . 

1.  Sixty-two  visitors  toured  these  facilities  during  the  past  year. 

2.  Consultant  visits  were  made  by  Dr.  W.H.  Riser,  (hip  dysplasia). 


1593 


DISCUSSION . With  the  development  of  a gene  pool  producing  consistently 
successful  military  working  doqs,  the  decision  was  made  to  transfer  the 
stock  to  usinq  organizations  for  production  purposes.  Per  a formal  Memo- 
randum of  Understanding  between  US  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development 
Command  and  the  US  Customs  Service  six  mature  breeders  and  five  young 
potential  breeding  canines  were  transferred  to  the  US  Customs  Service  at 
Front  Royal,  VA.  With  the  concurrence  of  the  Commanding  General,  US  Army 
Medical  Research  and  Development  Command,  eleven  breeders  were  donated  via 
contract  to  The  Seeing  Eye,  Inc.,  for  use  in  their  breeding  program.  As 
the  major  gaining  agency  with  fifteen  breeders,  the  Air  Force  will  be 
admirably  situated  to  implement  the  establishment  of  a canine  remount 
service  at  selected  military  installations. 

PUBLICATIONS . 

Three  papers  were  prepared  during  the  period  of  this  report  they  are: 

1.  "A  Genetic  Study  of  Canine  Hip  Dysplasia"  has  been  cleared  for 
publication  by  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Board  of  Review  and 
tentatively  accepted  for  publication  by  the  American  Journal  of  Veterinary 
Research.  Principle  author  is  CPT  E.  A.  Leighton,  MSC. 

2.  "The  Use  of  Frozen  Semen  in  Artificial  Insemination  of  the  German 
Shepherd  Dog".  The  author  is  G.  £.  Lees,  DVM. 

3.  "Efficacy  of  Breeding  Phenotypically  Hip  Dysplasia-free  Dogs" 
in  manuscript.  Principle  author  is  MAJ  J.  M.  Linn,  VC. 

CONCLUSION.  Man's  ability  to  breed  animals  for  a desired  qenetic  result 
was  repeated  with  the  establishment  of  a gene  pool  of  the  German  Shepherd 
Dog  which  produced  consistently  successful  military  working  dogs. 


1594 


Project  3A762760A837  MILITARY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT 
Task  00  Military  Animal  Resources  Development 


Work  Unit  055 


Development  and  evaluation  of  improved  biological  sensor 
systems 


LITERATURE  CITED. 


References. 


(1)  Towsend,  L.,  Hip  Dysplasia  in  Canine  Military  Candidates.  In 
Proceedings:  Canine  Hip  Dysplasia  Symposium  and  Workshop.  Orth.  Foun. 
Anim.,  (1972):  127-130. 


1595 


I 


V-'  <■'* 


11  ITART  0 A T I 

6S  07 

111  tITIMATCO  COMALCTION  OAT« 

con  r 

DA  | 

»•  RIRRORMANCC  RHTmOO 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT  ORAMT 

««  RCROURCII  CRTIRAT* 

A RRORIRRIORAl  HAN  Y At 

A RUNOR  (t*  M»u*AA4N> 

A OAT«|/RRR*C*IVI: 

■ RRIRATION 

«N  RURltR  * 

r IRC  A L 

76 

5 

262 

■: 

C T*R« 

4 AMOUNT 

T|AR 

t 

■ NINO  OF  AIARO 

1,  C UM  AMT. 

77 

3 

:?() 

M RIRRONMIRn  OROAMII  ATION 

1 

....  _.i  n 

>! 

n.ni*  Walter  Reed  Army 

Institute  ot  Research 

•am* Walter  Reed  Army 

institute  ot  Kesearcn 

1 

[Pll  Redacted] 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


1 DATE  All  v SUWRY 


~5  :r  m , !).  Change 


■ 'NO  OR  I U IMA  ANY 


10  NO  COOC  I * 


PROGRAM  (LIMINT 


M.  PRIMARY 


k.  CONT  AIRuTIMG 


'J&2SSSSX1 


162760A 


l,sR1>S  11-11- 


11 


• ROAR  UCURiTy^1 

IJ 


PROilCT  NUMIIR 


VCUT^Hy? 


t AQIRCT  ACCIRRAON* 

DA  OB  6444 


RIGRAMW6 

NA 


i*  K" 


1 OAT«  OR  MMARr 

76  07  01 


' 0#R  r N iNIT  R‘  N 

NL 


TAW  AR(A  NUMIIR 


00 


Rifoar  coRraot  trmmoi 

l)l>  DKLf  AH,bSt> 


IPVCIRlC  DATA 
CONTRALTO*  ACCCIt 

(3  Til  GnO 


• LlvC  L OR  RUM 
A.  won  UNT 


■ORK  UNIT  NUMIIR 


056 


• I TITl*  tF • !»  lacwrltr  C<u«Ol>«"ai 

IUI  Diseases  of  Niiitari  Animal- 

1 lOluTKlC  AND  flCNNOLOOICNk  AN«A«r 


010100  Mi  c rob i o 1 ogy  005900  hnv i ronmenta  1 Biology 


Washington,  IK!  1001’ 


RtlPONllRK  INDIVIDUAL 

MAUI.  JOY,  Robert  .1.  T. 
..A...,,.,.  202-576-5551 


COL,  MC 


reign  into) i ige 


Hot  Oi'll.si'. 


Iliv  of  Vet  Resources 
AOONIM  * Washington,  IK!  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IRYIITI6ATOR  >f«Mi A MM  ll  V I 4<4 

RAMI  * STHPIlh.NSON,  I dward  I 

.idinnon.  202- 42N-5389 

ROC  I A L IICvJRI  T » ACCOUNT  RuMlIR 
A HOC  I A T | IMVIRTI6A  TORI 

— * Thomas  .J.,  UC,  Vf 

MARI 


i rxMKNfiianj 

I. It!,  DVM 


BINN,  1..  N. , I’hD. 


II  ihcL..i*<.N-c.*^[]1  Military  hogs:  (!)}  Tihrl  i cli  i ae ; (IJ)  Til  ra  i ni  liienza  5V-:>; 

inzymes;  (llj  Random-Source  Hogs;  ^ 1 1 ) Viral  Respiratory  Ois- 


II  TRCMNICAL  OiifCYlVC  * |4  ApWmO^CM.  I»  MOORIIf  (Pu*>lp'l>Ul'>lANl  H'lRM*"  UPiKia  *i  d*N>  ppm*  »il  .1  Ntl  WIR  IMWIH  ClMli«i(i/a>  (ap 

25.  (11)  To  investigate  diseases  and/or  conditions  affecting  or  associated  with  the  mili- 
tary dog;  to  enhance  disease  diagnosis,  treatment  and  control,  and  to  investigate  dis- 
eases and/or  conditions  affecting  laboratory  animals  used  for  military  research,  to  en- 
hance production  quality  and  health  management  to  provide  research  animals  free  of 
pathogens. 

24.  (Ill  Conventional  epidemiological,  pathological,  and  microbiological  methods  are  em- 
ployed; special  procedures  are  developed  as  needed. 

25.  'll)  75  U7  - 76  06  Inocula  of  fhrlichia  cani-~,  including  those  sonic, illy  disrupted, 
failed  to  infect  cell  cultures  of  4 separate  canine  and  5 other  species  cell  lines.  In 
field  trials  of  a new  SV-5  vaccine  in  recruit  military  uogs , 90  per  cent  developed  low 
serum  neutralizing  antibody  tiiers  after  two  doses  given  subcutaneously.  V.KCine  tiros 
did  not  infect  unvaccinated  dogs;  untoward  reactions  were  not  observed.  Wild  strains 
of  SV-5  could  not  he  evaluat'd.  An  optimal  standard  procedure  for  preparation  and  as 
say  of  canine  digestive  enz>mes  was  presented.  7ti  05  - 76  06  Severe  respiratory  dis- 
ease (mostl>  canine  distemper)  affected  more  than  half  of  the  random- source  dogs  during 
conditioning,  with  10  per  cent  mortality.  SV-5  and  Toronto  A26/61  caused  most  of  the 
IIRI)  in  CO  immune  dogs,  and  contributed  to  the  severity  of  Cl).  Hamsters  were  raised 
free  of  Interobacteri aceae  n evaluate  the  role  played  in  ant ihiot  ic- induced  diarrhea 
and  death;  their  absence  from  the  intestinal  tract  had  no  sparing  effect.  coli 
strains  from  116  monkeys  and  25  hamsters  with  diarrhea  failed  to  show  heat  labile  enterc- 
toxin.  I! . coli  from  4 of  52  monkeys  showed  heat  stable  enterotoxin.  Shigella  sp  was 
isolated  from  27  percent  of  the  monkeys,  lor  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  In- 
stitute of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1 Jul  75-50  dun  76.  New  work  initiated  with 
mission  and  title  change  76  03,  will  he  separated  under  work  unit  057  in  TY  77.  Support 

hY  r funds  is  programmed  for  the  period  1 .lul-50  Sep  70. 


DD. 498 


dJE’w-  Tl  r * £ n.  n 4 


7..T-  ' 


«lii.A  UMirirAitii 


Project  3A762760A837  MILITARY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT 


Task  00  Military  Animal  Resources  Development 

Work  Unit  056  Diseases  of  Military  Animals  Section  I 

I .'vestigators : 

Principal:  LTC  E.  II.  Stephenson,  VC 

Associate:  L.  N.  Binn,  Ph.D.;  LTC  T.  J.  Keefe,  VC;  CPT  J . R. 

Boyce,  VC;  E.  S.  Windham,  M.S.;  K.  Noon,  B.S.; 

R.  L.  Marchwicki,  B.S.;  I.  E.  Heinelt,  A.B.;  SP5  A. 
Hussain;  SP5  D.  White;  SP4  R.  Federman;  SP4  E.  K. 
Vinson;  SP4  L.  R.  Nornhold;  PFC  A.  Kanthack;  and 
PFC  R.  Thomas 

Description: 

To  define,  study,  diagnose,  and  control  known  and  potential  infecti- 
ous diseases  of  military  dogs.  A major  effort  is  directed  toward 
developing  an  alternate  in  vitro  method  for  cultivating  Ehrlichia 
can  is  rather  than  the  primary  canine  macrophage.  Additional  studies 
concern  the  epidemiology,  diagnosis,  treatment  and  control  of  other 
disease  agents  or  conditions  affecting  the  military  dog. 

During  the  reporting  period,  research  activities  have  included: 

(1)  attempts  at  cultivation  of  !E.  canis  in  cells  other  than  primary 
canine  macrophages,  (2j  evaluation  of  parainfluenza  SV5  vaccine  in 
military  dogs,  and  (3)  development  of  a standardized  method  for 
preparation  and  assay  of  canine  intestinal  carbohydrases. 

1 . Propagation  of  .Ehrlichia,  canis  in  cells  other  than  canine 
peripheral  monocytes. 


Ehrlichia  canis,  the  causative  agent  of  canine  ehrlichiosis,  is  the 
type  species  of  a group  of  rickettsia-like  organisms  that  form 
intracytoplasmic  inclusions  in  circulating  leucocytes  of  suscept.  le 
mammalian  host^.  Until  the  development  of  the  primary  monocyte  cell 
culture  system  , ehrlichial  investigations  were  limited  to  in  vivo 
studies.  Use  of  the  peripheral  monocyte  culture  technique  afforded 
a means  for  developing  the  indirect  immunofluorescence  technique 
and  conducting  limited  studies  on  comparative  morphogenesis  and 
pathogenesis.  The  morphogenetic  and  pathogenetic  studies  of  £.  canis, 
however,  are  hindered  by  2 technical  barriers:  the  inability  to 

propagate  ehrlichiae  in  large  numbers  and  the  inability  to  quantitate 
the  organisms.  Canine  peripheral  blood  monocyte  cultures,  as  currently 
prepared,  do  not  support  the  growth  of  sufficient  organisms  to  be 
experimentally  useful.  Therefore,  another  cell  and/o”  host  must  be 
defined  in  which  ehrlichiae  will  replicate  in  large  numbers  and 


‘1- 


• ^ 


1 

retair.  all  the  properties  of  the  agents  propagated  in  vivo.  This 
study  was  designed  to  determine  the  susceptibility  of  different 
available  cell  types  and  embryonated  chicken  eggs  to  infection  with 
E.  canis. 


Ehrlichia  canis  propagated  in  cultures  of  primary  canine  peripheral 
blood  monocytes  was  used  as  the  source  of  inocula  when  greater  than 
90%  of  the  detached  monocytes  contained  one  or  more  morula.  Inocula 
for  the  different  experiments  were:  procedure  1,  detached  cells  and 

media  from  infected  cultures;  procedure  2,  attached,  infected  cells 
which  were  trypsin-EDTA  dispersed,  then  pelleted  by  centrifugation 
and  resuspended;  and  procedure  3,  infected  cells  treated  as  (2)  above, 
then  exposed  to  60W  of  ultrasound  treatment  for  15  sec  using  a Branson 
sonifier  and  the  free  agents  were  concentrated  by  centrifugation. 
Following  sonication,  the  infected  cells  were  completely  disrupted 
leaving  numerous  intact  ehrlichiae,  as  determined  by  fluorescent 
microscopy.  Sonicated  inocula  were  used  to  infect  canine  peripheral 
blood  monocyte  cultures.  Seventy  to  80%  of  the  cells  contained  1 or 
more  agents  at  24  hr  post  inoculation  (PI),  and  morulae  developed  by 
7 days  PI.  The  percent  of  cells  infected  approached  100%  by  10  days 
PI.  By  contrast,  when  canine  peripheral  blood  monocytes  were  inocu- 
lated with  ehrlichial  suspensions  prepared  as  described  in  procedures 
1 and  2,  approximately  30  to  40%  of  the  cells  contained  1 or  more 
agents  at  24  hr  PI.  The  number  of  cells  infected  gradually  increased 
until  greater  than  90%  of  the  cells  contained  morulae  by  10  to  14 
days  PI.  Thus,  use  of  ehrlichial  suspensions  *diat  were  sonically 
treated  resulted  in  enhanced  synchrony  of  the  infection  and  in  a 
reduction  by  3 to  7 days  of  the  time  required  to  achieve  maximum 
infection  of  canine  peripheral  blood  monocytes. 


* 


i 


1 


Both  primary  cells  and  cell  lines  were  inoculated  with  E^.  canis. 
Primary  cells  used  were  canine  spleen,  canine  kidney,  canine  thyroid, 
bovine  fetal  spleen,  and  mouse  macrophage  cells.  Cell  lines  included 
the  Walter  Reed  canine  continuous  line,  A-72  canine  tumor  continuous 
line,  L929  mouse  fibroblast,  J-lll  human  monocytic  leukemia,  and 
LLC-MK2  rhesus  monkey  kidney  cells.  Coverslip  cultures  of  each  cell 
type  were  prepared  in  Leighton  tubes.  Culture  medium  was  decanted, 
the  cultures  were  washed  twice  with  Hank's  balanced  salt  solution 
(HBSS) , and  the  inoculum  was  added.  When  inocula  were  prepared  by 
procedures  1 and  2 above,  a total  of  1.0  ml  was  transferred  to 
each  culture  tube.  After  24  hr,  the  inoculum  was  decanted,  the  cul- 
tures were  washed  twice  with  HBSS,  and  1.0  ml  of  medium  (EMEM  + 

2 uM  glutamine  + 20%  heat  inactivated  canine  serum)  was  added.  When 
the  sonicated  inoculum  was  used,  the  24  hr  incubation  period  was 
replaced  by  a 1 hr  adsorption  period.  All  cultures  were  incubated 
at  35  C. 


Ehrlichiae  were  detected  in  coverslip  cultures  of  infected  cells 
by  the  Giemsa  stain  method  and  by  direct  fluorescent  microscopy. 


1598 


In  one  series  of  experiments,  irradiation  was  used  to  arrest  multi- 
plication of  all  the  cell  types,  except  mouse  macrophages,  in  the 
G-l  phase  of  the  cell  cycle.  The  reasons  for  employing  this  proce- 
dure were  4-fold:  (1)  the  canine  monocyte  is  a non-replicating 

cell, ,>(2)  chlamydiae  replicate  in  cells  in  the  G-l  phase  of  the  cell 
cycle  , (3)  the  susceptibility  of  McCoy  cells  to  infection  by 
Chlamydia  trachomatis  and  £.  psittaci  is  significantly  increased 
when  t^e  cells  are  irradiated  with  4000  to  5000  r prior  to  inocu- 
lation , and  (4)  rickettsiae  replicating  in  non-irradiated  L929 
mouse  fibroblasts  become  undetectable  due  to  the  cells  replicating 
more  rapidly  than  the  rickettsiae,  which  results  in  a smaller  per- 
cent of  the  total^cell  population  being  infected  with  each  doubling 
of  the  host  cells^g  Suspensions  of  cells  were  exposed  to  gamma 
radiation  from  a uCo  source.  The  radiation  dose  received  by  each 
cell  type  was  predetermined  as  the  amount  necessary  to  stop  repli- 
cation and  varied  from  3000  to  5000  r.  The  integrity  of  monolayers 
of  irradiated  cells  was  maintained  in  excess  of  21  days  after  ex- 
posure if  the  medium  was  changed  every  3 to  4 days.  Irradiated 
cells  were  inoculated  with  ehrlichial  suspensions  described  in  pro- 
cedures 2 and  3. 

Six-  to  8-day-old  embryonated  chicken  eggs  were  inoculated  via  the 
yolk  sac,  chorioallantoic,  and  amniotic  routes  using  inoculum  pre- 
pared by  procedure  2.  Three  eggs  each  were  inoculated  with  0.5 
ml  of  the  undiluted  inoculum  and  the  next  2 serial  10-fold  dilutions. 
Inoculated  eggs  were  incubated  at  35  C and  55  to  60%  relative  humid- 
ity, and  were  candled  daily  for  18  days  for  evidence  of  embryonic 
death.  Impression  smears  obtained  from  tissues  of  embryos  surviving 
3 days^I’I  were  examined  for  rickettsia-like  organisms  by  the  Gimenez 
method  . Two  blind  subpassages  were  made  before  the  ability  of 
£.  canis  to  replicate  in  embryonated  eggs  was  considered  to  be  nega- 
tive. 

The  initial  attempts  to  infect  other  cell  types  with  £.  canis  were 
made  using  inocula  prepared  by  procedures  1 and  2.  Only  canine 
spleen  and  bovine  fetal  spleen  cells  supported  the  growth  of 
ehrlichiae.  Less  than  0.5%  of  the  cell  population  of  these  cultures 
has  small  intracytoplasmic  inclusions  that  stained  specifically 
with  conjugated  anti-E.  canis  serum.  Subpassage  of  such  cultures 
did  not  result  in  increased  numbers  of  infected  ceils,  but  resulted 
in  the  loss  of  the  agent.  If  ehrlichiae  entered  any  of  the  other 
cell  types,  destruction  occurred  within  24  hr,  which  was  the  time 
selected  for  the  initial  examination.  Co-cultivation  of  the  cell 
types  with  infected  canine  peripheral  blood  monocytes  also  was  tried. 
Replication  of  ehrlichiae  was  detected  in  a rare  canine  spleen  and 
bovine  fetal  spleen  cell.  Again,  the  result  of  subpassage  of  the 
canine  spleen  and  bovine  fetal  spleen  cultures  was  loss  of  the  agent. 
Ehrlichiae  were  detected  only  in  a few  cells  of  canine  spleen  and 


1599 


bovine  fetal  spleen  cultures  when  sonically  treated  ehrlichial  pre- 
parations were  used  as  inocula.  Irradiated  cells  failed  to  support 
the  growth  of  ehrlichiae,  with  the  exception  of  about  0.5%  of  the 
canine  spleen  and  bovine  fetal  spleen  cells.  The  agents  were  lost 
upon  subpassage  to  irradiated  cultures  of  the  same  type. 

Ehrlichia  canis  would  not  replicate  in  the  yolk  sac,  on  the  chorio- 
allantoic membrane,  or  in  the  amniotic  cavity  of  embryonated  chicken 
eggs,  even  after  2 blind  subpassages.  The  few  embryo  deaths  that 
occurred  were  not  attributable  to  ehrlichial  infection  and  a speci- 
fic death  pattern  was  not  observed.  Rickettsia-like  organisms  were 
not  seen  in  Gimenez-stained  impression  smears  of  the  appropriate 
tissues. 


Failure  to  propagate  .E.  canis  in  host  cells  other  than  the  primary 
canine  monocyte  suggested  a specific  genetic  and  physiologic  rela- 
tionship between  ehrlichiae  and  canine  monocytes  that  does  not  exist 
for  any  of  the  cell  types  tested  to  date.  This  relationship  appears 
to  be  species  specific  because  the  mouse  macrophage,  which  is 
ontogenetical ly  similar  to  the  canine  monocyte,  did  not  support  the 
growth  of  ehrlichiae.  A search  for  a more  efficient  cell  and/or  host 
for  propagation  of  large  numbers  of  ehrlichiae  is  still  in  progress. 

Cultures  of  canine  spleen,  canine  kidney,  canine  thyroid,  bovine 
fetal  spleen,  mouse  macrophage,  Walter  Reed  canine  continuous  line, 
A-72  canine  tumor  continuous  line,  L929  mouse  fibroblast,  J-lll 
human  monocytic  leukemia,  and  LLC-MK2  rhesus  monkey  kidney  cells 
were  inoculated  with  canis  that  had  been  propagated  in  primary 
canine  peripheral  blood  monocytes.  Ehrlichiae  did  not  replicate 
in  any  of  the  cultures,  except  canine  spleen  and  bovine  fetal  spleen 
cells.  Small  intracytoplasmic  inclusions  were  detected  in  less  than 
0.5%  of  these  cells.  Identical  results  were  obtained  when  the  host 
cells  were  irradiated  with  3000  to  5000  r prior  to  inoculation  and 
when  co-cultivation  techniques  were  used.  Ehrlichiae  could  not  be 
propagated  in  the  yolk  sac,  on  the  chorioallantoic  membrane,  or  in 
the  amniotic  cavity  of  embryonated  chicken  eggs,  even  after  2 blind 
subpassages. 

2.  Evaluation  of  a parainfluenza  SV5  vaccine  for  the  prevention  of 
respiratory  disease  in  military  dogs. 


Over  the  past  12  years  epizootics  of  respiratory  disease  have  occurred 
at  the  DOD  procurement  and  training  centers  at  Lackland  AFB  (LAFB) , 
Texas,  and  Ft.  Benning,  Ga.  ’ (WRAIR  Annual  Report  19751.  During  the 
disease  outbreaks,  approximately  one-fourth  of  the  dogs  developed  signs 
of  respiratory  disease  and  the  great  majority  of  the  remaining  dogs 
had  inapparent  infections.  The  epizootics  seriously  disrupted  the 
training  and  deployment  of  military  dogs.  Parainfluenza  SV5  virus 


► 


i 


4 

had  been  recovered  consistently  from  affected  dogs  and  the  virus  was 
demonstrated  to  be  highly  communicable.  In  December  1974,  a vaccine 
containing  attenuated  parainfluenza  SV5  was  licensed  for  the  immuni- 
zation of  dogs.  The  following  May  in  conjunction  with  the  DOD  mili- 
tary dog  center  at  LAFB  a prospective  study  was  initiated  to  evaluate 
the  new  vaccine  in  recruit  military  dogs.  The  present  report  sum- 
marizes the  initial  findings. 

The  vaccine  evaluation  study  involved  approximately  250  dogs;  half 
received  the  standard  bivalent  canine  distemper  (CD) -infectious 
canine  hepatitis  (ICH)  vaccine  and  the  remaining  half,  the  new 
CD-ICH-SV5  vaccine.  Each  dog  was  given  2 vaccinations  at  30  day 
intervals  by  the  subcutaneous  route.  The  dogs  were  bled  before 
vaccination  on  arrival  at  LAFB  and  at  intervals  thereafter  as  indi- 
cated below.  Serums  were  forwarded  to  WRAIR  for  SV5  serum  neutra- 
lization tests.  The  vaccinated  dogs  were  examined  for  signs  of 
disease  and  any  reactions  to  vaccination. 


Untoward  vaccine  reactions  were  not  reported  in  nearly  100  SV5 
vaccinated  dogs.  During  the  study  period  only  a few  new  dogs  have 
exhibited  minor  transient  signs  of  respiratory  disease  and  there 
have  been  no  indications  of  secondary  cases. 

Laboratory  studies  to  measure  the  SV5  antibody  response  have  been 
carried  out  on  approximately  30  vaccinated  dogs.  In  addition,  tests 
were  conducted  to  detect  SV5  infections  in  a similar  number  of  dogs 
receiving  the  standard  CD-ICH  vaccine.  With  2 possible  exceptions, 
evidence  of  infections  was  not  detected  in  dogs  given  the  CD-ICH 
vaccine.  One  dog  arrived  with  a low  SV5  antibody  titer  (1:16)  and 
had  a rise  in  titer  and  a second  dog  developed  a low  neutralizing 
antibody  titer  after  the  second  dose  of  standard  vaccine.  These 
findings  indicated  that  SV5  virus  infections  of  vaccine  or  natural 
origin  were  rare  events  if  they  occurred  at  all  during  this  study 
period. 

The  antibody  response  of  seronegative  dogs  given  SV5  vaccine  is 
summarized  in  Tables  1 and  2.  In  the  initial  study,  the  development 
of  SV5  antibody  in  8 dogs  was  examined  (Table  1).  Low  levels  of 
SV5  neutralizing  antibody  were  first  detected  at  14  days  after  the 
initial  dose.  At  30  days,  the  titers  were  similar  or  slightly 
lower.  Following  the  second  vaccination,  a 4-fold  increase  in 
antibody  titer  occurred  and  7 of  the  8 dogs  were  serotest  positive. 
In  a larger  group  of  dogs,  a similar  antibody  response  was  ob- 
served (Table  2).  More  than  60%  (23  of  37  dogs)  developed  low 
levels  of  neutralizing  antibody  and  90%  of  the  dogs  had  antibody 
after  2 doses.  However,  the  levels  of  antibody  were  approximately 
l/8th  of  that  obtained  after  natural  infection. 


1601 


The  level  of  vaccine  induced  antibody  required  for  protection  is 
unknown.  It  would  be  prudent,  however,  to  explore  the  means  of 
inducing  higher  levels  of  antibody.  Data  provided  by  the  manufac- 
turer indicates  that  the  intramuscular  route  induces  2-  to  4-fold 
higher  antibody  titers.  Accordingly,  studies  are  in  progress  com- 
paring the  response  of  military  logs  to  SV5  vaccine  given  by  the 
subcutaneous  and  intramuscular  routes. 

In  summary,  a new  SV5  vaccine  is  undergoing  safety  and  potency  tests 
to  prevent  respiratory  disease  in  recruit  military  dogs.  Following 
2 doses  of  vaccine  administered  subcutaneously,  90%  of  the  dogs  de- 
velop low  serum  neutralizing  antibody  titers.  The  SV5  vaccine  virus 
did  not  spred  to  unvaccinated  dogs  and  untoward  reactions  were  not 
reported.  During  the  observation  period,  only  a few  dogs  showed 
serological  evidence  of  SV5  infection.  These  findings  support  the 
conclusion  that  wild  strains  of  SV5  were  not  being  transmitted. 
Consequently,  it  was  impossible  to  evaluate  the  ability  of  the  vac- 
cine to  protect  dogs  against  field  challenge  with  SV5  virus.  Fur- 
ther studies  are  in  progress,  to  increase  the  antibody  titers 
produced  by  vaccination. 

3.  Detection  and  definition  of  canine  intestinal  carbohydrases 
using  a standardized  method. 

Previous  investigations  of  German  shepherd  puppies  with  chronic 
diarrhea  showed  a relationship  between  high  starch  diets  and  (1) 
chronic  diarrhea,  (2)  frank  starch  in  the  feces,  (3)  numerous 
trichomonads  and  giardia  in  the  feces,  (4)  malabsorption  of  xylose, 
and  (5)  mucosal  injury  of  the  small  intestine.  However,  when 
constituent  analysis  for  fat,  protein,  starch,  and  hemicel lulose 
were  conducted  on  the  diarrhea  stools  from  adult  G.  shepherds  and 
from  stools  from  adult  inbred  hounds,  both  breeds  showed  surpris- 
ingly comparable  digestive  efficiency  (WRAIR  Annual  Report  1975). 

In  conjunction  with  these  studies,  investigations  were  started  for 
detection  and  definition  of  canine  intestinal  carbohydrase  activity. 

A survey  of  the  literature  on  dog  nutrition  had  brought  to  our  atten- 
tion significant  differences  in  the  reported  levels  of  canine  carbo- 
hydrate digesting  enzymes.  These  differences  could  have  been  due 
to  a host  of  variables,  such  as  assays  conducted  on  mixed  or  differ- 
ent breeds,  and  variations  in  feeding,  environment,  specimen 
collection  agdge^y^|  |^say  as  well  as  different  interpretations  of 
test  results3’  ’ ’ ’ . In  fact,  the  inconsistences  encountered 

in  our  earliest  attempts  to  repeat  the  studies  of  other  authors, 
pointed  out  that  a comparison  of  methods  and  their  standardization 
was  needed.  This  report  describes  the  qualitative  and  quantitative 
carbohydrase  contents  of  the  jejunum  and  pancreas  in  purebred  beagle 
dogs,  as  determined  by  a standardized  methodology.  The  enzymes 


1602 


investigated  were  a-amylase  E.C.3.2. 1.1,  maltase  and  isomaltase 
E.C.3.2. 1 .20,  sucrase  E.C.3. 2. 1 .26,  lactase  E.C.3.2. 1.23,  amylog- 
lucosidase  E.C.3.2. 1.3  and  cellobiase  E.C.3.2. 1.4. 

Jejunal  samples  were  obtained  from  18  purebred,  healthy  inbred  hounds 
whose  ages  ranged  from  17  to  33  weeks.  They  were  fed  a daily  diet 
of  approximately  230  Gm.  of  Respond  2000  plus  116  Gm.  of  Kenl  Ration, 
but  fasted  overnight  priar  to  sampling.  Specimens  taken  from  the 
mid-jejunum  region  were  chilled  on  wet  ice  and  sliced  longitudinally. 
Feces  were  removed  by  gently  washing  the  mucosa  with  0.85%  NaCl  - 
0.02  CaC^.  These  mucosa  samples  were  stored  at  -60  C.  Pancreatic 
samples  were  stored  at  -60  C.  Mucosa  carefully  scraped  from  thawed 
sections  of  jejunum  with  a glass  slide  was  weighed  and  suspended 
in  4 volumes  of  cold  0.85%  NaCl.  Suspensions  were  sonicated  in  an 
ice  bath  using  a sonicator  set  at  90  watts  for  either  one  or  four 
minutes  and  stored  at  -60  C.  Pancreatic  samples  were  thawed, 
weighed  and  suspended  in  20  vol  of  cold  0.85%  MaCl  + 0.02M  CaC^. 

After  mincing  with  scissors,  the  tissue  was  sonicated  for  2 minutes 
and  frozen  at  -60  C.  Some  of  the  sonicated  mucosal  homogenates  ^ 
were  enzymatically  solublized  according  to  the  method  of  Dahlquist1 
After  centrifugation,  the  clear  supernatant  extracts  were  removed 
and  frozen  at  -60  C.  All  samples  were  diluted  1:100  v/v  0.85% 

NaCl  and  assayed  for  protein  by  the  method  of  Lowry  et  al1  . 
Disaccharidase  activities  were  measured  by  using  a commercially 
prepared  tris-glucose  ^idase  kit.  The  procedure  was  the  same  as 
that  used  by  Dahlquist1  . All  the  substrates,  maltose,  isomaltose, 
sucrose,  lactose  and  cellobiose  were  prepared  according  to  the  method 
of  Dahlquist  except  for  the  soluble  starch.  Contaminating  glucose 
and  maltose  were  removed  from  the  soluble^gtarch  substrate  by  modi- 
fying the  method  used  by  Friedemann  et  al1  . In  this  modification 
one  gram  of  soluble  starch  was  precipitated  for  1 hr  in  100  ml  of 
70%  isopropanol,  filtered  and  reprecipitated  4 more  times.  The 
slurry  was  then  stirred  in  100%  isopropanol  to  remove  the  water  from 
the  starch,  filtered  and  dessicated  to  dryness.  Due  to  the  varia- 
tions in  the  size  of  the  molecules  of  starch,  the  number  of  glucose 
residues  per  starch  molecule  is  inestimable  and  consequently 
problematical.  Therefore,  in  calculating  amyloglucosidase  activity, 
starch  degradation  was  interpreted  as  a disaccharide  yielding  one 
glucose  molecule  per  enzymatic  degradation.  The  a-amylase  ac^vity 
was  determined  by  measuring  the  liberation  of  reducing  sugars  . 

Units  of  activity  are  expressed  as  nanomoles  of  maltose  produced  per 
mg, protein  per  min.  Amyloglucosidase  activity  was  assayed  after 
heating  s^gples  at  55  C for  15  min  to  inactivate  the  heat  labile 
a-amylase10.  Isomaltase  activity  was  demonstrated  using  chromato- 
graphically  homogeneous  isomaltos^as  the  substrate.  Heating  at  54  C 
was  used  to  inactivate  isomaltase1  . Units  of  disaccharidase  activity 
were  expressed  as  nanomoles  of  disaccharide  hydrolyzed  per  mg  protein 
per  min.  The  enzymes  of  solublized  mucosal  samples  were  separated 


1603 


T 


by  polyacrylamide  gel  electrophoresis  (PAGE:  20,21).  The  PAGE  prep- 
aration was  composed  of  IS  drops  of  glycerol,  4 drops  of  0.1%  aqueous 
bromophenol  blue  and  1.3  ml  enzyme  mixture.  The  enzyme  mixture  was 
adjusted  so  that  300  pi  of  the  PAGE  preparation  contained  400  ug 
protein.  The  300  pi  PAGE  preparation  was  layered  on  the  separation 
gel  withi,ij  glass  tubes  and  electrophoresed.  Both  the  discontinuous 
tris-HCl  and  the  continuous  imidazole  buffer  systems  were  each 
used  in  similar  procedures  for  separating  the  enzymes.  All  gels  were 
electrophoresed  at  2ma  per  tube  at  4 C for  approximately  4 hours. 

Gels  were  sliced  at  2 nu^intervals  and  each  segment  was  assayed  for 
disaccharidase  activity  . Duplicate  gels  were  stained  for  protein 
with  Coomassie  blue  dye. 

Results 

22 

Hill  has  shown  that  the  digestion  of  starch  by  the  canine  is 
initiated  by  the  pancreatic  a-amylases  secreted  into  the  lumen  of 
the  small  intestine.  The  resulting  starch  fragments  and  disaccharides 
are  then  degraded  further  by  enzymes  associated  with  the  cells  and 
membranes  of  the  brush  borders  of  the  small  intestine.  Table  3 
describes  these  processes  including  isomaltase  activity  not  previously 
reported  by  other  authors. 

Table  4 presents  a comparison  of  disaccharidase  activities  found 
after  different  extraction  treatments  of  inbred  hounds  intestinal 
mucosa.  The  mucosal  homogenates  were  sonicated  for  1 min,  4 min, 
and  4 min  followed  by  enzyme  solubilization.  Homogenates  sonicated 
for  4 min  without  solubilization  showed  the  highest  disaccharidase 
activity  for  maltase,  sucrase,  and  amyloglucosidase.  Only  the  lac- 
tase activity  decreased  after  this  prolonged  sonication.  The  samples 
which  were  sonicated  for  4 min  and  then  solublized  with  papain  all 
lost  activity. 

An  excess  of  the  4 minute-sonicated  samples  afforded  an  opportunity 
to  measure  the  cellobiase  and  isomaltase  activities  of  these  samples. 
It  can  be  seen  that  inbred  hounds  do  have  some  ability  to  degrade 
B-linkages  of  disaccharides  derived  from  cellulose  (Table  4). 
Isomaltase  activity  was  demonstrated  as  a separate  isozyme  in  8 of 
the  9 dogs  studied  (Table  5).  Only  one  dog  had  no  isomaltase  activity 
and  in  this  dog  and  2 others  the  total  maltase  activity  disappeared 
upon  heating  at  54  C for  1 hr. 

The  aamylase  activity  of  the  pancreas  was  22.621+5.08  units  and  the 
total  amylase  activity  (aamylase+amyloglucosidase)  of  the  intestinal 
mucosa  was  0.031±0.02  units  (Table  4). 

When  papain  solublized  homogenates  from  2 dogs  were  applied  to  7.5% 
polyacrylamide  gels,  electrophoresed  and  stained  for  protein,  four 
major  protein  bands  were  detected,  one  fast  moving  and  three  slower 


f 


moving  bands.  In  the  discontinuous  tris-HCl  buffer  system,  maltase 
and  amyloglucosidase  were  found  in  the  sliced  gels.  In  Figure  1A 
two  samples  are  compared.  Sample  Ts  shows  two  peaks  of  maltase 
activity  and  Vs  shows  only  one  peak.  Figure  IB  depicts  amylogluco- 
sidase activity  in  both  samples  with  sample  Ts  possessing  a small 
second  peak  of  doubtful  sifnificance.  In  the  continuous  imidazole 
buffer  system  maltase,  amyloglucosidase  and  sucrase  were  demonstrated 
in  the  sliced  gels.  Again  the  Ts  sample  displayed  two  peaks  of 
maltase  activity  and  the  Ys  sample  only  one  peak.  The  amylogluco- 
sidase assayed  gels  revealed  only  one  peak  in  each  of  the  samples. 

A third  set  of  gels  showed  sucrase  activity  trailing  over  a broad 
range  of  slices.  Lactase  activity  was  not  found  in  either  buffer 
system  and  will  be  described  later. 


In  these  experiments  it  was  seen  that  the  method  of  treatment  of 
intestinal  tissue  greatly  affected  the  detection  and  quantification 
of  disaccharidase  activity  in  the  microvilli  of  the  mucosal  epithe- 
lium. For  example,  the  samples  which  were  sonicated  for  only  one 
minute  had  amyloglucosidase  activities  which  were  barely  detectable. 
However,  upon  prolonged  sonification  a nearly  25-fold  increase  in 
activity  was  observed.  The  maltase  activity  increased  more  than 
threefold,  and  the  sucrase  activity  improved  slightly.  Only  lactase 
showed  a reduction  in  activity  after  sonification  for  4 a^nutes. 

This  may  be  due  to  its  sensitivity  to  heat  and  oxidation^  . In 
contrast j^the  solubilization  treatment  proposed  by  Dahlquist  and 
Teleneos  had  a deliterious  effect  on  the  activities  of  all  the 
enzymes  tested.  These  variations  may  explain  the  inconsistences 
seen  when  comparing  the  results  of  other  authors.  Hi  1 1 **  , in  his 
excellent  study  on  malabsorption  in  dogs,  used  two  methods  for  enzyme 
extraction.  A Griffiths  tube  homogenizer  was  used  for  manual  assay 
whereas,  an  ultrasonicator  was  used  for  assay  in  an  autoanalyzer. 

The  sonicated  samples  always  yielded  higher  activities.  He  stated 
that  this  increased  activity  was  probably  due  to  untimed  enzyme 
hydrolysis  in  the  dialyzer  of  the  autoanalyzer.  However,  early 
studies  in  our  laboratory  comparing  methods  of  tissue  disruption 
indicated  that  sonicated  tissue  yielded  higher  enzymatic  activity. 
Thus,  we  believe  that  some  of  the  increased  activity  found  by  Hill 
could  be  due  to  greater  release  of  these  membrane -bound  enzymes. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  previous  studies  presented  carbohy- 
drase  values  from  mongrels  or  as  averages  from  two  or  more  purebreds. 
The  present  investigation  has  defined  carbohydrase  values  for  one 
purebred  dog. 


The  multiplicity  of  canine  maltases  has  not  yet  been  <J|fined. 
Auricchio  has  separated  five  different  human  maltases*  . Three  of 
these  are  heat  inactivated  at  54  C for  1 hr,  maltases  111  and  IV 
each  of  which  degrades  maltose  and  sucrose  and  maltase  V which  de- 
grades maltose,  palatinose  and  isomaltose.  The  presence  of  a canine 


1605 


d 


*4 


1 


maltase  type  V has  not  been  described  in  previous  investigations. 
Therefore,  to  show  isomaltase  as  a separate  isozyme  of  maltase  in 
canines,  we  measured  maltase  and  isomaltase  activities  of  4 min- 
sonicated  homogenates  before  and  after  heating.  The  results  showed 
a heat  sensitive  isomaltase  in  8 of  the  9 dogs  sampled  (Table  5). 
Three  of  the  samples  including  that  with  no  isomaltase,  had  a total 
maltase  activity  which  disappeared  upon  heating  at  54  C.  According 
to  Auricchio's  scheme,  these  3 samples  do  not  show  the  presence  of 
the  ieat  stable  maltases  I and  II.  On  the  basis  of  the  nine  dogs 
studied,  we  have  shown  that  canines  do  possess  several  maltases: 
heat  stable  (54  C,  1 hr)  maltase  types  I and  II,  heat  labile  maltase 
types  III  and  IV  and  a heat  labile  isomaltase  type  V (Table  3). 

The  tris-glucose-oxidase  method  of  Dahlquist  used  in  these  experi- 
ments employs  o-dianisidine  as  a chromagen.  Because  of  its  suspected 
carcinogenic  effects,  this  method  was  supplanted  by  the  Trinder 
method  which  utilizes  4-aminophenazone  and  phenol.  The  results 
obtained  with  the  Trinder  method  were  comparable  to  those  of  the 
Dahlquist  method  when  the  same  protocol  was  used. 

In  this  study,  a unit  of  disaccharidase  activity  is  defined  as 
nanomoles  of  disaccharide  hydrolyzed  per  mg  protein  per  minute.  A 
mg  of  protein  was  chosen  as  the  criterion  rather  than  a mg  wet  weight 
of  t^sue  because  it  is  a more  reproducible  method  of  measurement. 
Hill  came  to  this  same  conclusion  after  using  the  wet  weight  method 
of  measurement. 


a-amylase  has  been  widely  investigated  using  different  techniques 
which  employ  various  units  of  activity  and  it  is  dif^icult 

to  compare  the  results  of  different  investigators1^'  ' . The 

Dahlquist  method  of  reducing  sugars  was  chosen  for  these  studies 
because  its  unit  of  amylase  activity  is  defined  according  to  the 
recommendations  for  clinical  and  biochemical  enzyme  units  made  b ' 
the  Joint  Sub-Commission  on  Clinical  Enzymes  Units  of  the  Inter- 
national Union  of  Biochemistry  and  the  International  Union  of  Pure 
and  Applied  Chemistry 

In  the  polyacrylamide  gel  electrophoresis  experiments  neither  sucrase 
nor  lactase  activity  was  detected  in  the  tris-HCl  buffer  system. 

This  was  probably  ^ye  to  the  inhibitory  nature  of  the  tris  buffer 
on  disaccharidases^  . For  this  reason,  the  imidazole  buffer  was  used 
instead.  Sucrase  activity  was  detected  and  a 2-  to  3-fold  increase 
in  activity  was  found  for  maltase  and  amyloglucosidase.  However,  the 
resolution  of  enzyme  activity  in  the  imidazole  system  was  not  as 
discrete  as  the  discontinues  tris-HCl  system.  Our  inability  to 
detect  lactase  activity  in  either  buffer  may  have  been  due  to  a loss 
of  activity  during  the  solubilizing  of  the  samples,  some  inhibitory 
effect  of  the  PAGE  system,  or  a combination  of  both,  as  lactase  is 


23 

inactivated  by  heat  and  by  oxidation 

The  reproduction  of  the  two  peak  pattern  of  maltase  activity  in  dif- 
ferent electrophoretic  buffer  systems  indicated  that  one  of  the  peaks 
in  the  Ts  sample  is  a valid  and  separable  enzymatic  activity  and  it 
may  represent  the  presence  of  isolamtase  which  was  subsequently 
demonstrated  in  the  heat  inactivation  studies.  The  absence  of  this 
maltase-isomaltase  enzyme  in  one  dog's  mucosa  indicated  that  it  was 
either  a non-induced,  inducible  enzyme  or  a variable  genetic  char- 
acteristic of  this  breed. 

Our  data  indicate  that  thermal,  chemical,  or  mechanical  treatment 
of  intestinal  mucosa  prior  to  or  during  assay  contributes  to  quanti- 
tative variations  when  measuring  1(  vels  of  digestive  carbohydrases. 
This  becomes  a major  consideration  when  digestive  disorders  are 
suspected  to  be  due  t02enzymatic2deficiencies.  A statistical  analysis 

c ■ r 2 o Between  o within!  c ..  ........ 

of  variance  [a  _ . = r; *• — r: 1 of  the  results  obtained  using 

L Total  N N • n 1 6 

the  procedures  outlined  in  this  report  revealed  that  the  variation 
within  sample  is  extremely  low.  The  variations  reflected  in  the 
standard  deviations  in  Table  4 are  primarily  contributed  by  the 
variation  among  the  dogs.  Thus  even  among  a group  of  purebred  dogs, 
the  intestinal  enzyme  levels  span  a range  of  specific  activity. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  reduce  variations  stemming  from  method 
of  treatment  and  assay  to  a minimum.  The  procedure  presented  in 
this  report  is  an  effort  to  refine  the  method  of  detection  in  order 
to  further  define  the  composition  and  concentration  of  canine  intes- 
tinal carbohydrases. 

In  summary,  intestinal  mucosa  and  pancreas  from  inbred  hounds 
were  assayed  for  carbohydrase  activity  using  several  methods  of  tissue 
treatment.  The  enzymes  found  and  studied  were  a-amylase,  sucrase, 
lactase,  amyloglucosidase , cellobiase,  maltase  and  isomaltase. 
Experiments  using  polyacrylamide  gel  columns  and  heat  inactivation 
showed  the  presence  of  an  isoenzyme  of  maltase  which  degrades  iso- 
maltose. This  activity  has  not  been  previously  demonstrated  in 
canines.  An  optimal  standard  procedure  is  presented  for  the  prep- 
aration and  assay  of  canine  digestive  enzymes.  A statistical 
analysis  of  variance  of  the  results  showed  that  the  variance  was 
primarily  associated  with  differences  among  dogs  and  not  by  vari- 
ance within  the  procedure.  When  the  different  extraction  procedures 
were  used,  results  indicated  that  the  level  of  enzymes  detected 
differed  with  the  method  of  treatment. 


1607 


f 


I 


r 

t 

I 

f 

L 

[ 

l 

I 

I 


i 


t 


Table  1:  The  development  of  parainfluenza  SV5  neutralizing  antibody  in 

seronegative  dogs  given  an  attenuated  CDV-ICH-SVS  vaccine 
(preliminary  study)* 


Vaccination 
schedule  \ 

Day  post 
/accinati< 
examined 

)n 

No.  of  dogs  with 
antibody  titer 

Geom. 

mean. 

No.  sero 
positive** 

Dose  Day 

0 

2 

4 

8 

16 

32  64  128  titer 

No.  tested  (%) 

1 0 

7 

8 

- 

- 

- 

- 

- 

0 

0/8 

(0) 

14 

2 

3 

1 

2 

2.6 

6/8 

(75) 

30 

4 

1 

2 

1 

2.0 

4/8 

(50) 

2 30 

45 

1 

- 

3 

1 

1 

1 1 

8.0 

7/8 

(88) 

70 

1 

2 

1 

2 

- 

2 

5.7 

7/8 

(88) 

*Tissuvax  D-H-P  (Pittman-Moore 
the  Subcutaneous  route. 

**Titer  1:2  or  greater. 

Inc. , 

Washington  Crossing,  NJ 

08560) 

by 

Table  2 

: The  parainfluenza  SV5  neutralizing  antibody  response  of 

seronegative  dogs  given  attenuated  CDV-ICH-SV5  vaccine  by 
the  subcutaneous  route 

Vaccination 

schedule 

Day  post 
vaccination 

No.  of  dogs  with  Geom. 

antibody  titer  mean. 

No.  sero 
positive 

Dose 

Day 

examined  0 

2 

4 

8 

16 

32  64  128  titer 

No.  tested  (%) 

1 

0 

30  14 

10 

9 

3 

1 

2.2 

23/37 

(62) 

2 

30 

45  4 

1 

9 

9 

5 

51  1 7.8 

31/35 

(89) 

70  3 

8 

9 

4 

3 

3 4.5 

27/30 

(90) 

1608 


- ■■■^,v...  -_^ a . ; _ — - , ^ ...  jri. 


Specific  activity  of  enzymes  found  in  intestines 


• c 

<0  00  —i 

a)  e e 

co  w 
rt  io  c 

H (J  iH 

>>-H  <U 

e e 

<30 

O. 


+ 

U I <D 
t/)  3 </> 
rt  h cq 
*-h  00  t3 
X O *H 
6 H w 

< x o 

il u 


0> 

o 

m 

o 

«n 

• 

■H 

o 

Xi 

Q 

+1 

Q 

o 

Z 

NO 

z 

rH 

o 

rH 

o 

o 

• 

u 

o 

o 

r n 

»-H 

1 

o 

o 

o 

3 d> 

• 

• 

• 

</) 

o 

o 

o 

oo  cs 

+1 

+1 

+1 

O "0 

(N 

0> 

in 

* 

rH  -H 

o 

*-H 

* 

X </> 

o 

o 

o 

• 

E O 

• 

• 

• 

c 

o 

o 

o 

o 

•H 

E 

\ 

<N 

H 

r-H 

C 

o 

o 

o 

•H 

0) 

« 

• 

• 

0) 

l/) 

o 

o 

o 

4-> 

+1 

+1 

+1 

o 

♦-* 

in 

vO 

i-H 

Ih 

o 

CM 

rH 

o, 

o 

o 

o 

xj 

• 

• 

■ 

• 

o 

o 

o 

00 

E 

(N 

cm 

<N 

</) 

o 

o 

O 

<U 

• 

• 

• 

•r4 

w 

o 

o 

o 

c 

a 

+1 

+i 

+1 

3 

u 

O) 

Cl 

u 

in 

rH 

3 

o 

o 

o 

C/> 

• 

• 

• 

o 

o 

o 

■4* 

(N 

fO 

0> 

o 

r-H 

rH 

</) 

• 

• 

• 

rt 

o 

o 

o 

4-» 

+1 

+1 

+1 

^H 

cr> 

00 

LT. 

rt 

NO 

en 

2 

o 

CM 

iH 

• 

• 

• 

o 

o 

o 

<-*  T3 
« t-i 
2 rt 
-3 
<U  C 

i—4  flj 

O X 

e in 
o 

e +i 
rt  i 

z IX 

■4-  -t*  Q 
Z 


Not  determined 


Table  5: 

Maltase  and  Isomaltase  Activities  in  l.eateu 
mucosal  homogenates  sonicated  for  4 min. 

and  unheated 

Enzyme: 

Maltase 

Isomaltase 

Substract 

: maltose 

isomaltose 

Unheated 

Heated  54  C/hr 

Unheated 

Heated  54  C/hr 

Sample  J 

0.3999* 

0.2163 

0.0589 

0.0000 

T 

0.3801 

0.2095 

0.0670 

0.0000 

G 

0.3245 

0.1517 

0.0599 

0.0000 

A 

0.3000 

0.0800 

0.0482 

0.0000 

H 

0.2504 

0.0000 

0.0000 

0.0000 

E 

0.2205 

0.0835 

0.0423 

0.0000 

F 

0.1835 

0.0565 

0.0221 

0.0000 

I 

0.1554 

0.0000 

0.0220 

0.0000 

K 

0.1502 

0.0000 

0.0204 

0.0000 

‘units  - 

nanomole  di saccharide  hydrolyzed 

per  mg.  protein  per  minute, 

, VST' 


’"  'it  ' -~--i.^-v-^  J'-'—  -^■T  -■ 


Figure  r Separation  of  Uisaccharidases  by  polyacry laniue  gel^ 

° electrophoresis.  Discontinuous  electrophoreses  us:..j 

tris-HCl  buffer  system.  Direction  of  electrophoresis 


E 

E 


wn  ost?  cro  WN  ost?  'o  o 

1612 


.T,  ^ 


Gel  Length  in 


Project  3A762760A837  MILITARY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT 
Task  00  Military  Animal  Resources  Development 
Work  Unit  056  Diseases  of  Military  Animals 
Literature  Cited. 


References: 


1.  Nyindo,  M.  B.  A.,  M.  Ristic,  D.  L.  Huxsoll,  and  A.  R. 

Smith.  1971.  Tropical  canine  pancytopenia:  In  vitro  cultivation 

of  the  causative  agent  - Ehrlichia  canis.  Amer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  32: 
1651-1658. 

2.  Storz,  J.  1971.  Chlamydia  and  chlamydia-induced  diseases. 
Charles  C.  Thomas,  Springfield,  IL. 

3.  Gordon,  F.  B.,  11.  R.  Dressier,  A.  L.  Qtan,  W.  T.  McQuilkin, 
and  J.  I.  Thomas.  1972.  Effect  of  ionizing  irradiation  on  sus- 
ceptibility of  McCoy  cell  cultures  to  Chlamydia  trachomatis.  Appl. 
Microbiol.  23: 123-129. 

4.  Osterman,  J.  V.  1975.  Personal  communication. 

5.  Gimenez,  D.  F.  1964.  Staining  rickettsiae  in  yolk-sac 
cultures.  Stain  Technol.  39:135-140. 

6.  Binn,  L.  N.,  E.  C.  Lazar,  M.  Rogul,  V.  M.  Shepler,  L.  J. 
Swango,  T.  Claypoole,  D.  W.  Hubbard,  S.  G.  Asbill,  and  A.  D. 
Alexander.  1968.  Upper  respiratory  disease  in  military  dogs: 
Bacterial,  mycoplasma,  and  viral  studies.  Amer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  29: 
1809-1815. 

7.  Crandell,  R.  A.,  W.  B.  Brunslow,  and  V.  E.  Davison.  1968. 
Isolation  of  a parainfluenza  virus  from  sentry  dogs  with  upper 
respiratory  disease.  Amer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  29:2141-2147. 

8.  Hill,  F.  W.  G.,  and  D.  F.  Kelly.  1974.  Naturally  Occurring 
Intestinal  Malabsorption  in  the  Dog.  Digest.  Dis.  19:649-665. 

9.  More,  P.,  and  M.  Messer.  1968.  Studies  of  Disaccharidase 
Activities  of  the  Intestine  of  the  Domestic  Cat  and  Other  Carniv- 
orous Mammals.  Comp.  Biochem.  and  Physiol.  24:717-725. 

10.  Toofanian,  F.,  D.  E.  Kidder,  and  F.  W.  G.  Hill.  1974. 

The  Amylases  of  Calf  Small  Intestine.  Brit.  Vet.  J.  130:XIX-XXI . 


1613 


11.  Welsh,  J.  D.,  and  A.  Walker.  1965.  Intestinal  Disaccha- 
ridase  and  Alkaline  Phosphatase  Activity  in  the  Dog.  Proc.  Soc. 
Exp.  Biol,  and  Med.  120:525-527. 


12.  Ziene,  L.,  W.  C.  Vogel,  and  W.  D.  Kelly.  1963.  Species 
Difference  in  Pancreatic  Lipolytic  and  Amylolytic  Enzymes.  J. 

App.  Physiol.  18:77-82. 

13.  Dahlquist,  A.,  and  U.  Telenius.  1969.  Column  Chromato- 
graphy of  Human  Small  Intestinal  Maltase,  Isomaltase  and  Invertase 
Activities.  Biochem.  J.  Ill: 139-146. 

14.  Lowry,  0.  H.,  N.  J.  Rosebrough,  A.  L.  Farr,  and  R.  J. 
Randall.  1951.  Protein  Measurement  with  the  Folin  Phenol  Reagent. 
J.  Biol.  Chem.  193:265-275. 

15.  Dahlquist,  A.  "1964.  Method  of  Assay  of  Intestinal  Dis- 
accharidases.  Anal.  Biochem.  7^18-25. 

16.  Friedemann,  T.  E.,  N.  F.  Witt,  and  B.  W.  Neighbors.  1967. 
Determination  of  Starch  and  Soluble  Carbohydrates.  1.  Development 
of  a Method  for  Grains,  Stock  Feeds,  Cereal  Foods,  Fruits  and 
Vegetables.  J.  AOAC  50: 944. 

17.  Dahlquist,  A.  1962.  A Method  for  the  Determination  of 
Amylase  in  the  Intestinal  Content.  Scand.  J.  Clin,  and  Lab.  Invest. 
14 : 145-151 . 

18.  Kidder,  D.  E.,  F.  W.  G.  Hill,  and  J.  A.  Stevens.  1972. 
Automatic  Measurement  of  Some  Mucosal  Carbohydrases . Clin.  Chim. 
Acta,  37^:491-501 . 

19.  Auricchio,  S.,  G.  Semenza,  and  A.  Rubino.  1965.  Multipli- 
city of  Human  Intestinal  Disaccharidases.  II.  Characterization  of 
the  Individual  Maltases.  Biochim.  Biophys.  Acta  96:498-507. 

20.  Alpers,  D.  H.  1969.  Separation  and  Isolation  of  Rat  and 
Human  Intestinal  8-Galactosidases.  J.  Biol.  Chem.  244: 1238-1246. 

21.  Ornstein,  L.  1961.  Disc  Electrophoresis,  Canal  Industrial 
Corp.,  Bethesda,  MD. 

22.  Hill,  F.  W.  G.,  Ph.D.  Thesis.  1971.  Univ.  of  Bristol, 
Dept  Vet  Med,  Bristol,  England. 

23.  Birkenmeier,  E.,  and  D.  H.  Alpers.  1974.  Enzymatic 
Properties  of  Rat  Lactase-Phlorizin  Hydrolase.  Biochim.  Biophys. 
Acta  350:100-112. 


1614 


24.  Trinder,  P.  1969.  Determination  of  Glucose  in  Blood  Using 
Glucose  Oxidase  with  an  Alternative  Oxygen  Acceptor.  Ann.  Clin. 
Biochem.  <S:24-26. 

25.  McGeachin,  R.  L.,  J.  R.  Gleason,  and  M.  R.  Adams.  1958. 
Amylase  Distribution  in  Extrapancreatic , Extrasalivary  Tissues. 

Arch.  Biochem.  and  Biophys.  75:403-411. 

26.  Rajasingham,  R.,  J.  L.  Bell,  and  D.  N.  Baron.  1971.  A 
comparative  study  of  the  isoenzymes  of  mammalian  a-amylase.  F.nz. 

1_2: 180-186. 

Publications: 

1.  Buhles,  W.  C.,  Jr.,  D.  L.  Huxsoll,  and  P.  K.  Hildebrandt. 

1975.  Tropical  canine  pancytopenia:  Role  of  aplastic  anemia  in  the 

pathogenesis  of  severe  disease.  J.  Comp.  Pathol.  85:511-521. 

2.  Buhles,  W.  C.,  D.  L.  Huxsoll,  G.  Ruch,  R.  H.  Kenyon,  and 

B.  L.  Elisberg.  1975.  Evaluation  of  primary  blood  monocyte  and  bone 
marrow  cell  culture  for  the  isolation  of  Rickettsia  rickettsii . 
Infect.  Immun.  12 : 1457-1463. 

3.  Davidson,  D.  E.,  Jr.,  G.  S.  Dill,  Jr.,  M.  Tingpalapong, 

S.  Premabutra,  P.  L.  Nguen,  E.  H.  Stephenson,  and  M.  Ristic.  1975. 
Canine  ehrlichiosis  (tropical  canine  pancytopenia)  in  Thailand. 
Southeast  Asia  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  6j 541-543. 

4.  DeShazo,  R.  D.,  J.  R.  Boyce,  J.  V.  Osterman,  and  E.  H. 
Stephenson.  1976.  Early  diagnosis  of  Rocky  Mountain  spotted  fever 
using  the  primary  monocyte  culture  technique.  J.  Amer.  Med.  Ass. 
235:1353-1355. 

5.  Groves,  M.  G.,  G.  L.  Dennis,  H.  L.  Amyx,  and  D.  L.  Huxsoll. 
1975.  Transmission  of  Ehrlichia  canis  by  ticks  (Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus) . Amer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  36:937-940. 

6.  Lewis,  G.,  D.  Renquist,  I.  Hemelt,  D.  Huxsoll,  M.  Ristic, 
and  F..  II.  Stephenson.  1975.  Experimental  inoculation  of  Macaca 
mulatta  with  Ehrlichia  cani s-infected  canine  monocyte  cell  culture. 
Proc.  56th  Ann.  Meet.  Conf.  Res.  Workers  Anml.  Dis.  p.15. 

7.  Smith,  R.  D.,  D.  M.  Sells,  E.  H.  Stephenson,  M.  Ristic,  and 
D.  L.  Huxsoll.  1976.  Development  of  Ehrlichia  canis,  causative 
agent  of  canine  ehrlichiosis,  in  the  tick  Rhipicephalus  sanguineus 
and  it  differentiation  from  a symbiotic  rickettsia.  Amer.  J.  Vet. 
Res.  37:119-126. 


1615 


8.  Stephenson,  E.  H.,  and  J.  Storz.  1975.  Protein  profiles 
of  dense-centered  forms  of  five  chlamydial  strains  of  animal  origin. 
Amer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  36:881-887. 

9.  Storz,  J.,  E.  J.  Carroll,  E.  H.  Stephenson,  L.  Ball,  and 
A.  K.  Eugster.  1976.  Urogenital  infection  and  seminal  excretion 
after  inoculation  of  bulls  and  rams  with  chlamydiae.  Amer.  J.  Vet. 
Res.  37:517-520. 


r 


Diseases  of  Military  Animais  Section  II 
Investigators: 

Principal:  LTC  T.  J.  Keefe,  VC 

Associate:  L.  N.  Binn,  Ph.D.;  R.  E.  Sims,  B.S.;  CPT  j.  R.  Boyce, 

VC;  MAJ  R.  J.  Beattie,  VC;  MAJ  C.  A.  Montgomery,  VC; 

R.  H.  Marchwicki,  B.S.,  CPT  J.  P.  Alford,  VC;  MAJ  M.  J. 
Reardon,  VC;  SP4  R.  Barriere;  PFC  J.  A.  Lee;  and 
PFC  A.  E.  Kanthack 

Description: 


To  investigate  diseases  and/or  conditions  affecting  laboratory  animals 
at  the  1VRAIR  to  enhance  production  efficiency  and  health  care  manage- 
ment, and  to  provide  research  animals  free  of  known  or  potential 
pathogens.  A major  effort  is  directed  toward  defining  the  etiology 
of  respiratory  and  enteric  pathogens,  developing  rapid,  specific  and 
economical  diagnostic  techniques,  and  developing  rapid  analytical 
surveillance  methods  for  early  detection  of  known  or  potential  path- 
ogens. 


During  the  reporting  period,  research  activities  have  included  in- 
vestigations on:  (1)  respiratory  disease  in  random  source  laboratory 
dogs,  (2)  antibiotic-induced  lethal  diarrhea  in  hamsters,  and  (3)  the 
role  of  enterotoxigenic  E_.  col i in  diarrhea  of  monkeys  and  hamsters. 

1.  Respiratory  disease  in  random  source  laboratory  dogs. 


Severe  and  often  fatal  respiratory  disease  continues  as  the  most 
important  problem  |n  the  conditioning  of  random  source  dogs  (RSD) 
for  laboratory  use1.  Experience  at  the  WRAIR  more  than  a decade  ago 
indicated  that  up  to  70%  of  these^d^gs  developed  respiratory  disease 
and  20%  of  the  affected  dogs  died  ’ . Clinical  observations,  patho- 
logic examination,  and  virus  studies  have  provided  clear  evidence 
of  the  importance  of  canine  distemper  (CD)  virus  infections  in  the 
majority  of  severe  cases  of  respiratory  disease.  However,  respira- 
tory disease  of  varying  severity  occurred  in  dogs  immune  to  CD  virus. 
The  severe  disease  occurred  notwithstanding  prompt  immunization  of 
newly  purchased  dogs  with  attenuated  CD  virus  and  infectious  canine 
hepatitis  (ICH)  virus  vaccines.  Moreover,  intensive  antimicrobial 
treatment  of  sick  dogs  was  largely  unsuccessful.  Laboratory  virus 
studies  of  these  RSD  showed  the  presence  of  6 viruses  and  the  common 


1 - k'-.viv  A. *1  r L _ . I*  ■->-  -V  ■ - ‘•-a  I ■ v J-  — - I -V  V -----  If  A C-J  — I ■ '»  llifl 


2 3 

occurrence  of  multiple  virus  infections^-’  . In  addition  to  CD  virus, 
infections  with  ICI1  virus,  Toronto  A26/61  adenovirus,  parainfluenza 
SV5,  canine  herpesvirus  and  reovirus  type  1 were  detected.  The 
respiratory  disease  problem  encountered  by  this  institute  a decade 
ago  was  resolved  when  colony  bred  hounds  were  purchased.  At  the 
coiony,  the  hounds  were  given  CD-ICH  vaccines  and  many  dogs  were 
naturally  infected  with  SV5  and  canine  herpesvirus.  Due  to  changing 
contractural  requirements,  in  December  1975,  WRAIR  again  began  to 
buy  unconditioned  RSD.  As  anticipated,  during  the  conditioning  of 
these  dogs,  a high  incidence  of  severe  respiratory  disease  has  oc- 
curred. A prospective  study  is  in  progress  to  define  the  current 
etiology  and  epizootiology.  The  objectives  of  this  investigation 
are  the  reduction  of  the  number  and  severity  of  respiratory  disease 
cases  and  better  clinical  management  of  the  remaining  affected  dogs. 
This  report  summarizes  the  clinical  observations  and  laboratory 
studies  carried  out  to  date. 

"roups  of  RSD  were  purchased  from  a licensed  vendor  (Biomedics 
Associates,  Inc.,  Friedensburg,  TA  17933).  On  arrival,  the  dogs 
were  weighed,  examined  for  signs  of  disease,  heartworms,  and  unsuit- 
able dogs  rejected.  Many  shipments  contained  dogs  exhibiting  overt 
signs  of  respiratory  disease.  The  newly  procured  dogs  were  condi- 
tioned in  building  511  as  customary,  bach  dog  was  identified  by 
number  and  given  CD-ICH  vaccine  within  48  hours  after  arrival. 

Blood  specimens  for  virus  serology,  and  CBC  were  collected  on  the 
day  of  arrival  from  each  dog.  At  the  onset  of  signs  of  respiratory 
disease,  nose,  throat,  and  rectal  swab  specimens  were  obtained  from 
dogs  for  bacterial,  mycoplasma,  and  virus  isolation  tests.  A blood 
specimen  for  serology  and  CBC  was  also  obtained  at  this  time  and  a 
convalescent  blood  specimen  21  days  later.  In  addition,  post-mortem 
tissue  specimens  for  histopathologic,  microbiologic,  virus,  and 
mycoplasma  studies  were  collected  from  dogs  with  fatal  infections. 

The  procedure  fo^  microbiological  and  virus  studies  have  been  des- 
cribed elsewhere^’  in  detail.  Primary  dog  kidney  (PDK)  and  the 
Walter  Reed  canine  cell  (WRCC)  were  used  for  isolation  of  virus. 

During  the  conditioning  of  each  of  six  groups  of  RSD  severe  respira- 
tory disease  occurred  with  one  or  more  fatal  infections  (Table  1). 
More  than  half  (86  of  152)  of  the  new  dogs  developed  respiratory 
disease  and  40%  (34  of  86)  of  the  sick  dogs  died.  Signs  of  upper 
respiratory  disease  (URD)  were  detected  as  early  as  2 days  after 
arrival  with  most  cases  beginning  10-14  days  after  arrival.  The 
clinical  nature  of  disease  could  be  divided  into  2 types  depending 
on  the  clinical  signs,  duration  of  illness,  and  outcome.  Initially 
all  affected  dogs  exhibited  signs  of  URD,  i.e.,  conjunctivitis, 
nasal  discharge  and  elevated  body  temperature.  Following  treatment 


1618 


for  5 days  with  tylosin,  sulfonamide,  antihistamine,  vitamin  C,  and 
expectorants,  40%  (36)  dogs  recovered.  These  dogs  were  considered 
to  have  had  uncomplicated  URD.  The  remaining  50  dogs  developed  a 
second  clinical  course  consistent  with  lower  respiratory  disease 
and  a diganosis  of  distemper,  i.e.,  cough,  pneumonia,  diarrhea, 
dehydration  and  depression.  Approximately  one-third  (16)  of  these 
severely  ill  dogs  made  a stow  recovery  without  sequelae.  The  re- 
maining 34  dogs  died  or  developed  signs  of  central  nervous  system 
disease  and  were  euthanatized  (Table  1).  tlistopathogenic  examination 
of  17  of  34  fatal  cases  confirmed  the  clinical  diagnosis  of  CD,  in 
that  pathognomonic  virus  inclusions  were  evident  in  14  dogs,  and  the 
remaining  3 dogs  were  reported  as  CD  suspect  cases.  The  remaining 
fatal  cases  were  not  available  for  histopathologic  examination. 

Studies  were  carried  out  on  the  CD  and  ICH  antibody  status  of  the 
dog  on  arrival.  Forty-three  percent  (67  of  157)  of  the  dogs  had 
significant  CD  virus  neutralizing  antibody  and  52%  (81  of  159)  had 
ICH  virus  neutralizing  antibody  (Table  2).  Fifty-six  of  the  67  dogs 
(84%)  with  CDV  antibody  also  had  ICH  virus  neutralizing  antibody. 

The  relationship  of  these  antibody  test  results  to  subsequent  res- 
piratory disease  during  the  conditioning  period  is  summarized  in 
Table  3.  As  anticipated,  dogs  with  CD  virus  and  ICH  virus  antibodies 
had  the  lowest  incidence  (23%)  of  respiratory  disease  and  dogs  with- 
out these  antibodies  had  the  highest  incidence  (83%).  Although  the 
number  of  dogs  with  only  CD  virus  antibody  was  small,  these  dogs  also 
had  a similar  low  incidence  of  disease  (27%)  as  dogs  with  both  types 
of  antibody.  The  dogs  with  only  ICII  virus  antibody  has  a signifi- 
cantly higher  rate  of  disease  (48%)  than  dogs  with  CD  virus  antibody. 
Consistent  with  the  previously  described  relationship  between  severe, 
lower  respiratory  diseases  and  histopathological ly  confirmed  CD,  dogs 
arriving  with  CL)  antibodies  experienced  relatively  mild  URD.  Dogs 
arriving  without  CD  antibodies  developed  the  severe,  lower  respiratory 
disease  of  CD.  The  findings  emphasize  the  importance  of  prior  immu- 
nity to  CD  in  preventing  severe  respiratory  disease  during  condition- 
ing. However,  it  is  important  to  note  the  occurrence  of  respiratory 
disease  in  approximately  one-fourth  the  dogs  with  CD  virus  antibody. 

Virus  isolation  studies  were  done  on  the  first  3 groups  of  dogs. 

Table  4 summarizes  the  results  of  isolation  attempts  from  nose,  throat, 
and  rectal  swab  specimens  in  PDK  and  WRCC  cells.  The  hemadsorbing 
viruses  and  adenoviruses  were  recovered  most  frequently.  Only  a few 
canine  herpesviruses  and  minute  viruses  of  canines  (MVC)  were  iso- 
lated. Adenoviruses  and  herpesviruses  were  recovered  equally  well 
in  PDK  and  WRCC  cell  cultures.  However,  the  hemadsorbing  viruses 
were  isolated  more  frequently  in  PDK  cell  than  WRCC  cultures.  The 
hemadsorbing  viruses  were  recovered  from  upper  respiratory  specimens 


1619 


but  not  from  rectal  specimens.  In  contrast,  adenoviruses  were  re- 
covered from  all  three  sources,  frequently  from  the  rectum  and  infre- 
quently from  nasal  secretions.  Different  isolates  from  each  dog  were 
identified  by  serum  neutralization  tests  and  the  results  summarized 
in  Table  5.  Viruses  were  recovered  from  29  of  39  dogs  tested.  Para- 
influenza SV5  and  Toronto  A26/61  were  recovered  from  each  group  of 
dogs.  Individual  dogs  in  each  group  shed  the  MVC.  Canine  herpes- 
virus was  recovered  only  from  dogs  in  the  last  group  tested.  In  6 
dogs,  2 viruses  were  simultaneously  recovered;  5 had  SV5  and  Toronto 
A26/61  viruses  and  1 had  Toronto  A26/61  and  canine  herpesviruses. 

The  findings  provide  evidence  of  multiple  virus  infection  during  the 
quarantine  of  each  group  of  dogs.  In  this  regard,  one  of  these  multi- 
ple virus  recoveries,  SV5  and  Toronto  A26/61  virus,  was  from  a dog 
rejected  on  arrival  with  signs  of  URD.  The  latter  findings  clearly 
indicate  that  these  viruses  are  introduced  into  our  facilities. 

Viruses  yie re  recovered  from  the  post-mortem  tissues  of  2 of  3 dogs. 

SV5  was  recovered  from  the  trachae,  lung,  and  pulmonary  lymph  node 
of  dog  66123.  This  dog  shed  SV5  from  the  nose  and  throat  2 week* 
before  death  and  was  shedding  Toronto  A26/61  virus  and  the  MVC  prior 
to  that.  The  histopathological  studies  on  this  dog  indicated  it 
died  with  concurrent  CD.  In  addition,  an  agent  unidentified  to  date 
has  been  recovered  in  PDK  cells  from  the  lungs  of  another  dog  (65908). 
Although  the  dog  has  pathognomic  CD,  the  isolate  was  not  neutralized 
by  CD  virus  antiserum.  Further  studies  on  its  identification  are  in 
progress. 

Serological  tests  are  in  progress  to  measure  the  transmission  of 
selected  canine  viruses  among  the  sick  dogs.  The  use  of  CD  and  ICH 
vaccines  precluded  studying  the  natural  transmission  of  CD,  ICH,  and 
Toronto  A26/61  viruses.  Results  of  SV5  and  canine  virus  neutraliza- 
tion tests  on  each  group  of  dogs  are  summarized  in  Table  6.  SV5 
infections  occurred  in  each  group  of  dogs  and  83%  of  the  sick  dogs 
had  a rj.se  in  titer.  In  contrast,  canine  herpesvirus  infections  were 
detected  in  only  one  group  of  21  dogs  and  only  4 (19%)  had  a rise  in 
titer.  Each  of  these  4 dogs  had  rises  also  to  SV5.  The  serological 
studies  were  consistent  with  the  virus  isolation  results. 

Bacterial  culture  of  nose  and  throat  specimens  resulted  in  the  iso- 
lation of  commensal  organisms,  e.g.,  staphlococcus,  coliform,  and 
Neisseria  sp.  However,  Bordetella  bronchespitica  and  beta  hemolytic 
streptococci  were  recovered  from  the  lungs  of  individual  dogs  with 
fatal  respiratory  disease.  These  2 dogs  also  had  CD.  Mycoplasma 
sp.  were  recovered  on  appropriate  media  from  throat  specimens  of  all 
13  sick  dogs  assayed.  The  lung  suspension  from  the  dog  cited  above 
with  £.  bronchi septica  also  contained  mycoplasma.  Hyperimmune 
specific  antiserum  against  the  6 prevalent  canine  mycoplasma  species 
have  been  prepared  in  rabbits  for  identification  of  isolates.  In 


1620 


addition,  mycoplasma  have  been  recovered  from  subcultures  of  canine 
cell  cultures  originally  inoculated  with  nasal  or  throat  specimens 
from  3 sick  dogs.  The  latter  3 isolates  were  detected  by  focal  areas 
of  hemadsorption.  The  hemadsorption  was  not  present  in  cell  cultures 
containing  chlortetracycline.  The  recovery  of  non-vi ral  hemadsorbing 
agents  in  cell  cultures  complicates  the  recovery  and  i-'i  icification  of 
parainfluenza  SV5  from  dogs.  The  significance  of  mycoplasma  in  canine 
respiratory  disease  has  not  been  resolved. 

In  summary,  severe  respiratory  disease  epizootics  have  occurred  in 
random  source  dogs  during  the  conditioning  period.  More  than  half  of 
the  introduced  dogs  developed  respiratory  diseases,  and  40%  of  the 
affected  dogs  died.  Clinical  observations  and  laboratory  studies 
have  provided  clear  evidence  the  CD  infections  were  responsible  for 
most  of  the  severe  lower  respiratory  disease  and  associated  mortality. 
SV5  and  Toronto  A26/61  adenovirus  infections  also  occurred  during  the 
conditioning  of  each  group  of  dogs.  The  latter  viruses  contributed 
to  the  severity  of  the  CD  infections  and  were  responsible  for  most  of 
the  URD  in  CD-immune  dogs.  Both  SV5  and  Toronto  A26/61  were  isolated 
from  sick  dogs  rejected  on  arrival,  indicating  these  viruses  were 
consistently  being  introduced  into  our  facilities  with  new  dogs. 

Canine  herpesvirus  and  MVC  were  recovered  from  a few  dogs.  Although 
B^.  bronchi  sept  ica  and  B hemolytic  streptococci  were  isolated  from  the 
lungs  of  individual  dogs  with  CD,  these  and  other  pathogenic  bacteria 
were  not  present  in  the  respiratory  secretions  of  other  sick  dogs. 
Further  studies  are  needed  to  identify  and  evaluate  the  pathogenic 
role  of  the  mycoplasmas  which  were  recovered  from  each  of  16  sick 
dogs  examined.  A virus,  unidentified  to  date,  was  recovered  from 
the  lungs  of  one  dog  which  died  with  CD.  Evidence  was  presented 
for  the  transmission  of  5 viruses,  CD,  Toronto  A26/61,  SV5,  canine 
herpesvirus,  and  MVC,  and  the  common  occurrence  of  multiple  infec- 
tions. Results  from  this  study  clearly  indicate  that  purchase  of 
dogs  immune  to  CD  should  reduce  the  morbidity  of  respiratory  disease 
by  50%  and  the  fatal  cases  by  75%.  Studies  are  in  progress  to  develop 
a rapid  and  inexpensive  assay  for  detection  of  CD  antibody. 


2.  Antibiotic-induced  lethal  diarrhea  in  hamsters. 


Outbreaks  of  watery  diarrhea  are  |he  principal  causes  of  morbidity 
and  mortality  in  hamster  colonies3.  Typically,  young  hamsters  which 
have  undergone  a stress  such  as  weaning  or  shipping  are  most  affected. 
The  enzootic  nature  of  the  diarrhea,  its  predilection  for  the  young, 
and  the  sporadic  occurrence  of  the  diarrhea  following  stress,  suggests 
an  indigenous  etiology.  Ong  of  the  most  popular  thegr^es  incriminates 
II.  coli  as  the  causal  agent0.  We,  as  well  as  others  * , have  ob- 
served that  the  intestinal  contents  of  affected  hamsters  frequently 
contain  large  numbers  of  E_.  coli,  and  rarely  other  organisms  not 
usually  considered  as  pathogens,  such  as  Proteus  sp.  and  Pseudomonas 

SR-  • " 


J 


Penicillir  and  other  antibiotics  inoculated  parenterally  into  ham- 
sterSgC^uses  diarrhea  within  several  days  and  usually  results  in 
death  ’ . The  normal  aerobic  bacterial  inhabitants  of  the  intestinal 
tract  are  found  in  disproportionate  numbers  compared  with  untreated 
hamsters.  The  bacteria  most  often  detected  in  large  numbers  were 
members  of  the  Enterobacteriaceae,  usually  E^.  coli,  Klebsiella  sp. , 
and  Enterobacter  sp.  Antibiotic  induced,  lethal  diarrhea  appears 
to  mimic  the  naturally  occurring  disease  clinically,  and  with  regard 
to  the  tvpe  and  number^o^various  Enterobacteriaceae  commonly  found 
in  affected  intestines  * . The  present  studies  were  designed  to 

clarify  the  etiologic  role  of  Enterobacteriaceae  in  the  lethal  diar- 
rhea of  hamsters  induced  by  penicillin. 

Pooled  accumulations  of  weekly  fecal  pellets  as  well  as  minced  whole 
intestine  from  dying  hamsters  were  cultured  by  incubating  the  samples 
in  250  ml  of  Trypticase  soy  broth  (TSB)  at  37°C  overnight.  The  broth 
cultures  were  then  subcultured  onto  MacConkey's,  eosine  methylene 
blue  (E.MB)  and  sheep's  blood  igars.  These  plates  were  then  incubated 
at  57°C  for  24  hr  and  observed  for  several  days  at  room  temperature 
before  discarding  as  negative.  Colonies  appearing  on  MacConkey's 
and/or  EMB  agar  were  selected  for  identification.  Colonies  appearing 
on  sheep's  blood  agar  were  Cram  stained.  Quantitative  culture  of 
small  intestine  was  performed  by  making  serial  100-fold  dilutions  of 
contents  in  TSB.  Dilutions  were  incubated  at  37°C  for  18-24  hr  and 
then  streaked  on  MacConkey's  agar  and  further  incubated  18-24  hr  at 
37°C.  Colonies  from  the  highest  dilution  showing  growth  were  picked 
for  identification  using  standard  techniques.  Hamsters  were  defined 
as  free  of  Enterobacteriaceae  when  no  facultative,  anaerobic,  oxidase 
negative,  uram  negative  rods  were  isolated  on  the  above-mentioned 
media. 


Hamsters  with  no  detectable  Enterobacteriaceae,  as  described  above 
were  (1)  maintained  in  a laminar  flow  hood,  (2)  handled  aseptically, 
(3)  reared  in  sterilized  cages  with  sterilized  bedding,  and  [4)  fed 
sterilized  food  and  water.  Twenty-one  hamsters  lacking  Enterobac- 
teriaceae were  used  for  this  experiment  when  21  days  old.  Fecal 
accumulations  from  these  animals,  when  cultured  on  sheep's  blood 
agar,  usually  showed  a variety  of  Gram  + organisms,  e.g.,  entero- 
cocci. These  hamsters  were  born  of  four  mothers  also  devoid  of 
Enterobacteriaceae.  Accumulated  feces  from  mothers  and  babies  of 
each  litter  were  cultured  weekly  as  previously  described.  By  these 
culture  techniques,  these  hamsters  showed  no  evidence  of  Enterobac- 
teriaceae, in  spite  of  coprophagy.  An  equal  number  of  21-day  old 
hamsters  received  from  a commercial  source  were  caged  without  attempts 
to  restrict  environmental  contamination.  Both  groups  of  hamsters 
were  inoculated  intraperitoneal ly  with  100,000  units  of  potassium 
penicillin  G in  0.5  ml  of  saline.  This  dose  and  route  of  inocula- 
tion, on  previous  trials,  was  associated  with  90%-1009»  mortality 
within  one  week  post-inoculation  (pi). 


In  both  groups  of  hamsters,  diarrhea  was  usually  evident  within  24 
hr  pi  and  persisted  in  varying  degrees  until  death.  The  mortality 
in  both  groups  was  similar;  11  of  21  (52%)  hamsters  without  intes- 
tinal Enterobacteriaceae  died,  and  7 of  12  (58%)  conventional  hamsters 
died.  Survivors  showed  a self-limiting  diarrhea  which  was  absent  by 
the  fourth  day  pi.  As  expected,  disproportionate  numbers  (=  10°  ml) 
of  Klebsiella  sp.  and  E_.  coli  were  isolated  from  the  small  intestines 
of  three  dead  hamsters  from  commercial  origin.  Nine  additional 
commercial  hamsters,  found  partially  decomposed  or  eaten,  also  har- 
bored Enterobacteriaceae.  Intestinal  contents  cultured  from  the  dead 
hamsters  which  were  devoid  of  Enterobacteriaceae  before  challenge 
yielded  growth  only  on  sheep's  blood  agar. 


In  summary,  these  experiments  showed  that  with  strict  sanitary  pre- 
cautions, hamsters  can  be  raised  and  maintained  healthy  without  har- 
boring Enterobacteriaceae.  However,  contrary  to  what  was  expected 
and  what  has  been  implied  by  others,  the  absence  of  these  organisms 
from  the  intestinal  tract  had  no  sparing  affect  on  antibiotic-induced 
diarrhea  and  death. 

3.  The  role  of  enterotoxigenic  _E.  :o!i  in  the  diarrhea  :,f  monkeys 
and  hamsters. 

Despite  the  advent  of  antibiotics,  the  feeding  of  more  nutritious 
diets,  and  the  use  of  improved  animal  housing  facilities,  diarrheal 
disease  continues  to  be  one  of  the  nrincipal  causes  of  morbidity  and 
mortality  in  laboratory  animals.  This  is  particularly  true  in  colo- 
nies of  newly  acquired  laboratory  monkeys  and  weanling  hamsters. 

Numerous  outbreaks  of  diarrhea  in  laboratory  monkeys  have  been  de- 
scribed in  the  literature.  The  vast  majority  cf  these  have  2a^ 5r i 4 
buted  to  infections  with  Shigella  spp.,  usually  Sh.  flexneri  ’ | * 

The  second  most  commonly  incriminated  agents  are  the  salmonellae1  * ’ 

Our  laboratory  examined  184  diarrheal  stools  from  monkeys  during  the 
2-year  period  1 July  1973  to  30  June  1975.  Shigella  sp£.  were  iso- 
lated from  23%  and  Salmonella  spp.  from  1%  of  the  specimens.  The 
most  striking  finding,  however,  was  the  absence  of  either  agent  in 
75%  of  the  cases.  Although  it  is  recognized  that  many  of  these  un- 
diagnosed cases  may  represent  nutritional,  parasitic,  or  viral  diar- 
rheas, we  have  nevertheless  observed  that  in  a high  percentage  of 
these  cases  the  stools  contained  large  concentrations  of  E_.  coli. 
Weanling  age  hamsters,  particularly  wheg  stressed,  develop  a highly 
lethal  diarrhea.  We,  as  well  as  others0,  have  observed  that  the 
small  intestines  of  affegted  hamsters  frequently  contain  very  high 
numbers  of  E.  col i (£  10  /ml).  Although  coli  is  not  currently 

recognized  as  a cause  of  diarrhea  in  either  of  these  two  species, 
the  ubiquitous  and  pathogenic  nature  of  this  organism  in  other  spe- 
cies requires  that  it  be  considered  as  a possible  cause  of  enteric 
disease. 


1623 


T-rz-ruxrrzLsrw .»i.w MqMKGag - "n.  7: 


Enterotoxin  elaborating  strains  are  also  recognized  a^e^ologic 
agents  of  diarrhea  in  humans,  young  swine,  and  calves10 ’ . Serotyping 

cannot  be  used  to  evaluate  enteropathogenicity  of  EL  col i , since 
enterotoxin  promotion  is  determined  by  a plasmid  which  can  be  passed 
to  any  serotype  ‘ . Systems  for  the  assay  of  EL  coli  enterotoxin  are 
based  on  animal  intestinal  loop  models  or  indirect  cyclic  AMP  measure- 
ments. Undoubtedly  the  tedious  testing  procedures  required  to  eval- 
uate a strain's  pathogenicity  partially  accounts  for  the  absence  of 
reports  of  enterotoxigenic  coli  for  laboratory  animal  species. 

Fecal  swabs  from  131  monkeys  experiencing  diarrhea  during  early  con- 
ditioning and  before  antibiotic  treatment  were  streaked  onto  plates 
of  MacConkey,  salmonella-shigella,  and  brilliant  green  agars  for 
detection  of  Salmonella  sp.  Shigella  sp.  and  EL  coli.  Salmonella 
and  Shigella  bacteria  were  identified  by  standard  methods.  Lactose 
fermenting  colonies  from  MacConkey' s agar  were  further  tested  for 
indole  production  and  their  inability  to  grow  on  Simmon's  citrate 
agar  before  being  designated  EL  coli.  Fecal  swabs  from  116  of  131 
monkeys  yielded  4,  well-isolated  colonies  with  the  above-described 
biochemical  reactions.  These  464  strains  were  tested  for  entero- 
toxin production.  Each  colony  was  streaked  onto  trypticase  soy  agar 
(ISA)  slants  and  stored  at  25  C until  processed  for  enterotoxin  pro- 
duction. In  addition,  IL  col i strains  were  similarly  isolated  from 
each  of  25  juvenile  hamsters  which  experienced  severe  diarrhea  during 
naturally  occurring  epizootics  subsequent  to  the  stress  of  shipping. 

Cultures  were  processed  for  production  of  heat  labile  enterotoxin  by 
bacterial  loop  transfer  from  TSA  slants  into  0.5  ml  of  trypticase  soy 
broth  (TSB)  within  individual  wells  of  the  24-well  tissue  culture 
plates  (Falcon)  and  incubated  at  37C/48  hr.  Cultures  were  aerobically 
processed  for  production  of  heat  stable  enterotoxin  by  bacterial  loop 
transfer  from  TSA  slants  into  0.5  ml  of  1%  peptone  water  and  incubated 
overnight  at  37  C.  Then  0.01  ml  was  inoculated  into  10  ml  of  TSB 
within  a 50  ml  erlenmeyer  flask,  shaken  overnight  at  approximately 
150  rpm  at  37  C,  clarified  by  centrifugation  at  2500  rpm/20  min  in 
a GSA  rotor  (Sorvall),  and  the  supernate  stored  at  -70  C until  assayed. 
Cultures  were  anaerobically  processed  for  production  of  heat  stable 
enterotoxin  by  bacterial  loop  transfer  from  TSA  slants  into  3.0  ml 
of  TSB  within  12  mm  X 56  mm  screw  cap  vials  and  incubated  with 
loosened  caps  anaerobically  using  a Gas-pak  (BBL)  at  37  C/48  hr. 
Cultures  were  clarified  by  centrifugation  and  the  supernate  stored 
frozen  as  previously  described. 

Heat-labile  enterotoxin  from  aerobic  growth  of  IL  coli  was  detected 
by  the  morphologic  changes  it  prodi^ges  in  monolayers  of  Y-l  mouse 
adrenal  cells  as  described  by  Sack1  . Cells  were  grown  in  the  24-well 
tissue  culture  plates  and  maintained  in  Ham  F-10  medium  enriched  with 
12.5°6  horse  serum  and  2.5?»  fetal  calf  serum  and  containing  100  units/ 
ml  potassium  penicillin  G and  25  ug/ml  streptomycin  sulfate.  Each 


1624 


m 


well  was  seeded  with  approximately  40,000  cells  in  0.6  ml  of  medium 
and  used  3 days  later  when  monolayers  were  between  50%  and  75%  con- 
fluent. Using  a pasteur  pipette,  2 drops  of  whole  live  culture  were 
added  to  individual  wells,  adsorbed  at  37  C/15  min,  then  removed  by 
suction.  Cells  were  then  gently  rinsed  with  Pucks  saline  and  fresh 
medium  was  replaced.  The  cells  were  observed  after  6 hr  incubation 
at  37  C for  typical  rounding.  Known  positive  and  negative  control 
strains  of  E.  coli  were  used  with  each  assay. 

Heat  stable  enterotoxins,  from  aerobic  or  anaerobic  growth  of  E.  coli 
were  deleted  in  2-day  old,  white,  Swiss  mice  (WRAIR) , as  described 
by  Dean1  . At  least  4 mice  per  strain  were  inoculated  intra-gastri- 
cally  with  0.1  ml  of  culture  supernate  which  had  been  prepared  and 
stored  frozen  no  longer  than  7 days  previously.  After  4 hours,  the 
mice  were  euthanized  under  Co_,  and  necropsied.  Using  an  analytical 
balance  (Mettlar  type  H) , gut  weights  (pylorus  to  terminal  rectum) 
and  remaining  body  weights  were  obtained.  The  mean  of  the  ratios  of 
gut  weight  to  remaining  body  weight  were  calculated  for  each  strain. 
Indigo  blue  dye  in  each  inoculum  assured  that  at  least  2 mice  for 
each  strain  received  the  inoculum  intra-gastrically. 

Four  strains  of  coli  from  each  of  116  monkeys  (464  strains)  and 
each  of  25  hamster  strains  were  assayed  in  duplicate  on  Y-l  mouse 
adrenal  cells  for  morphologic  evidence  of  the  presence  of  heat  labile 
enterotoxin.  By  this  assay,  none  of  the  above  strains  showed  evidence 
of  heat  labile  enterotoxin. 

E.  coli  strains  from  52  of  116  monkeys  (208  strains)  grown  both  aero- 
bically and  anerobically  were  assayed  for  heat  stable  enterotoxin  in 
newborn  mice.  The  overall  mean  ratio  and  standard  deviation  (SD)  of 
gut  weight  to  remaining  body  weight  for  the  208  strains  grown  aero- 
bically and  anerobically  was  0.065  + 0.007  and  0.065  ± 0.006,  respec- 
tively. These  values  are  well  within  the  y^nge  indicating  the  absence 
of  stable  enterotoxin  as  described  by  Dean  . By  contrast,  the  mean 
ratio  of  the  enterotoxigenic  Calcutta  strain  078:1112  when  grown 
aerobically  was  0.120,  well  beyond  3 SD  (0.084).  The  mean  ratio  of 
two  strains  from  one  monkey  (#346)  when  grown  aerobically  was  also 
well  beyond  3 SD  (0.117)  and  comparable  to  the  positive  mean  ratio 
produced  by  the  Calcutta  strain  grown  aerobically.  Interestingly, 
mean  ratios  of  the  Calcutta  strain  (0.066)  and  the  two  strains  from 
monkey  #346  (0.064)  were  well  within  the  normal  range  after  anae- 
robic growth.  Anaerobic  growth  conditions  apparently  enhanced  entqgo- 
toxin  production  by  these  three  strains,  as  described  by  Klipstein" 
with  Klebsie 11a  pneumoniae. 


i 


! 

j 

i 


E.  coli  strains  from  the  25  hamsters  with  epizootic-related  diarrhea 
were  grown  aerobically  and  assayed  for  heat  stable  enterotoxin  in 
newborn  mice.  The  overall  mean  ratio  and  SD  of  gut  to  remaining  body 


1625 


weight  was  0.067  ± 0.005.  The  range  of  individual  mean  ratios 
(0.061  to  0.078)  were  well  within  3 SD  (.082)  and  previously  described 
"normal"  values,  indicating  the  absence  of  enterotoxin. 


Salmone 11a  sp.  were  not  isolated  from  any  of  the  131  monkeys  or  25 
hamsters.  Shigella  sp.  were  recovered  from  36  monkeys  (27%),  in- 
cluding monkey  #346  from  which  enterotoxin  producing  E_.  col i were 
also  isolated. 

The  absence  of  heat  labile  enterotoxin  of  l[.  coli  from  diarrhea  speci- 
mens of  monkeys  when  assayed  by  the  Y-l  mouse  adrenal  cell  culture 
system  was  not  particularly  surprising.  Most  enterotoxin  producing 
strains  of  E^.  coli  reported  from  non-human  animals  to  date  have  pro- 
duced the  heat  stable  toxin  only.  The  detection  of  enterotoxigenic 
£.  coli  from  diarrhea  specimens  of  monkeys  is  consistent  with  their 
presence  in  other  species.  However,  only  4 of  52  (8%)  monkey  har- 
bored enterotoxin  producing  E_.  coli  during  diarrhea  episodes  which 
occurred  during  conditioning.  By  contrast,  27%  of  these  same  monkeys 
harbored  Shigella  s£.  These  data  suggest  that  the  etiologic  role  of 
enterotoxigenic  E^.  coli  is  minor  in  the  diarrhea  episodes  which  affect 
monkeys  during  conditioning.  Although  few  hamsters  were  examined, 
the  failure  to  detect  enterotoxigenic  E.  coli  is  consistent  with 
epidemiological  and  experimental  data  which  incriminate  indigenous, 
host-related  factors  rather  than  transmission  of  enteropathogenic 
organisms  during  juvenile  diarrhea  episodes. 

In  summary,  four  strains  of  E^  coli  from  each  of  116  monkeys  (464 
strains)  affected  with  diarrhea  during  conditioning,  and  strains  from 
each  of  25  juvenile  hamsters  with  epizootic-related  diarrhea  after 
shipping,  failed  to  show  any  heat  labile  enterotoxin  as  detected  and 
defined  by  cell  culture  assay.  Additionally,  the  25  hamster  strains 
failed  to  show  any  heat  stable  enterotoxin,  as  detected  and  defined 
by  intra-gastric  inoculation  of  newborn  mice.  However,  4 of  52 
monkeys  (8%)  harbored  IE.  coli  which  produced  heat  stable  enterotoxin. 
Interestingly,  strains  which  produced  enterotoxin  after  aerobic 
growth  failed  to  do  so  when  grown  anaerobically,  and  vice-versa. 
Salmonella  sp.  was  not  isolated  from  hamsters  or  monkeys,  but  Shigella 
sp.  was  isolated  from  27%  of  the  monkeys. 

New  work,  detailed  in  Section  II  above,  will  be  separated  for  FY77 
under  title  change  "Health  Care  and  Management  of  Laboratory  Animals", 
Work  Unit  #057, 


Table  1:  Incidence  of  non-fatal  and  fatal  respiratory 

disease  in  groups  of  random  source  laboratory 
dogs  during  conditioning. 


Date  group 
arrived 

No.  with 
signs/total 
(%) 

No.  died/ 

No.  with  signs 
(%) 

18  Dec  75 

18/47 

(38) 

8/18 

(44) 

29  Dec  75 

2/10 

(20) 

1/2 

(50) 

25  Feb  76 

28/37 

(76) 

6/28 

(21) 

11  March  76 

7/15 

(47) 

3/7 

(43) 

31  March  76 

29/43 

(67) 

14/29 

(48) 

14  April  76 

2/12 

(17) 

2/2 

(100) 

Totals 

86/164 

(52) 

34/86 

(40) 

Table  2:  Incidence  of  canine  distemper  virus  (CDV) 

infectious  canine  hepatitis  virus  neutralizing 
antibodies  in  newly  procured  dogs. 


No.  dogs 

Number 

Percent 

Virus 

tested 

seropositive 

seropositive 

CDV 

158 

67* 

43 

ICHV 

159 

81** 

52 

*Based  on  the  neutralization  of  100-300  egg  ID_n  of 
CDV  by  a 1:100  serum  dilution. 

**Based  on  the  neutralization  of  300  TCD,.q  of  ICHV  by  a 
1:20  serum  dilution. 


1627 


Table  3:  Relationship  between  canine  distemper  virus  (CDV)  and/or 

infectious  canine  hepatitis  virus  (ICHV)  antibodies  in 
newly  procured  dogs  and  subsequent  non-fatal  and  fatal 
respiratory  disease. 


Antibodies  present 
on  arrival* 

No. 

Dogs 

No.  with 
signs  (%) 
(A) 

No.  with  fatal 
disease  (%) 
(B) 

Total 
Sick  (%) 
(A+B) 

CDV  + and  ICHV  + 

56 

10  (18) 

3 (5) 

13 

(23) 

CDV  + and  ICHV  0 

11 

3 (27) 

0 

3 

(27) 

CDV  0 and  ICHV  + 

25 

7 (28) 

5 (20) 

12 

(48) 

CDV  0 and  ICHV  0 

66 

30  (45) 

25  (38) 

55 

(83) 

Totals 

158 

50  (32) 

33  (21) 

83 

(53) 

* + = seropositive 
0 = seronegative 

Table  4:  Cytopathic  and  hemadsorbing  viruses  recovered  from  nose, 

throat,  and  rectal  swab  specimens  of  dogs  with  respiratory 
disease  in  Primary  dog  kidney  (PDK)  and  the  Walter  Reed 
Canine  Cell  (WRCC)  line. 

Host 

No.  of  isolations  made  from 

Agent  recovered* 

Cells 

nose 

throat 

rectum 

Hemadsorbing  agent 

PDK 

18 

14 

0 

WRCC 

3 

3 

0 

Adenovirus 

PDK 

3 

10 

13 

WRCC 

3 

10 

14 

Herpesvirus 

PDK 

3 

1 

0 

WRCC 

3 

0 

0 

Minute  virus  of  canines 

PDK** 

0 

0 

0 

WRCC 

1 

0 

3 

‘Tentative  grouping  of  isolates  based  on  type 

of  cytopathic 

effect 

or  presence  of  hemadsorption. 

**Minute  virus  of  canines  does  not  replicate  in  PDK. 


1628 


Table  5:  Viruses  recovered  from  random  source  dogs  with  respiratory 

disease. 


No.  dogs  with  virus 

Date  No.  dogs  with  virus/  SV5  Toronto  Canine  Minute 


Arrived 

No.  examined 

(%) 

A26/61 

Herpes 

Virus  of 
Canines 

18  Dec  75 

16/22 

(73) 

12* 

8* 

0 

1 

29  Dec  75 

2**12 

(100) 

1 

1 

0 

1 

25  Feb  76 

11/13 

(85) 

6 

5 

3 

1 

Totals 

29/37*“ 

(78) 

19 

14 

3 

3 

‘Includes  the  recovery  of  SV5  and  Toronto  A26/61  from  individual 
rejected  dogs  with  overt  signs  of  disease. 

“Dog  66123  examined  3 times,  Toronto  A26/61  isolated  from  first 
specimen,  SV5  from  second  and  third. 

“*Two  viruses  recovered  from  7 dogs.  Six  SV5-Toronto  A26/61 
combined  isolations  and  1 Toronto  ,'26/61-canine  herpesvirus. 


Table  6:  Parainfluenza  SV5  and  canine  herpesvirus  antibody  studies 

of  random  source  laboratory  dogs  with  respiratory  disease. 


No.  dogs  with  increased  neutralizing 
Date  antibody  titer/total  tested  (%) 

Arrived  canine 

SV5  herpesvirus 


18 

Dec  75 

10/13 

(77) 

0/11 

(0) 

29 

Dec  75 

1/2 

(50) 

0/2 

(0) 

25 

Feb  76 

18/21 

(86) 

4 * / 2 1 

(19.) 

11 

March  76 

1/2 

(50) 

0/2 

(0) 

31 

March  76 

17/25 

(68) 

0/25 

(0) 

Totals 

47/63 

(74) 

4/61 

(7) 

‘Each  of  these  dogs  also  had  a rise  in  titer  to  SV5. 


1629 


Project  3A762760A837  MILITARY  ANIMAL  RESOURCES  DEVELOPMENT 
Task  00  Military  Animal  Resources  Development 
Work  Unit  Diseases  of  military  animals 
Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Christie,  R.  J.  1975.  Evaluation  of  a Conditioning  Pro- 
gram for  Random-Source  Dogs.  Lab.  Anim.  Sci.,  25 : 647 . 

2.  Binn,  L.  N.,  G.  A.  Eddy,  E.  C.  Lazar,  J.  Helms,  and 

T.  Murnane.  1967.  Viruses  Recovered  from  Laboratory  Dogs  with 
Respiratory  Disease.  Proc.  Soc.  Exptl.  Biol.  5 Med.,  126: 140-145. 

3.  Binn,  L.  N.,  E.  C.  Lazar,  J.  Helms,  and  R.  E.  Cross. 

1970.  Viral  Antibody  Patterns  in  Laboratory  Dogs  with  Respiratory 
Disease.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.,  31:697-702. 

4.  Binn,  L.  N. , E.  C.  Lazar,  G.  Eddy,  and  M.  Kajima.  1970. 
Recovery  and  Characterization  of  a Minute  Virus  of  Canines.  Inf.  § 
Immun. , 1_: 503-508. 

5.  Soave,  0.  A.  1963.  Diagnosis  and  Control  of  Common 
Diseases  of  Hamsters,  Rabbits,  and  Monkeys.  J.  Am.  Vet.  Med.  Assoc. 
142:285-290. 

6.  Thomlinson,  J.  R.  197j.  "Wet  Tail"  in  the  Syrian  hamster: 
a form  of  colibacillosis.  Vet.  Rec.,  96:42. 

7.  Sheffield,  F.  W.,  and  E.  Beveridge.  1962.  Prophylaxis  of 
"Wet  Tail"  in  Hamsters.  Nature  (London),  196: 294-295 . 

8.  Small,  J.  D.  1968.  Fatal  Enterocolitis  in  Hamsters  given 
Linconycin  Hydrochloride.  Lab.  Anim.  Care,  18:411-420. 

9.  Schneierson,  S.  Stanley,  and  E.  Perlman.  1956.  Toxicity 
of  Penicillin  for  the  Syrian  Hamster.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med., 
91.:  229-230. 

10.  Frenkel,  J.  K.  1972.  Infection  and  Immunity  in  Hamsters. 
Prog.  exp.  Tumor  Res.,  16: 341-344. 

11.  Arya,  S.  C.,  A.  Verghese,  D.  S.  Agarival,  and  S.  C.  Pal. 
1973.  Shigellosis  in  rhesus  monkeys  in  quarantine.  Lab.  Anim., 
7:101-109. 


Bagful  *. 


12.  Groves,  M.  G.,  J.  Anandan,  and  C.  E.  Davis.  1969.  Epi- 
zootic diarrhoea  in  a group  of  pig-tailed  macaques  (Macaca  nemestrina) 
Kajian  Veterinaire  2:23-28. 


13.  Lindsey,  J.  R.,  P.  11.  Hardy,  Jr.,  H.  J.  Baker,  and  E.  C 
Melby,  Jr.  1971.  Observations  on  shigellosis  and  development  of 
multiple  resistant  shigellas  in  Macaca  mulatta.  Lab.  Anim.  Care, 
21:832-844. 


14.  Schneider,  N.  J.,  E.  C.  Prather,  A.  L.  Leives,  J.  E. 
Scatterday,  and  A.  V.  Hardy.  1960.  Enteric  bacteriological  studies 
in  a large  colony  of  primates.  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.,  85:935-941. 


15.  Ogawa,  H.,  A.  Nakamura,  and  R.  Sakazaki.  1968.  Pathogenic 
properties  of  "enteropathogenic"  Escherichia  coli  from  diarrheal 
children  and  adults.  Jap.  J.  Med.  Sci.  Biol.,  21:333-349. 


16.  Smith,  H.  W.,  and  S.  Halls.  1967.  Observations  by  the 
ligated  intestinal  segment  and  oral  inoculation  methods  on  Escherichia 
coli  infections  in  pigs,  calves,  lambs,  and  rabbits.  J.  Pathol . 
Bacteriol.,  93:499-529. 


17.  Gyles,  C.,  N.  So,  and  S.  Falkow.  1974.  The  enterotoxin 
Plasmids  of  Escherichia  coli.  J.  Infect.  Dis.,  130:40-49. 


18.  Sack,  David  A.,  and  R.  Bradley  Sack.  1975.  Test  for 
enterotoxigenic  Escherichia  coli  using  Y-l  adrenal  cells  in  mini- 
culture. Inf.  5 Imm.,  11:334-336. 


19.  Dean,  A.  G.,  Y.  Ching,  R.  H.  Williams,  and  L.  B.  Harden. 
1972.  Test  for  Escherichia  coli  enterotoxin  using  infant  mice: 
Application  in  a study  of  diarrhea  in  children  in  Honolulu,  J. 
Infect.  Dis.,  125:407-411. 


20.  Klipstein,  F.  A.,  and  R.  F.  Ewgert.  1976.  Purification 
and  properties  of  Klebsiella  pneumoniae  heat-stable  enterotoxin. 
Inf.  and  Imm.,  13:373-381. 


Publications: 


1.  Binn,  L.  N.,  E.  C.  Lazar,  K.  P.  Keenan,  D.  L.  Huxsoll, 

R.  H.  Marchwicki,  and  A.  J.  Strano.  1975.  Recovery  and  Characteri- 
zation of  a Coronavirus  from  Military  Dogs  with  Diarrhea.  Proc.  78th 
Ann.  Meeting,  U.  S.  Animal  Hlth  Assoc.,  1974.  pgs.  359-366. 


2.  Binn,  L.  N.  1975.  Epi zootiological  Studies  of  Canine  Virus 
Diseases,  JAVMA  167:856  (Abstract). 


I 


hi 


1631 


3.  Binn,  L.  N.  1975.  Public  Health  Aspects  of  Canine  Viral 
Diseases.  JAVMA  167:858  (Abstract). 

4.  Keenan,  K.  P.,  H.  R.  Jervis,  R.  H.  Marchwicki,  and  L.  N. 

Binn.  1976.  Intestinal  Infection  of  Neonatal  Dogs  with  Canine 
Corona-virus  1-71:  Studies  by  Virologic,  Histologic,  Histochemical, 

and  Immunof luorescent  Techniques.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  37:247-256. 

5.  Takeuchi,  A.,  L.  N.  Binn,  H.  R.  Jervis,  K.  P.  Keenan, 

P.  K.  Hildebrandt,  R.  B.  Valas,  and  F.  F.  Bland.  1976.  Electron 
Microscope  Study  of  experimental  enteric  infection  in  neonatal  dogs 
with  a canine  coronavirus.  Lab.  Invest.  34:539-549. 


DISTRIBUTION: 

5 - U.  S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command,  WASH  DC 
20314 

12  - Defense  Documentation  Center,  ATTN:  DDC-TCA,  Alexandria  VA  22314 
1 - Superintendent,  Academy  of  Health  Sciences,  U.S.  Army,  ATTN:  AHS -COM, 
Ft  Sam  Houston  TX  78234 

1 - Director  of  Biological  and  Medical  Sciences  Division,  Office  of  Naval  Re- 
search, 800  N.  Quincy  Street,  Arlington  VA  22217 
1 - Commander,  Naval  Medical  R&D  Command,  National  Naval  Medical  Center, 
Bethesda,  MD  20014 

1 - Director  of  Professional  Service  jlfice  of  The  Surgeon  General,  Depart- 
ment of  the  Air  Force,  Washing.  DC  20314 
1 - Director  of  Defense  Research  and  Engineering,  ATTN:  Assistant  Director 
(Environmental  and  Life  Sciences),  Washington  DC  20301 
1 - Commander,  U.S.  Army  Training  & Doctrine  Command,  Ft  Monroe  VA 
23651 

1 - Each  USAMRDC  Laboratory 


1633 


* u.  S.  GOV  ERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE  1977  O - 22B-726 


