AD-A284  718 

IBIII1IIII 


CONTRACT  NO:  DAMD17-89-C-902 1 


TITLE:  SERVICES  TO  OPERATE  AND  MAINTAIN  WALTER  REED  ARMY 

INSTITUTE  OF  RESEARCH'S  (WRAIR)  MICROWAVE  FACILITY 

SUBTITLE:  Physiological  and  Behavioral  Effects  of  High 

Power  Microwave  Fields 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  Dr.  Yahya  Akyel 


CONTRACTING  ORGANIZATION:  OGDEN  BioServices  Corporation 

6  Montgomery  Village  Ave.,  #322 
Gaithersburg,  Maryland  20879 


REPORT  DATE:  June  20,  1994 


TYPE  OF  REPORT:  Final  Report 


PREPARED  FOR:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel 

Command,  Fort  Detrick, 

Frederick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT:  Approved  for  public  release; 

distribution  unlimited 


The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  author (s)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so 
designated  by  other  documentation. 


^  94-30190 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


Form  JoCi'OvM 
OMB  Vo.  3704-0  J SB 


^jOIk  r«Oftir»o  auto**  *or  :«i*  couecuon  Qf  ’'formation  'o  -Tur  ot'  ncHjPi  iq  tne  w«t  tor  '•v<#wma«  *'nin»ciiOm.  s*«fC*«*o  0*t*  vou/<ev 

jna  niiMWflinq  tneaat*  reeaea  ina{0«wtift<j  a»vj  Tnec;i»«va«cT  intonation  ser«s  -ominwB  f*q*<aifvj  t**  Ownaen  numitecr  *♦**  other  iiorn  o*  ’*♦* 

collection  a»  ^formation.  rtciuatnq  iuqgwtioFn  tor  *-«ou<mq  ??*r%  swo***  '3  »v*trn«vjton  •**#oauan**»  WfvK«  ^•rector*!#  »or  «*or **»•<»«»*  ooeranom  *na  *ettony,  *2  is  .ctimon 
Oav«H»onwr»*.  $mt#  »2C«  Arlington.  /A  «2202-M02  •»««  »0  tn» 0««<e of  M«n#qer***t  ana  8woget.  Cionwon  Redaction  *'Ci«t  iQ  704-3  TMJ .  rVavuneton  -C  Z3S03 


1.  AGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Lewe  OUfiil  2.  REPORT  3ATE 

20  June  1994 


3.  REPORT  TYPE  ANO  OATES  COVERED  i 

Final  5  Nov.  1988  -  20  May  1994 


а.  titu  and  subtitle  Services  to  Operate  and  Maintain  5-  ending  numbers 
"falter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research's  (WRAIR) 

-iicrowave  Facility 

Contract  # 

б.  AUTHOR(S)  “T”""  ”  “  .  "  “  DAMD17-89-C-9021 

OGDEN  BioServices  Corporation 

Dr.  Yahya  Akyel 
Dr.  Shin-Tsu  Lu 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  ANO  AOORESStfS! 

OGDEN  BioServices  Corporation 
6  Montgomery  Village  Ave.  Suite  322 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20879 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 


9.  SPONSORING /MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  ANO  AOORESS(ES) 


10.  SPONSORING.  MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  ATTN:  SGRD-RMI-S 
Frederick,  MD  21702-5012 


11.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

Subtitle:  Physiological  and  Behavioral  Effects  of  High  Power 

Microwave  Fields 


12a.  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 


12b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODE 


Approved  for  public  release 
Distribution  Unlimited 


13.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  woras) 

Effects  of  high  power  pulsed  and  continuous  wave  microwave  fields 
and  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  fields  were  studied  using  various 
physiological  and  behavioral  paradigms.  Engineering  progress 
included  modifications  to  improve  the  EMP  simulator  and  TEMPO 
exposure  system,  and  developments  of  a  tri-axial  scanner  for 
densitometry  and  dosimetry  methods,  including  calorimetry, 
thermometry  and  the  finite  difference  time  domain  method. 
Behavioral  studies  included  effects  on  operant  behavior,  memory 
retention,  circadian  rhythmicity  of  the  food  consumption,  time 
perception,  motor  activity  and  microwave  evoked  whole-body 
movements.  Cardiovascular  effects,  cutaneous  temperature 
changes,  neural  damages  and  ocular  injuries  were  also  studied. 
Except  the  absence  of  a  demonstrable  retinal  injury,  all  these 
biological  endpoints  could  be  altered  by  the  electromagnetic 
fields  in  the  radiofrequency  range.  Details  and  accomplishments 
of  research  are  presented  in  this  report. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS 

High  power  microwaves,  dosimetry,  ocular  effects, 
cardiovascular  effects,  behavioral  effects, 
work  performance,  cognition 


17.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  18.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  20.  LIMITATION  OF  ABSTRACT 
OF  REPORT  OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified  Unclassified  Unclassified  Unlimited 


IS.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 
82 


16.  PRICE  CODE 


NSN  7540431  -280-5500 


Standard  -orm  298  (Rev  2-89) 

by  Sid 


Opinions,  interpretations,  conclusions  and  recommendations  are 
those  of  the  author  and  are  not  necessarily  endorsed  by  the  US 
Army. 

(4,A-  Where  copyrighted  material  is  quoted,  permission  has  been 
obtained  to  use  such  material. 

H.  A-  Where  material  from  documents  designated  for  limited 
distribution  is  quoted,  permission  has  been  obtained  to  use  the 
material . 

<ut_  Citations  of  commercial  organizations  and  trade  names  in 
this  report  do  not  constitute  an  official  Department  of  Army 
endorsement  or  approval  of  the  products  or  services  of  these 
organizations . 

^.4  -  In  conducting  research  using  animals,  the  investigator (s) 
adhered  to  the  "Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
Animals,  "  prepared  by  the  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
Animals  of  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources,  National 
Research  Council  (NIH  Publication  No.  86-23,  Revised  1985)  . 

H-4  Por  the  protection  of  human  subjects,  the  investigator (s) 
adhered  to  policies  of  applicable  Pederal  Law  45  C7R  46. 

jj.  4-  In  conducting  research  utilizing  recombinant  DNA  technology, 
the  investigator (s)  adhered  to  current  guidelines  promulgated  by 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health. 

-/,4-  In  the  conduct  of  research  utilizing  recombinant  DNA,  the 
investigator (s)  adhered  to  the  NIH  Guidelines  for  Research 
Involving  Recombinant  DNA  Molecules. 

t/  4  In  the  conduct  of  research  involving  hazardous  organisms, 
the  investigator (a)  adhered  to  the  CDC-NIH  Guide  for  Biosafety  in 
Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION  . 1 

Modifications  to  Improve  the  EMP  (Electromagnetic  Pulse)  Simulator  . 1 

The  Tri-Axial  Scanner . 3 

Modifications  to  Improve  TEMPO  Exposure  System . 5 

Personnel  Safety  of  the  TEMPO  Exposure  System  . 6 

Maintenance  Modifications  of  the  TEMPO  Exposure  System . 8 

Performance  Modifications  of  the  TEMPO  Exposure  System . 13 

Rationale  for  CNS/Behavioral  Studies  . 16 

Post-Exposure  Effects  of  High-Peak  Power  Microwave  Pulses  On  Operant  Behavior  .  16 

In-field  Behavioral  Effects  of  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields  . 17 

Neuropathology  in  Rats  Exposed  to  Pulsed  and  Continuous-Wave  Radiofrequencv 

Radiation  .  18 

Mechanisms  of  Microwave- Evoked  Whole-Body  Movements . 18 

Behavioral  Effects  of  the  High-Peak-Power,  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields  (TEMPO)  ...  19 

Effects  on  Treadmill  Performance  (TEMPO)  . 19 

Effects  on  Memory  (TEMPO) . 20 

Effects  on  Circadian  Rhythmicity  and  Food  Consumption  (TEMPO)  . 20 

Effects  on  Time  Perception  and  Discrimination  (TEMPO) . 20 

Behavioral  Effects  of  EMP  Fields  . 21 

Modeling  of  the  Radiofrequency  Radiation  Hazards  (The  Finite  Difference  Time 

Domain  Method  for  Electromagnetic  Field  Simulation)  . 22 

Microwave  Effects  on  Baroreceptor  Function  (Protocol  N-ll-87) . 24 

Reflexive  Responses  Evoked  by  High  Peak/Low  Average  Power  Microwave  Pulses 

(Protocol  N- 1 1-88) . 26 

Preliminary  Thermometric  Studies  on  Microwave  Exposure  Reported  to  Cause 

Retinal  Damage  in  the  Rabbit  (Protocol  N- 14-90) . 30 

Induction  of  Ocular  Injuries  in  Rabbits  by  High  Peak  Power  but  Low  Average  Power 

Pulsed  Microwaves  (Protocol  N-01-92)  (in  progress)  . 37 

Microwave  Dosimetry  of  the  Rat  Lens  In  Vitro  (Protocol  N-02-93)  .  43 


TABLE  OF  CONTENT S  (continued) 


Whole-Body  Calorimetric  Dosimetry  (In  Support  of  the  Protocol  N- 10-88, 

Effects  of  Continuous-Wave  and  Extremely  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed  Microwave 

on  Rats  Responding  on  High  and  Low  Rates) . 46 

Subcutaneous  And  Skin  Surface  Temperature  Increments  in  Rats  Exposed  to 
One-second  Gated  CW  Microwaves  (In  Support  of  the  Protocol  N-04-91, 

Modification  of  Acoustic  and  Tactile  Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses) . 50 

Tempo  Dosimetry  (In  Support  of  Protocol  N-21-88.  Nervous  System  Effects 
of  TEMPO  Radiation  I,  and  Protocol  N-06-90,  Time  Perception  in  Rats: 

The  Effect  of  High  Power  Pulsed  Microwave  Irradiation) . 54 

Effect  of  Interaction  Between  Ambient  Temperature  and  SAR  on  Microwave-Induced 
Hyperthermia  In  Rats  (Work  supported  by  PHS  Grant  ES0330  and  published  under 
a  contract  DAMD  17-89-C-9201  with  the  Department  of  Microwave  Research. 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research) . 57 

Pulsed  Microwave  Ocular  Exposure  of  the  Monkey  (In  Support  of  the  Protocol  013-88 
and  Protocol  N-016-92,  High-Peak- Power  Microwaves:  A  Health  Hazard. 

PI:  Henry  A.  Kues,  Johns  Hopkins  University)  . 61 

Modification  of  Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses  in  the  Rat  (Protocol  A-01-90.  Pilot  Study 
for  Modification  of  Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses  and  Protocol  N-04-91,  Modification 

of  Acoustic  and  Tactile  Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses) . 66 

CONCLUSIONS . 74 

REFERENCES -PUBLICATION  LIST . 76 


INTRODUCTION 


The  following  report  summarizes  the  performance  of  OGDEN  BioServices 
Corporation’s  (BSC)  staff  at  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  at  Department  of 
Microwave  Research  (DMR)  under  the  contract  DAMD17-89-C-9021. 

OGDEN’s  understanding  of  technical  issues  and  insight  into  scientific  principles 
has  been  the  keystone  of  success  for  Department  of  Microwave's  research  program.  Due 
to  our  efforts  in  planning  and  managing  the  research  program,  the  research  productivity 
of  the  Department  has  risen  dramatically.  In  the  past  year  alone,  dozens  of  scientific 
papers  have  been  published  or  submitted  for  publication.  Moreover,  in  this  period  of 
time  our  research  program  has  achieved  international  stature:  our  staff  participates 
regularly  and  frequently  in  international  conferences  as  session  chairs  and  speakers. 

We  are  determined  to  continue  to  provide  high-quality  scientific  research  and  to 
represent  U  S.  Army’s  Microwave  Bioeffects  program  under  the  guidance  of  U  S.  Army 
Medical  Research,  Development,  Acquisition  and  Logistics  Command  in  its  new  location 
at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base  in  San  Antonio,  Texas. 


Modifications  to  Improve  the  EMP  (Electromagnetic  Pulse)  Simulator 

The  simulation  of  even  a  smallest  nuclear  detonation  is  almost  impossible  without 
using  actual  nuclear  devices.  The  nuclear  blast  generates  intense  heat,  enormous  amount 
of  radioactive  fallout,  and  tremendous  strength  of  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP).  The 
heat  and  radioactive  fallout  effects  on  human  are  well  known  to  public;  however,  the 
biological  effects  on  the  EMP  are  least  known  subject.  The  known  effects  of  EMP  are 
mostly  on  electronic  hardware.  And  for  this  reason,  the  majority  study  on  EMP  has 
been  conducted  from  many  different  government  agencies  and  private  industries 
throughout  world  on  the  hardware  field.  The  biological  effect  on  the  EMP  has  become  a 
public  concern  recently  and  the  experiments  in  the  this  field  are  becoming  more  active 


lately. 


The  characteristic  of  the  nuclear  E\1P  is  very  complicated  to  reproduce  inside 
laboratories.  The  outdoor  EMP  simulators  in  some  laboratories  are  very  bulky  in  size 
and  extremely  expensive  to  maintain  and  operate.  The  DMR  is  using  a  small,  bench- 
size.  simple  and  inexpensive  system  to  maintain  and  operate  for  EMP  simulator  research. 
The  EMP  simulator  system  consists  of  a  parallel  plate  transmission  line  which  acts  as  an 
antenna  (Fig.  1)  and  an  EMP  waveform  generator.  The  parallel  plate  antenna  has 
dimension  of  118  X  20  X  40  cm  (  L  x  H  x  W  )  with  45  X  10  X  40  cm  working  volume 
which  has  fairly  uniform  electromagnetic  field.  The  working  volume  is  large  enough  to 
expose  small  organisms  such  as  rats  to  study  the  biological  effects.  The  EMP  simulator 
waveform  generator  can  produce  7  nanosecond  risetime  EM  pulses  with  100 
kilovolts/meter  peak  electric  (E)  field 
strength  which  is  comparable  to  a  big 
outdoor  EMP  simulator.  However,  the 
EMP  simulator  waveform  generator 
uses  standard  1 10  V  outlet  for  its 
power  source:  therefore,  the 
maintenance  and  operation  cost  are 
insignificant  compare  to  outdoor  EMP 
simulator. 

The  EMP  simulator  was  delivered  to  WRAIR  1988,  since  then  OGDEN 
engineering  staff  has  modified  it  to  improve  its  performances.  The  original  EMP 
simulator  delivered  to  WRAIR  had  a  10  ns  risetime.  However,  the  nuclear  EMP  in  a 
real  blast  has  less  than  10  ns  risetime.  The  OGDEN  engineering  staff  made  many 
alterations  to  eliminate  the  risetime  problem  and  drastically  shorten  to  7  ns.  This 
modification  allowed  to  researchers  to  get  more  comparable  EMP  experiments.  A 
special  type  of  animal  holder  was  developed  for  this  simulator.  It  has  a  plastic  base  with 
a  metal  plate  attached  to  it.  A  series  of  current-sampling  resistors  between  the  metal 
base  and  the  bottom  plate  of  parallel  plate  antenna  allowed  the  investigators  to  gather 
more  data  around  the  experimental  subject.  The  DMR  purchased  new  measuring 


Figure  1.  Parallel  Plate  Antenna. 


instruments  to  fully  utilize  and  characterize  the  EMP  simulator,  and  these  new 
instrument  gave  more  precise  data  measurement.  Moreover,  OGDEN  engineering  staff 
modified  the  EMP  simulator  and  the  data  acquisition  system  to  be  operational  by  only 
one  person  which  in  its  turn  saves  many  valuable  man-hours  and  frees  our  staff  to  attend 
to  other  responsibilities. 


The  Tri- Axial  Scanner 

The  tri-axial  volume  scanner  was 
uniquely  designed  and  developed  by 
OGDEN  technical  staff  with  the  guidance 
of  the  COR  and  the  government  scientists 
for  WRAIR  Department  of  Microwave 
Research.  The  tri-axial  scanner  was 
designed  to  assist  researchers  in  studying 
the  electromagnetic  field  patterns  in  an 
exposure  site.  Using  the  data  acquired  with 
the  scanner,  a  contour  map  of  field  pattern 
can  be  developed.  Such  a  map  is  a 
powerful  tool  used  by  researchers  to  best 
optimize  the  unique  exposure  system  under  consideration  for  each  experiment.  This 
field  map  enables  the  researcher  to  visualize  the  exposure  field  patterns. 

The  scanner  accurately  moves  the  probe  and  simultaneously  takes  field  density, 
position  and  microwave  source  power  measurements  in  real  time.  This  fully  automatic 
tri-axial  scanning  system  is  much  faster,  more  accurate  and  more  efficient  than  the 
manual  mapping  method.  In  performing  this  task,  the  scanner  utilizes  its  three  main 
subsystems,  the  three  axial  positioning  arms  (moving  mechanism),  the  hardware 
controller  box  and  the  computer  controller/data  acquisition  system. 


\L 


Figure  2.  Scanner  Diagram 


I 


The  positioning  arms  are  driven  by  three  stepper  motors,  one  for  each  axial 
direction.  The  utilization  of  these  three  axial  arms  enables  the  operator  to  perform 
I  linear,  planar  and  spatial  scans  (three  dimensional).  The  movements  of  each  axial  arm 

are  independent  and  accurate  to  within  1  mm  over  a  range  of  90  cm.  The  two  horizontal 
axes  are  worm  gear  driven  on  steel  rails.  The  vertical  axis  is  driven  by  a  non-metallic  wire 
in  a  wooden  frame  to  minimize  RF  reflections.  Each  axis  has  a  1  meter  long  scale 
|  mounted  along  the  arm  for  visual  verification  of  the  probe  position.  The  scanning  range 

for  the  X-axis  and  the  Y-axis  movements  is  -45cm  to  +45cm.  The  scanning  range  for 
the  Z-axis  is  -30cm  to  +45cm.  These  ranges  are  enforced  by  mechanical  interlocks  to 
prevent  stepper  motor  damage.  The  probe  is  attached  to  the  wooden  slider  using  the 
^  wooden  probe  mount  with  velcro  fasteners.  The  probe  can  also  be  mounted  on  a  pole  if 

necessary  in  order  to  provide  sufficient  distance  from  the  moving  mechanism  and  work 
successfully  within  the  geometrical  confines  and  requirements  of  the  exposure  site. 

^  Incident  and  reflected  power  data  are  communicated  to  the  controller  box  via  two 

BNC  input  cables.  The  power  density  probe  data  are  collected  via  a  third  BNC  input 
cable.  The  computer  is  interfaced  with  the  controller  box  through  a  ribbon  cable.  The 
controller  box  is  housed  in  the  top  half  of  a  standard  19"  wide,  half  height  equipment 
^  rack.  The  motor  power  supplies  are  located  in  the  bottom  half  of  the  equipment  rack. 

The  requirements  for  the  controller  computer  are  a  286  or  more  advanced 
processor,  EGA  or  VGA  graphics  card,  5  MB  of  free  hard  disk  space  and  at  least  one 
floppy  drive  to  store  and  transfer  the  acquired  data.  The  computer  interfaces  the 
controller  box  through  a  computer  interface  card. 

OGDEN  technical  staff  is  committed  to  continue  to  develop  and  modify  this 
simple,  cost-effective  yet  very  reliable  system  to  meet  principal  investigators 
^  requirements. 


I 


I 


4 


Modifications  to  Improve  TEMPO  Exposure  System 


The  Transformer  Energized  Megavolt  Output  (TEMPO)  transmitter  was 
developed  for  the  WRAIR  Department  of  Microwave  Research  by  the  Sandia  National 
Laboratory.  This  transmitter  was  designed  to  provide  scientists  and  researchers  with  a 
means  of  studying  biological  effects  and  potential  health  hazards  associated  with 
exposure  to  high-power  pulsed  microwaves.  The  unique  exposure  parameters  which 
TEMPO  provides  the  research  community  is  an  extremely  high-peak-power  pulse  which 
is  comprised  of  a  very  intense  electrical  field.  The  manner  in  which  the  system  operates 
allows  for  this  high  power  level  to  be  delivered  to  the  test  subject  without  the  thermal 
effects  associated  with  a  high  powered  Continuous-Wave  (CW)  source.  This  provides  a 
means  for  the  researchers  to  obtain  an  exposure  environment  which  will  allow  the 
examination  of  effects  the  electrical  fields  have  on  a  subject  and  concurrently  minimize 
the  thermal  effects  associated  with  other  high-power  transmitters. 

Since  the  delivery  and  installation  of  TEMPO  by  Sandia  National  Labs,  the 
OGDEN  engineering  staff  has  been  constantly  improving  and  enhancing  the  transmitter 
system.  The  objectives  of  the  improvements  were:  to  increase  the  safety  of  the  personnel 
operating  and  using  the  transmitter,  to  minimize  the  possibilities  of  machine  failures,  and 
to  increase  the  operating  performance  of  the  transmitter.  The  performance 
modifications  can  be  further  categorized  in  the  following  areas:  stability  and  reliability, 
higher  peak  power,  higher  energy  levels,  reduction  in  maintenance  and  the  minimization 
of  the  time  required  for  repairs  to  be  completed  once  the  system  has  been  rendered 
inoperable.  The  following  are  improvements  that  the  OGDEN  engineering  staff  has 
accomplished  since  the  delivery  of  TEMPO,  demonstrating  their  expertise  in  operating, 
maintaining  and  modifying  this  highly  complicated  transmitter  system  in  the  interest  of 
the  DMR  program. 


5 


Personnel  Safety  of  the  TEMPO  Exposure  System 


Although  most  design  modifications  are  driven  to  obtain  a  singular  result,  they  often 
inherently  influence  other  aspects,  categories  or  reasons  for  consideration.  The 
modifications  outlined  below  were  undertaken  strictly  in  the  interest  of  personnel 
welfare. 

As  a  result  of  high  voltage  operation.  TEMPO  generates  X-  ray  radiation  as  a 
byproduct.  This  phenomenon  is  a  common  characteristic  of  Virtual  Cathode  Resonators 
(VIRCATORS).  The  levels  of  X-rays,  which  personnel  and  test  subjects  are  exposed  to. 
have  been  attenuated  to  a  safe  level  as  determined  by  WRAIR  Health  Physics 
Department.  This  has  been  accomplished  by  installing  an  interlocking  lead  shield  around 
the  VIRCATOR.  Recognizing  that  X-ray  radiation  is  difficult  to  detect,  and  the  threat 
of  exposure  continuously  exists,  the  OGDEN  staff  has  acquired  additional  services  of 
Seimens  Gammasonics  Inc,  Health  Physics  Services,  to  monitor  the  levels  of  radiation. 
Seimens  continuously  monitors  the  levels  of  radiation  in  and  around  the  TEMPO 
transmitter  in  addition  to  monitoring  personnel  and  recording  their  exposure  history.  In 
an  effort  to  minimize  the  risk  of  exposure  and  as  a  result  of  the  relocation  of  the  DMR 
to  Brooks  AFB,  the  engineering  staff  has  been  able  to  remove  the  secondary  operator 
from  the  transmitter  room.  The  secondary  operator  and  scientists  utilizing  TEMPO  now 
can  occupy  a  shielded  room  which  is  located  adjacent  to  the  transmitter  room. 

Therefore,  the  only  personnel  in  the  transmitter  room  during  operation  is  the  primary 
operator.  The  primary  operator  has  also  been  relocated  into  a  Faraday  screen  room, 
located  within  the  transmitter  room,  which  protects  the  operator  from  spurious  EMI 
fields  produced  by  TEMPO. 

The  OGDEN  staff  has  also  been  successful  in  containing  yet  another  type  of 
radiation  which  is  inherent  during  high  voltage  operation  of  TEMPO,  Ultra  Violet  (UV) 
light.  UV  light  is  generated  during  the  operation  of  the  high  voltage  switches.  There 
are  four  such  switches  in  use  during  the  firing  of  TEMPO,  three  of  which  are  visually 
monitored  continuously  by  the  primary  operator.  To  filter  the  UV  light  which  is 


6 


produced,  the  Faraday  cage  which  houses  the  three  switches,  has  been  enclosed  in 
polycarbonate  sheeting,  which  in  turn  has  been  chemically  treated  to  retard  the  LTV  light. 
In  an  effort  to  totally  obscure  the  UV  light,  the  OGDEN  staff  is  investigating  the 
properties  of  the  chemical  treatment  which,  barring  the  incompatibility  of  the  chemical 
as  a  dielectric,  will  be  used  in  the  future  on  the  switch  housings  when  they  are 
manufactured.  Puis  process  will  eliminate  this  potentially  hazardous  operating  condition. 
It  is  also  being  recommended  that  the  DMR  invest  in  safety  glasses  which  have  been 
chemically  treated  to  attenuate  the  UV  light,  as  from  time  to  time  the  primary  bitches 
described  above  are  operated  without  the  polycarbonate  shield  in  place  (ie. 
troubleshooting,  routine  maintenance,  etc..)  Pie  fourth  switch  mentioned  is  not  visible 
to  the  operator,  as  it  is  mounted  inside  of  the  TEMPO  water  tank. 

As  stated  earlier,  the  secondary  operator  has  been  moved  to  a  remote  location  in 
an  effort  to  minimize  the  risk  of  injury  to  staff  members  as  well  as  the  researchers.  This 
posed  many  inconveniences  and  safety  concerns  in  itself,  as  the  primary  operator  has 
now  been  severed  from  required  information  critical  to  the  safe  operation  of  the 
transmitter.  To  alleviate  this  problem,  communication  systems  have  been  installed 
between  the  transmitter  room  and  the  diagnostics  room  where  the  secondary  operator  is 
stationed.  Video  cameras  and  monitors  have  been  installed  in  both  positions  which  allow 
the  operators  to  view  all  pertinent  data  from  either  position.  Likewise,  voice  activated 
intercoms  have  also  been  utilized. 

The  primary  responsibility  of  the  secondary  operator  is  to  perform  as  a  safety 
person  for  the  primary  operator.  To  provide  a  means  of  performing  these  duties,  a 
parallel  inhibit  line  has  been  installed  in  the  secondary  position.  This  prevents  the 
transmitter  from  firing  until  both  operators  have  cleared  the  inhibit  line.  Beyond  this,  in 
the  event  of  an  emergency  the  secondary  operator  (in  addition  to  the  primary  operator) 
also  has  control  of  the  emergency  shut-down  line  which  has  been  designed  to  completely 
disconnect  the  transmitter  from  its  supply  voltage.  Prior  to  this  modification,  the 
secondary  operator  was  required  to  leave  their  position  and  cross  the  room  to  activate 
the  shut-down  procedure  (in  the  event  that  the  primary  operator  was  incapacitated). 
Relocating  the  secondary  operator  out  of  view  of  the  primary  operator  necessitates  the 


7 


need  for  door  interlocks  on  the  shield  room,  screen  room  and  chamber  so  that  the  doors 
must  be  closed  prior  to  the  transmitter  entering  the  READY  condition.  In  the  event  any 
of  the  three  doors  are  opened,  the  transmitter  will  automatically  return  and  be  locked 
into  the  STANDBY  condition  until  all  doors  are  again  closed. 

The  data  acquisition  system  has  become  an  instrumental  safety  tool  in 
determining  and  characterizing  the  operating  conditions  of  TEMPO.  Initially  the  data 
acquisition  system  recorded  data  from  sensors  and  monitors  providing  a  means  of 
investigating  the  conditions  and  circumstances  which  led  to  a  failure.  It  also  stored  the 
RF  data  for  an  exposure  series,  providing  the  scientists  with  the  parameters  and 
conditions  to  which  the  subjects  were  exposed.  The  OBC  engineers  and  technicians, 
through  numerous  revisions,  compiled  a  system  and  computer  program  which  allows  the 
operators  to  observe  the  operating  conditions  and  performance  of  the  transmitter  live. 
This  enables  the  operators  to  recognize,  through  experience,  potentially  hazardous 
conditions  immediately,  vice  post  failure.  In  providing  this  service,  the  operators  are 
able  to  terminate  the  operation  of  the  transmitter  prior  to  failure  which  often  results  in 
damaged  equipment  or  hazardous  conditions  for  operators.  The  "live-time"  diagnostics 
also  allow  the  operators  to  adjust  operating  parameters  of  the  transmitter  to  optimum 
conditions  during  an  exposure  series.  This  in  turn  results  in  the  recovery  of  a 
potentially  unsatisfactory  exposure  for  a  given  protocol. 


Maintenance  Modifications  of  the  TEMPO  Exposure  System 

The  following  modifications  were  driven  in  an  effort  to  minimize  maintenance, 
increases  intervals  between  routine  maintenance  and  to  decrease  the  "off-line"  time  due 
to  repairs.  Through  these  alterations,  the  OGDEN  staff  has  been  able  to  save  time  on 
maintenance  and  repairs  which  in  turn  provides  more  time  for  research  and 
development. 


The  high  voltage  (HV),  generated  by  TEMPO,  begins  in  an  enclosed  power 


supply  which  utilizes  transformer  oil  (UNIVOLT-N61)  to  serve  as  a  dielectric  insulator. 
Routine  maintenance  mandates  the  removal  of  this  oil  (350  gals).  This  has  been  a 
necessary  procedure  which  evacuates  carbon  from  the  oil  which  in  turn  will  build-up  on 
the  HV  components  and  conductors  in  the  power  supply.  This  practice  is  both 
economically  and  environmentally  disastrous.  OGDEN,  therefore,  designed  a  recycling 
system  which  filters  the  oil,  removing  the  carbon,  returning  the  oil  to  its  original  state. 
Until  the  recent  relocation  of  the  DMR  to  Brooks  AFB.  the  oil  had  not  been  changed  in 
4  years,  surpassing  the  previous  duration  of  use  by  2  times.  Furthermore,  the  oil  did  not 
need  to  be  replaced  at  this  time,  but  at  the  request  of  the  Air  Force  the  oil  was 
disposed  of  in  Maryland,  prior  to  the  transportation  of  TEMPO  to  Brooks  AFB.  The  oil 
recycling  equipment  has  proven  to  be  a  beneficial  investment,  as  it  is  used  annually  on 
the  COBER  transmitter  in  addition  to  semiannually  on  TEMPO. 

The  mechanism  which  begins  TEMPO’S  high  voltage  pulse  operation  is  the 
ignition  of  the  primary  switches.  Two  primary  switches  are  each  charged  with  20 
kilovolts  and  discharged  in  a  fraction  of  a  second.  The  switches  are  pressurized  statically 
with  40  psi  of  air.  During  the  ignition  of  the  switch,  the  air  pressure  increases  in  a  burst, 
at  this  time  the  switch  is  in  its  most  volatile  state.  It  is  during  this  time  that  most 
failures  occur,  the  explosion  of  the  switch  being  the  most  severe.  Ogden  has  taken 
numerous  steps  to  protect  operators  from  this  hazardous  situation.  After  the  first 
evidence  of  this  condition,  the  Faraday  cage  which  houses  the  switches  was  completely 
encased  in  polycarbonate.  This  protects  all  personnel  from  projectiles  in  the  event  of 
such  a  failure.  Secondly,  different  material  is  being  used  in  the  manufacturing  of  new 
switches  which  were  structurally  reengineered.  The  switches  are  now  mounted  on 
aluminum  standoffs  which  increase  the  distance  from  the  metal  surfaces  to  which  the 
switches  have  arced  in  the  past.  Since  this  modification,  the  switches  have  operated 
continuously  (with  the  exception  of  routine  maintenance)  without  failure,  increasing  the 
previous  longevity  of  the  switch  by  more  than  ten-fold.  The  engineering  staff  is 
continuing  to  modify  the  switch  housings  in  an  attempt  to  eliminate  the  UV  light 
mentioned  earlier  in  this  section.  The  staff  is  also  investigating  the  possibility  of 
replacing  the  aluminum  HV  components  with  stainless  steel  duplicates,  as  aluminum  has 
been  observed  oxidizing.  This  oxidation  results  in  poor  conduction  between 


components,  providing  a  potential  HV  failure  if  not  continuously  maintained.  The 
stainless  steel  which  does  not  oxidize,  will  reduce  the  maintenance  effort  required  to 
ensure  continuous  operation  of  TEMPO. 


The  HV  pulse,  generated  by  the  primary  switches,  travels  through  a  transformer 
which  raises  the  voltage  to  1.5  million  volts  (1.5  Megavolt).  This  pulse  is  delivered  to 
the  resonant  charge  line.  The  charge  line  is  housed  within  a  3’  x  4’  x  10’  water  tank. 

The  treated  water  functions  as  a  dielectric  insulator.  It  is  in  this  section  of  the 
transmitter  that,  due  to  the  presence  of  extremely  high  voltages,  many  profound 
improvements  were  required.  Just  as  the  primary  switches  initiate  the  HV  pulse,  the 
output  switch  initiates  the  1.5  MV  pulse  once  the  line  has  been  charged.  The  output 
switch  is  the  heart  of  the  MV  pulse  section,  and  like  the  primary  switch,  the  most 
delicate.  The  output  switch  was  intentionally  designed  to  be  mounted  in  line  with  the 
charging  line.  This  allows  the  horseshoe  shaped  charging  line  to  discharge  through  the 
switch  uniformly.  This  configuration  of  the  switch  proved  to  be  inadequate,  as  it  forced 
the  HV  line  to  pass  close  to  the  ground  planes  in  the  water  tank.  This  in  turn  stressed 
the  dielectric  characteristics  of  the  water  in  the  immediate  vicinity  of  the  switch,  causing 
an  arc,  and  subsequently  leading  to  the  failure  of  the  transmitter.  This  type  of  failure 
required  a  minimum  of  three  days  to  repair,  as  the  recovery  time  of  the  dielectric  water 
required  3  days.  This  condition  resulted  in  many  modifications  of  TEMPO  in  an  attempt 
to  minimize  the  frequency  of  failures  and  decrease  the  "off-line"  period  after  such  a 
failure.  The  most  radical  and  consequently  the  most  advantageous  modification  was  to 
mount  the  output  switch  perpendicular  to  the  base  of  the  charge  line.  This  provided  a 
means  of  relocating  the  HV  line  to  the  center  of  the  water  tank  consequently  maximizing 
the  distance  between  the  HV  line  to  ground.  By  decreasing  the  stress  placed  on  the 
insulating  properties  of  the  water,  the  transmitter  is  capable  of  operating  for  longer 
durations  and  at  faster  rates.  These  additional  operating  parameters  have  been 
extended  into  the  scientific  community  utilizing  TEMPO,  permitting  extended  exposures 
and  condensing  the  required  scheduling  times  of  the  transmitter. 

Further  investigations  indicated  that  improved  operation  of  the  switch  could  be 
attained.  The  air  lines  which  pressurize  the  switch,  were  removed  from  the  water  tank 


10 


eliminating  the  possibility  of  HV  arcing  along  the  surface  of  the  air  tube.  Accomplishing 
this  change  required  the  manufacturing  of  a  new  electrode  assembly  in  addition  to 
modifications  of  the  trigger  blade  located  inside  the  switch.  Individual  airways  were 
machined  into  the  trigger  blade  to  accommodate  the  necessary  air  flow  patterns  required 
for  correct  operation  of  the  switch.  According  to  fluid  dynamic  modeling,  this  new 
configuration  provided  an  increase  in  air  flow  as  well  as  a  more  efficient  exhaust  of 
contaminated  air.  As  demonstrated  in  the  diagrams  the  air  captured  behind  the  trigger 
blade  in  the  original  design  could  not  be  evacuated  entirely  between  bursts  of  HV 
current.  The  contaminated  air  remaining  in  the  switch  provides  a  potential  conduction 
path  for  the  HV,  which  often  lead  to  a  premature  ignition  of  the  switch  or  an  arc  across 
the  electrodes. 

Typically,  as  recorded  in  the  operation  logs  for  TEMPO,  the  life  expectancy'  of  the 
output  switch  was  designed  for  approximately  300  shots.  Upon  reaching  the  300  shot 
point,  a  failure  of  the  switch  was  guaranteed  before  reaching  500  shots.  This  mandated 
an  overhaul  of  the  switch  in  the  routine  maintenance  program  once  the  300  shot  mark 
was  obtained.  The  overhaul  of  the  switch  required  a  minimum  of  3  days  as  outlined 
above.  The  primary  reason  responsible  for  failure  of  the  switch,  at  this  point,  was  the 
dulling  of  the  trigger  blade.  The  output  switch  design  relies  on  the  biasing  level  of  the 
trigger  blade  for  given  potentials  of  HV.  The  biasing  level  is  determined  by  the  static  air 
pressure  applied  to  the  switch  by  the  primary  operator.  The  air  pressure  maintained  for 
optimal  operation  of  the  transmitter  is  that  of  a  threshold  just  below  the  level  at  which 
the  output  switch  is  kept  from  "ringing  over”.  Ringover  is  a  function  of  the  HV  on  the 
output  switch  arcing  to  the  grounded  electrode.  The  operation  of  the  switch  in  this 
condition  impedes  the  HV  pulse  from  coupling  onto  the  centerline  of  the  charging  line, 
hence,  producing  no  RF.  Proper  operation  of  the  switch  requires  the  air  pressure  to  be 
set  just  below  the  level  of  ringover.  This  allows  the  switch  to  self-bias  causing  an  initial 
arc  to  develop  between  the  trigger  blade  and  the  grounded  electrode.  This  arc  produces 
UV  light  which  ionizes  the  internal  chamber  of  the  switch.  The  ionized  air  essentially 
functions  as  a  conductor  for  the  HV,  allowing  the  switch  to  conduct  current  from  the  HV 
electrode  to  the  grounded  electrode.  This  symbolizes  a  closure  condition  of  the  switch 
which  extinguishes  once  the  HV  is  bled  from  the  charging  line.  The  conduction  of  the 


HV  in  this  manor  provides  the  mechanism  for  a  HV  pulse  to  be  coupled  onto  the 
centerline,  which  is  delivered  to  the  VIRCATOR  section  of  the  transmitter.  The 
mechanism  which  allows  the  trigger  blade  to  arc  to  the  grounded  electrode,  is  the  sharp 
edge  maintained  on  the  inner  surface  of  the  blade.  The  original  trigger  blade  was 
machined  out  of  brass.  It  is  assumed  that  brass  was  used  due  to  its  machinabilitv 
characteristics.  Unfortunately  this  same  attribute  proved  to  cause  the  switch  blade  to 
loose  its  edge  prematurely.  Now  that  the  switch  is  mounted  to  the  side  of  the  water 
tank,  the  switch  housing  is  able  to  be  opened  from  outside  the  tank  and  the  trigger  blade 
sharpened  without  disturbing  the  resistivity  of  the  water.  Beyond  this  modification,  the 
OGDEN  engineering  staff  has  manufactured  a  trigger  blade  fabricated  of  stainless  steel. 
The  stainless  steel  trigger  blade  has  proven  to  be  operated  in  excess  of  20.000  shots 
without  the  need  of  maintenance,  due  to  its  ability  to  hold  an  edge.  Since  stainless  steel 
is  difficult  and  time  consuming  to  machine,  the  OGDEN  staff  is  currently  designing  an 
insert  for  the  trigger  blade.  The  insert  will  provide  interchangeable  blade  edges  to  the 
trigger  blade,  which  will  be  able  to  be  installed  without  dismantling  the  output  switch, 
minimizing  the  "off-line"  duration  of  TEMPO. 

The  recovery  time  of  the  treated  water  in  the  tank  was  still  an  issue.  Failures 
continued  to  occur  when  the  transmitter  was  operated  for  an  extended  period  of  time 
(more  than  200  shots)  without  sufficient  time  for  water  rejuvenation.  As  the  research 
demands  on  TEMPO  increased,  it  was  made  clear  that  this  problem  needed  to  be 
addressed.  The  OGDEN  staff  has  been  able  to  reduce  the  period  of  recovery  from  3 
days  to  1.5  hours.  In  accomplishing  this,  the  resistivity  of  the  water  has  also  risen  from  6 
Megohms  (6,000,000)  to  16  Megohms.  This  in  turn  allows  the  transmitter  to  operate 
indefinitely  without  a  failure  due  to  the  resistivity  of  the  water. 

The  VIRCATOR  component  of  TEMPO  is  housed  within  an  extremely  high 
vacuum  chamber.  The  vacuum  functions  much  like  the  treated  water,  preventing  the  HV 
from  arcing  to  the  walls  of  the  vacuum  chamber.  The  centerline  continues  into  this 
section  as  the  cathode  shaft.  The  HV  is  applied  to  the  cathode,  creating  a  great 
potential  difference  to  the  anode,  which  is  at  ground  potential.  The  space  between  the 
cathode  and  anode  becomes  charged,  forming  a  plasma  cloud.  The  plasma  cloud 


functions  as  a  conductor, (much  like  the  UV  light  in  the  switches).  The  HV  on  the 
centerline  travels  to  the  cathode  in  search  of  ground  potential.  As  the  electrons  leave 
the  cathode,  towards  the  anode,  only  10  percent  of  the  electrons  intersect  with  the 
anode,  the  remaining  electrons  pass  into  the  resonator.  In  search  of  ground,  these 
electrons  reverse  direction  and  travel  toward  the  anode.  This  action  is  repetitive  until  all 
electrons  intersect  with  the  anode.  This  repetitive  action  is  the  mechanism  which 
produces  the  Radio  Frequency  (RF)  at  3  GHz. 

The  original  anode  was  fabricated  with  bronze  screen  which  would  burn  through 
after  30  shots,  requiring  the  VIRCATOR  to  be  rebuilt.  This  maintenance  required  6 
hours  to  complete.  Two  major  steps  have  been  taken  to  minimize  the  time  required  for 
this  procedure  and  to  increase  the  interval  at  which  it  needed  to  be  performed.  First, 
the  lead  bricks  which  encased  the  VIRCATOR  were  replaced  with  large  interlocking 
blocks,  decreasing  the  removal  and  installation  of  the  lead  from  5.5  hours  to  15  minutes, 
thus  decreasing  the  overhaul  of  the  anode  to  45  minutes.  Secondly,  the  material  used  for 
the  anode  has  been  replaced  with  a  stainless  steel  alloy,  which  permits  TEMPO  to  be 
operated  for  durations  of  up  to  3000  shots  without  anode  fatigue.  These  modifications 
have  resulted  in  an  extended  life  expectancy  of  the  anode  by  a  factor  of  100.  They  have 
also  reduced  the  scheduled  maintenance  time  required  for  an  overhaul  of  the  anode  by 
730%. 


Performance  Modifications  of  the  TEMPO  Exposure  System 

Performance  modifications  are  addressed  with  the  intent  of  enhancing  the 
operating  parameters  of  the  transmitter.  TEMPO  has  been  designed  as  a  prototype  high 
pulse  transmitter  of  which  three  have  been  manufactured.  The  transmitters  have  been 
distributed  to  the  following  organizations:  Armstrong  Labs  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base, 
Harry  Diamond  Labs  and  WRAIR.  The  OGDEN  engineering  staff  has  led  the 
development  of  TEMPO  through  an  evolution  of  change,  which  has  clearly  established 
the  WRAIR  TEMPO  as  the  most  reliable  and  productive  machine  of  the  three. 


The  primary  concentration  of  research  and  development  which  accounts  for  the 
elevation  of  the  output  power  of  the  VIRCATOR  has  been  the  cathode  configuration. 
These  developments  have  yielded  an  increase  in  output  power  of  the  VIRCATOR  by 
more  than  four-fold.  This  research  has  also  lengthened  the  duration  of  operation 
without  the  previously  required  recovery  cycle  of  the  cathode. 

The  operation  of  the  VIRCATOR  requires  the  cathode  to  release  electrons 
accelerated  by  the  HV  pulse.  As  stated  earlier  these  electrons  are  in  search  of  the  anode 
which  is  at  ground  potential.  The  original  aluminum  cathode  proved  to  be  inefficient  in 
releasing  the  electrons.  A  stainless  steel  cathode  has  been  used  improving  the  level  and 
quality  of  RF  generated.  The  primary  disadvantage  to  using  stainless  steel  is  its  inability 
to  dissipate  heat,  which,  as  it  escalates,  impedes  the  generation  of  RF.  Further 
experimentation  led  the  OGDEN  staff  to  the  current  cathode  material,  carbon.  The 
carbon  has  proven  to  maintain  the  high  level  of  RF  for  longer  durations.  Attaching  an 
aluminum  backplate  to  the  cathode  further  extended  the  duration  of  use  by  dissipating 
the  heat  generated  more  efficiently.  These  modifications  of  the  cathode  have  provided 
the  research  staff  with  a  transmitter  capable  of  producing  an  average  of  600  MW  per 
pulse  for  a  durations  well  beyond  the  original  design. 

Along  with  the  composition  of  the  cathode  the  engineering  staff  has  refined  the 
configuration  of  the  cathode  to  bring  the  level  of  RF  to  yet  another  level.  TEMPO  is 
currently  capable  of  delivering  800  MW  of  RF  energy.  This  has  been  accomplished  by 
tapering  the  back  of  the  cathode,  making  the  transmission  line  more  uniform  to  the  HV 
pulse.  To  exploit  this  theory  to  its  fullest,  the  engineering  staff  has  increased  the 
diameter  of  the  cathode  shaft  to  match  the  diameter  of  the  cathode.  In  theory  the  HV 
pulse,  which  is  a  high  frequency  pulse,  propagates  along  the  surface  of  the  shaft.  This  is 
quite  different  than  conventional  current  flow  which  travels  through  the  shaft 
(conductor).  By  fabricating  the  shaft  as  a  cylindrical  conductor  and  also  increasing  the 
diameter,  the  surface  area  has  increased  tremendously  which  should  decrease  the 
induction  of  the  transmission  line.  As  proven  in  the  past,  the  reduction  of  inductance 
provides  a  means  for  a  more  efficient  propagation  of  the  HV  pulse.  The  investigation  of 
this  modification  has  been  temporarily  interrupted  by  the  relocation  of  the  facility  to 


Brooks  AFB.  The  preliminary  results  have  indicated  that  the  quality  of  RF  has  been 
improved  by  producing  a  wider,  squarer  envelope  of  energy.  Along  the  same  lines,  the 
next  approach  is  to  make  the  ground  plane  surrounding  the  cathode  shaft  appear  to  be 
electrically  homogeneous. 

Since  the  delivery  of  TEMPO  to  DMR,  the  transmitter  has  evolved  from  a 
maintenance  intense  machine  into  an  instrumental  research  tool.  As  delivered,  TEMPO 
was  only  capable  of  firing  30  shots  of  RF  at  a  level  of  200  MW.  Through  their 
persevering  efforts,  the  OGDEN  staff  has  enhanced  the  operating  parameters  of  the 
transmitter  which  now  fires  1000  shots  continuously  maintaining  a  power  level  of  800 
MW. 


Rationale  for  CNS/Behaviural  Studies 


Concern  about  biological  effects  of  microwave  irradiation  has  increased  as 
applications  have  proliferated.  Much  of  this  interest  has  focused  on  the  effects  of  low- 
level,  non-ionizing  radiation  on  the  nervous  system.  These  effects  are  often  assessed 
through  measurement  of  behavioral  changes  in  organisms  following  exposure  to 
continuous  wave  (CW)  microwave  irradiation.  Current  safety  guidelines  specify  exposure 
levels  of  the  presumed  harmful  effects  of  electric  fields  that  RF  fields  induce.  Civilian 
standards,  on  the  other  hand,  do  not  address  the  unique  RF  fields  produced  by  military 
equipment  such  as  radars  and  directed  energy  weapon  systems.  High-peak,  low  average 
power  microwave  fields  produced  by  military  equipment  may  satisfy  civilian  safety 
standards,  however,  peak  power  levels  are  high  enough  to  cause  concern  and  their 
possible  bioeffects  on  the  Army  personnel  need  to  be  studied. 

The  effects  of  RF  fields  depend  on  the  exposure  level,  power  density,  and  specific 
absorption  rate.  Because  behavior  is  equally  as  important  a  determinant  of  change  as  is 
the  RF  field  itself,  sufficient  characterization  and  comparison  requires  analysis  that 
extends  over  a  range  of  behavior.  During  the  duration  of  the  contract,  OGDEN  research 
staff  teamed  with  government  investigators  studied  the  effects  of  high  power  pulsed.  CW 
microwave  fields  and  electromagnetic  pulses  on  operant  behavior,  memory,  circadian 
rhythms,  physical  endurance,  general  motor  activity  level,  startle  and  avoidance  behavior 
of  the  organisms.  Also,  a  preliminary  experiment  studied  the  interaction  of  a  wide 
spectrum  of  pharmacological  agents  and  pulsed  microwaves. 


Post-Exposure  Effects  of  High-Peak  Power  Microwave  Pulses 

On  Operant  Behavior 

Behavioral  effects  of  COBER  transmitter  on  Wistar  rats  were  studied  by  using 
operant  schedules.  Rats  were  trained  on  fixed-ratio,  variable-interval,  and  differential 
reinforcement-of-low  rate  schedules.  Ten  minute  exposure  to  240,  720,  2160,  and  6480 


pulses  at  a  l  Megawatt  peak  power  level  caused  a  rectal  temperature  rise  of  0.7  to  2.5  'C 
in  the  animals.  Total  doses  (SAs)  were  set  to  0.50.  1.5.  4.5.  and  14  kJ/kg  by  adjusting  the 
pulse  repetition  rate.  Each  pulse  produced  a  peak  whole-body  SA  and  SAR  of  2.1  J/kg 
and  0.21  MW/kg,  respectively.  A  microwave-transparent  animal  holder  was  used  to  keep 
the  animal’s  body  axis  parallel  to  the  E-field.  Regardless  of  their  schedules  of 
reinforcement,  animals  exposed  to  the  highest  dose  level  failed  to  respond,  on  the 
average,  for  13  minutes  after  the  exposure  when  they  were  placed  in  operant 
conditioning  chambers.  However,  as  soon  as  their  rectal  temperatures  decreased, 
responding  resumed  and  no  further  changes  in  response  pattern  were  exhibited.  No 
long-term  effects  were  observed.  No  behavioral  effects  were  found  at  the  lower  dose 
levels.  It  is  concluded  that  the  behavioral  perturbations  produced  by  pulsed  microwave 
fields  were  thermal  in  nature  [Akvel.  1991;  Akyel.  Hunt.  Gambrill,  and  Vargas,  1991; 
Akyel.  Hunt,  and  Vargas.  1989], 


In-field  Behavioral  Effects  of  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields 

A  similar  experiment  studied  in-field  behavioral  effects  of  1.25  GHz,  1-MW  peak 
power  and  10  ^ts  pulse  width  for  10  minutes.  At  high  dose  levels.  7.5  and  lOkJ/kg  rats' 
overall  response  rates  were  decreased  by  30  -  40%  relative  to  their  baseline  rates.  Due 
to  specific  requirements  of  the  schedules,  only  fixed-ratio  animals  which  needed  a  high 
number  of  responses,  collected  fewer  reinforcements,  at  the  highest  dose  level  [Akyel, 
Blair,  Serafini,  Akyel,  Varle,  1991],  OGDEN  staff,  designed  and  built  a  microwave- 
transparent,  fully  functional  computer  operated  operant  chamber  equipped  with  a 
response  lever,  stimulus  lights,  and  a  feeder  for  this  unique  in-field  experiment.  There 
were  several  requirements  for  a  RF-transparent  operant  chamber.  To  reduce  the 
perturbation  of  incidents  fields,  only  polycarbonate  and  fiber  optic  materials  were  used  in 
the  design  of  this  apparatus.  To  enhance  RF  absorption,  the  chamber  was  restrictive 
enough  to  keep  the  animal’s  body  parallel  to  the  electric  (E)  field  but  large  enough  not 
to  induce  stress  to  the  animal.  In  order  not  to  intensify  thermal  effects  of  microwave 
fields,  the  chamber  had  adequate  ventilation  to  ensure  heat  dissipation.  Finally,  the 


chamber  was  transparent  for  visual  inspection  of  the  animal’s  behavior  and  easy  to 
service  and  clean.  A  paper  describing  this  apparatus  to  the  scientific  community  is 
published  in  the  well-circulated  and  prestigious  Physiology  and  Behavior  Journal  [ Akyel 
and  Belt.  1992]. 


Neuropathology  in  Rats  Exposed  to  Pulsed  and  Continuous-Wave 

Radiofrequency  Radiation 

With  the  leadership  of  government  scientist  Dr.  Campbell  and  the  help  of 
OGDEN  staff,  a  preliminary  study  examining  the  neuropathology  of  the  rats  exposed  to 
pulsed  and  continuous-wave  RF  radiation  was  completed  using  COBER  transmitter.  In 
this  study,  rats  were  exposed  to  25  kJ  of  RF  energy,  either  in  the  form  of  pulsed 
radiation  (930  kW  peak  output  power  for  approximately  95  s,  2716  -  2803  pulses.  10  iis 
pulse  width,  29.2  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate)  or  as  continuous  wave  radiation  (963  W  for 
95  s).  Examinations  of  the  brains  of  these  animals  using  routine  neuropathological  tissue 
techniques  and  a  more  sensitive  silver-impregnation  method  revealed  considerably  more 
evidence  of  neurological  damage  in  animals  exposed  to  the  pulsed  radiation  than  in  those 
exposed  to  continuous  wave  radiation  [Campbell,  Hunt,  Bates,  and  Gambrill,  1991  j. 


Mechanisms  of  Microwave- Evoked  Whole-Body  Movements 

To  determine  the  mechanisms  underlying  a  reflex-like  whole-body  movement 
caused  by  a  high  peak  power  pulsed  and  low  power  continuous  microwaves  that  was 
reported  by  a  series  of  experiment  done  at  Department  of  Microwave  Research, 
OGDEN  researchers  and  technicians,  collaborating  with  government  scientists,  designed 
a  unique  automated  measurement  system.  The  exposure  device  consisted  of  a  downward 
pointing  WR  650  waveguide  with  an  endplate  short  and  hole  in  one  board  wall  to  accept 
the  animal  holder.  The  holder  was  a  ventilated  plastic  cylinder  which  restricted  the  rat’s 
extraneous  motions  and  detected  evoked  body  movements.  The  floor  of  the  holder 


contained  a  piezoelectric  film  that  detected  the  movement.  The  whole  experiment  was 
programmed  through  computer  to  eliminate  experimenter  bias.  Using  this  automated 
system  a  wide  spectrum  of  neuroactive  drugs  from  six  categories  including  serotonin  (5- 
HT),  dopamine,  norepinephrine,  acetylcholine,  opiates,  and  benzodiazepine  were  used  to 
determine  the  mechanism  of  microwave-evoked  whole-body  movement.  Drug  or  vehicle 
injected  rats  were  sham-exposed  or  exposed  to  Is,  120  W  pulses  at  1.25  GHz.  Atropine 
(cholinergic)  and  clonidine  (noradrenergic)  reliably  interfered  with  microwave  effects  so 
that  were  no  differences  in  response  incidence  between  sham  and  RF  exposed  rats 
[Akvel,  Akyel,  and  Raslear,  1993;  Akyel,  Raslear,  Akyel.  Seaman,  1993;  Raslear  and 
Akyel,  1993], 


Behavioral  Effects  of  the  High-Peak-Power,  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields 

(TEMPO) 

i 

Behavioral  effects  of  TEMPO  transmitter  which  operates  at  3  GHz  level  with  a 
700  MW  peak  transmitted  power  and  produces  80  ns  width  pulses  at  a  rate  of  1  pulse 
per  8  s  were  studied  in  the  following  experiments. 

I 


Effects  on  Treadmill  Performance  (TEMPO) 

To  assess  the  physical  endurance  of  organisms  following  an  exposure  to  200 
TEMPO  high-peak  power  microwave  pulses  treadmill  performance  of  rats  was  studied. 
Although  the  exposure  system  produced  a  time-averaged  midbrain  specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR)  of  0.21  W/kg  and  time-averaged  whole-body  SAR  of  0.07  W/kg,  both  well 
within  the  present  safety  guidelines,  the  results  indicated  that  exposure  to  such  RF  fields 
decreased  the  rats’  endurance,  as  reflected  in  running  time  on  the  treadmill  without 
faltering  [Akyel,  Belt,  Raslear,  Hammer,  1993], 


I 


Effects  on  Memory  (TEMPO) 


Memory'  consolidation  in  the  rat  following  200  TEMPO  pulses  were  also  studied. 
Water-deprived  rats  were  trained  in  a  single  trial  to  find  water  in  one  arm  of  a  Y-maze. 
Immediately  following  training  rats  were  either  exposed  to  high-peak  power  microwave 
pulses  as  described  above  or  returned  to  their  cages.  Statistically  significant  differences 
were  found  between  groups  in  errors  made  on  a  24-hour  retention  test  in  the  Y-maze 
[Raslear.  Akyei.  Serafini.  Bates,  and  Belt.  1991]. 


Effects  on  Circadian  Rhythmicity  and  Food  Consumption  (TEMPO) 

Circadian  rhythmicity  and  food  demand  following  exposure  to  TEMPO  pulses 
were  studied  by  Raslear.  Akyei.  Serafini.  Bates  and  Belt  [1991].  In  this  study,  rats  were 
either  exposed  to  400  high-peak  power  pulses  or  were  placed  in  the  exposure  chamber 
for  an  equivalent  period  of  time.  Immediately  thereafter,  the  rats  were  placed  in  home 
cages  equipped  with  response  levers  and  pellet  dispensers.  Rats  could  press  the  lever  to 
obtain  food  pellets,  which  were  their  only  source  of  food.  Each  day  the  number  of  lever 
presses  required  to  obtain  a  single  food  pellet  (the  price  of  food)  was  increased.  The 
demand  for  food  (consumption  as  a  function  of  price)  was  not  effected  by  microwave 
exposure,  but  the  circadian  pattern  of  food  intake  was  affected. 


Effects  on  Time  Perception  and  Discrimination  (TEMPO) 

The  effects  of  TEMPO  pulses  on  a  time  perception  and  discrimination  task  were 
studied  in  rats.  As  determined  by  calorimetry,  a  maximal,  whole-body-averaged,  specific 
absorption  rate  if  0.072  W/kg  was  produced.  Thus  exposures  were  well  below 
recommended  SAR  limit  of  0.4  W/kg.  Power  levels  of  transmitted  microwaves  were 
varied  over  a  50  dB  range  to  obtain  ascending  and  descending  dose-response  functions 
for  each  of  the  behavioral  measures.  Measures  of  time  perception,  response  bias,  and 


20 


total  trials  did  not  change  with  power  levels.  Dose-response  effects  were  observed  for 
discriminabilitv,  ability  to  distinguish  between  durations,  session  time,  and  trial 
completions  (failures  to  respond  on  a  trial).  The  observation  of  repeatable  dose- 
response  effects  on  discriminabilitv  and  null  responses  indicated  that  the  microwave 
exposures  were  affecting  cognitive  function  in  the  rats,  particularly  decision-making 
processes  [Raslear.  Akvel.  Bates,  Belt,  and  Lu.  19931. 


Behavioral  Effects  of  EMP  Fields 

OGDEN  researchers  investigated  behavioral  effects  of  electromagnetic  pulse  fields 
using  a  distinctive  EMP  simulator  that  has  been  drastically  improved  beyond  its  original 
capacity  by  OGDEN’s  technical  staff  [Akvel.  Raslear.  Bates,  and  DeAngelis.  1992:  Akvel. 
Raslear.  and  Serafini.  1990:  Mathur.  Bates,  and  Bassen.  1990],  Our  research  results  have 
been  presented  as  only  EMP  experiments  accomplished  in  a  controlled  laboratory  setting 
at  the  "EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel"  sponsored  bv  the  US.  Navy 
Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program  [Akvel  and  Raslear,  1993],  A  spectrum  of  behavioral 
paradigms  (memory  consolidation,  general  motor  activity  level,  behavioral  despair,  and 
preference  for  electromagnetic  fields)  were  employed  to  study  the  effects  of  EMP  fields 
on  rats.  DMR’s  parallel  plate  EMP  generator  was  used  to  expose  animals  to  200  pulses 
(6  pulses/min)  with  a  rise  time  of  7  ns  and  a  peak  field  strength  of  100  kV/m.  No 
significant  differences  were  found  between  exposed  and  sham-exposed  animals  in 
memory  consolidation  and  motor  activity  tests.  Porsolt’s  forced-swimming  test  did  not 
reveal  any  reliable  differences  in  immobility  time  (behavioral  despair)  of  the  rats  that 
were  sham-or  EMP-exposed.  However,  rats,  when  given  a  choice  reliably  preferred  the 
side  of  a  Plexiglas  tube  that  was  exposed  to  EM  pulses. 


21 


Modeling  of  the  Radiofrequency  Radiation  Hazards 

(The  Finite  Difference  Time  Domain  Method  for  Electromagnetic  Field  Simulation) 

Simulating  electromagnetic  fields  inside  an  arbitrary  object  involves  very  complex 
and  tedious  calculations.  Using  conventional  calculating  methods  to  simulate 
electromagnetic  field  propagation  through  an  object  may  take  hundreds  of  man-hours  to 
accomplish.  Therefore,  utilizing  the  HP  work-station  and  the  electromagnetic  field 
simulation  software  to  model  and  calculate  the  RF  field  generated  in  any  arbitrary  object 
is  very  critical  and  time  saving  for  researchers  and  engineers. 

The  Finite  Difference  Time  Domain  (FDTD)  method  has  been  used  extensively 
to  calculate  electromagnetic  field  inside  and  outside  of  any  material.  The  FDTD  is  very 
simple  in  concept  and  execution.  However,  it  is  remarkably  robust,  providing  highly 
accurate  modeling  predictions  for  a  wide  variety  of  electromagnetic  wave  interaction 
problems.  The  FDTD  applications  include  human  body  dosimetry  studies  for  electro¬ 
magnetic  safety,  studies  of  electro-magnetic  pulses  (EMP)  interaction  with  arbitrary 
objects,  radar  cross  section  (RSC)  studies  and  many  other  microwave  circuit  studies.  The 
FDTD  is  known  to  be  a  very  useful  tool  in  microwave  engineering  to  simulate 
electromagnetic  waves  and  pulses.  The  following  are  some  basic  properties  of  the  FDTD 
program. 

♦  The  FDTD  is  a  direct  solution  of  Maxwell’s  time-dependent  curl  equation. 

♦  The  FDTD  is  a  marching-in-time  procedure  which  simulates  the  continuous  actual 
waves  by  sampled-data  numerical  analog  propagating  in  a  data  space  stored  in  a 
computer. 

♦  The  FDTD  achieves  sampled-data  reduction  of  the  continuous  EM  field  in  a 
volume  space,  over  a  period  of  time. 

♦  Space  and  time  discretizations  are  selected  to  bound  errors  in  the  sampling 
process  to  ensure  numerical  stability  of  the  algorithm. 

♦  Electric  and  magnetic  fields  are  interleaved  in  space  to  permit  a  natural 
satisfaction  of  tangential  field  continuity  at  media  interfaces. 


The  preliminary  FDTD  computer  code  used  in  the  Department  was  developed  by 
OGDEN  contractor  Prof.  Om  Gandhi  was  able  to  simulate  electromagnetic  field  within 
an  object  with  a  limited  volume  and  was  able  to  use  only  limited  electromagnetic  pulse 
shapes.  OGDEN  engineers  worked  on  these  limitations,  and  made  many  modifications 
to  improve  the  computer  code.  The  preliminary  FDTD  code  was  debugged  to 
understand  the  limitations  of  the  program.  Modifications  wer  made  on  the  FDTD  code 
to  calculate  the  field  within  much  larger  objects  with  higher  volume  space.  Expanding 
the  number  of  cells  to  be  calculated  from  8,000  to  300.000  made  possible  to  calculate 
more  than  30  times  greater  volume  than  original  code.  Test  runs  on  the  modifications 
proved  to  be  successful.  The  preliminary  code  was  only  designed  to  simulate  far  field 
effects.  However,  our  investigators  mostly  use  open-end  waveguide  systems  designed  to 
study  near  field  effects.  Improvements  were  made  to  simulate  a  WR  650  open-end 
waveguide  exposure  system  used  in  near  field  experiments. 

Currently  Mr.  Lee.  our  senior  electrical  engineer,  compared  the  results  produced 
by  HP  work-station  using  FDTD  code  on  open-end  waveguide  exposure  system  and  the 
results  obtained  by  using  computer  controlled  microwave  tri-axial  scanne,.  This  will 
improve  the  reliability  of  both  measurement  systems.  OGDEN  staff  is  planning  to 
improve  further  the  FDTD  code  in  order  to  be  able  to  simulate  the  ultra  wide  band 
frequency  generator  which  the  Department  purchased  from  Sandia  National 
Laboratories. 


Microwave  Effects  on  Baroreceptor  Function 

(Protocol  N- 1 1-87) 


The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  test  the  hypothesis  that  high  peak  power 
microwave  radiation  can  induce  a  subtle  resetting  of  the  arterial  pressure  monitoring 
center,  the  baroreceptor.  A  resetting  of  the  baroreceptor  results  in  decreased  heart  rate 
(bradycardia)  and  decreased  arterial  blood  pressure  (hypotension).  The  hypothesis  was 
tested  in  35  ketamine  (166  mg/kg.  i.m.)  anesthetized  rats,  whose  heart  rate,  mean  arterial 
pressure,  systolic  arterial  pressure,  diastolic  arterial  pressure,  pulse  pressure,  respiration 
rate,  colonic  temperature  and  neck  temperature  (at  baroreceptor)  were  monitored 
continuously  through  the  use  of  an  indwelling  arterial  catheter,  blood  pressure 
transducer,  pneumatic  cuff,  pneumatic  transducer  and  a  microwave  transparent  Luxtron 
temperature  measurement  system.  Fifty-eight  exposures  were  performed.  Several  types 
of  exposures  were  implemented:  sham-exposures  (S),  continuous  wave  (CW)  and  pulsed 
microwave  exposures.  The  pulsed  microwaves  were  1.25  GHz  microwaves  operated  at 
400  kW  peak  power  pulse  modulated  at  0.5  Hz  (10  /xs  pulse  width.  2  watts  average)  and 
16  Hz  (1  /is  pulse  width.  6.4  watts  average).  The  CW  microwaves  were  2  watts 
(equivalent  to  0.5  Hz  pulses)  and  6.4  watts  (equivalent  to  16  Hz  pulses).  These 
exposures  were  ventral  head  and  neck  exposures  for  5  minutes  in  a  L-band  waveguide 
exposure  system  powered  by  a  Cober  transmitter.  The  average  specific  absorption  rate 
(SAR)  per  watt  transmitted  was  4.75  W/kg  at  the  medulla  oblongata  and  17.15  W/kg  at 
the  neck.  The  estimated  whole-body  average  SAR  was  1.51  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted. 
Data  were  collected  at  50  cycles/second  for  pre -exposure  equilibration,  exposure  and 
post-exposure  recovery  periods  composed  of  5  minutes  each. 

Respiration  rate  and  mean  arterial  pressure  were  not  altered  by  any  of  these  four 
exposures.  Changes  in  heart  rate  and  pulse  pressure  (difference  between  systolic  and 
diastolic  pressures  as  an  indicator  of  the  stroke  volume)  were  observed.  These  cardiac 
inhibitions  (bradycardia  and  possible  decreased  stroke  volume)  evolved  in  1.5  to  3 
minutes.  The  difference  between  pulsed  and  CW  microwaves  on  cardiac  functions  was 
subtle,  namely  a  minor  difference  in  average  exposure  time  to  development  of 


bradycardia  and  bradycardia  incidence.  A  quantitative  relationship  between  bradycardia 
incidence  and  microwave  power  was  noted.  The  incidence  was  0  %  in  sham  (0/12),  22  % 
in  rats  exposed  at  a  lower  microwave  power  (0  5  Hz  and  2  watts.  5/23)  and  57  %  in  rats 
exposed  at  a  higher  power  (16  Hz  and  6.4  watts.  13/23).  The  magnitude  of  bradycardia 
was  also  power  dependent:  20  bpm  (beats  per  minute,  5  %  of  the  baseline)  in  low 
microwave  power  and  35  bpm  (9  %  of  the  baseline)  in  higher  microwave  power.  Post 
exposure  recovery  in  5  minutes  was  complete  in  lower  microwave  power  but  incomplete 
in  higher  microwave  power.  The  pulse  pressure  inhibition  was  noted  in  rats  exposed  at 
higher  microwave  powers  only.  The  magnitude  of  change  is  approximately  4  mm  Hg  (12 
%  of  the  baseline).  The  microwave  pulse  pressure  inhibition  was  persistent  without  any 
sign  of  recovery  in  5  minutes  after  the  microwave  exposure.  At  the  appearance  of 
cardiac  inhibition,  the  colonic  temperature  increased  by  0.38  °C  and  the  neck 
temperature  by  2.25  °C  in  rats  exposed  to  a  higher  microwave  power. 

It  is  apparent  that  significant  acute  cardiac  deficit  (up  to  20  %  from  combined 
bradycardia  and  lower  pulse  pressure)  can  occur  in  individuals  sensitive  to  microwave 
exposure.  The  probability  of  occurrence  is  dependent  on  microwave  power  although  a 
high  local  SAR  (109  W/kg  at  baroreceptor)  and  high  whole-body  average  SAR  (8.6 
W/kg)  was  required  to  ascertain  the  occurrence  of  cardiac  deficit  in  more  than  half  of 
the  experimental  subjects  and  in  the  presence  of  significant  local  and  whole-body 
hyperthermia.  Nevertheless,  these  microwave  induced  cardiac  deficits  are  abnormal  and 
contrary  to  the  anticipated  hyperthermic  responses  in  experimental  animals.  Acute 
cardiovascular  inhibition  was  also  noted  by  an  independent  group  of  investigators 
exposing  rats’  baroreceptors.  Added  significance  should  be  attached  to  the  current 
findings  if  one  considers  that  hot  spots  in  the  neck  region  can  occur  in  humans  exposed 
to  certain  radiofrequency  radiations  [Lu.  Brown,  Johnson,  Mathur,  and  Elson  1991a; 
1991b;  1992]. 


Reflexive  Responses  Evoked  by  High  Peak/Low  Average  Power 
Microwave  Pulses  (Protocol  N- 11-88) 


One  of  the  potential  biohazards  induced  by  a  high  peak/low  average  power  pulsed 
microwaves  is  the  neurophysiological  responses  evoked  by  pulsed  microwaves.  Evoked 
body  movements  is  a  representative  of  these  neurophysiological  responses.  Results  of  a 
previous  pilot  study  led  to  the  hypothesis  that  a  2: 1  enhancement  of  the  Specific 
Absorption  (SA)  or  dose/response  relationship  existed  between  pulsed  and  continuous 
wave  (CW)  microwaves  of  equal  energy  [Wachtel,  Beblo,  Vargas,  Bassen,  and  Brown 
1989].  This  study  was  designed  to  provide  detailed  statistical  analysis  on  this  pulse 
enhancement  effect  and  to  examine  the  significance  of  factors  as  Specific  Absorption 
Rate  (SAR).  peak  power  and  exposure  duration.  In  addition,  microwave  dosimetry  and 
thermometry  were  performed  to  elucidate  the  primary  site  of  microwave  action. 

A  population  of  thirty-five  female  Balb-C  mice,  weighing  20  to  25  grams,  were 
fitted  with  a  tail-flick  motion  sensor  (for  identifying  body  movements)  and  placed  in  a 
low-Q  cavity  for  exposure  to  a  variety  of  microwave  pulses.  Microwave  exposures  for 
each  mouse  consisted  of  three  sessions  and  each  session  of  six  randomly  arranged  test 
events.  The  first  series  of  experiments  were  designed  to  test  the  two-fold  increase  in  the 
response  rate  of  mice  by  high  peak  power  microwaves  at  an  equivalent  average  power 
(160  W.tve,i?,,  200  kWp^,  10  /is  pulse  width  and  80  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate)  in  relation  to 
the  response  rate  evoked  by  gated  CW  (160  W^).  Three  different  pulse  burst  events 
(4,  8,  and  16  J  corresponding  to  2,  4,  and  8  pulses  in  25,  50,  and  100  ms)  and  three 
different  gated  CW  events  (8,  16,  and  32  J  corresponding  to  a  single  pulse  lasting  50,  100 
and  200  ms).  The  second  series  of  experiments  were  designed  to  supplement  and  to 
expand  the  dose-response  curve  of  the  first  series  of  experiments.  Five  different 
microwave  exposures  and  one  sham  exposure  were  included.  These  microwaves  were  32 
J  pulse  bursts  with  a  200  kW  peak  power  (16  pulses  in  200  ms),  and  a  20  kW  peak  (160 
pulses  in  2  s).  The  peak  powers  used  in  gated  CW  were  98.6  W  (one  19.7  J  pulse 
lasting  200  ms),  28.6  W  (one  22.7  J  pulse  lasting  800  ms),  and  7.2  W  (one  23  J  pulse 
lasting  3.2  s).  Total  number  of  test  events  studied  were  507.  In  addition  to  incidence  of 


body  movements,  the  latency  and  duration  of  evoked  body  movements  were  also 
evaluated.  The  mid-brain  SAR  was  96.0  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  in  pulsed  microwave 
and  73.7  W/kg  per  watts  transmitted  in  gated  CW.  This  difference  was  caused  by  a  fixed 
tuning  of  the  system.  Evoked  body  movements  by  acoustic  and  tactile  stimuli  were 
tested  in  half  of  the  mice  after  microwave  experiments  to  insure  that  the  responsiveness 
of  the  mouse  was  not  compromised  and  to  obtain  positive  control  for  comparison. 

Because  of  the  care  and  design  of  the  experiment,  the  incidence  of  the 
spontaneous  body  movements  was  very  low  2.4  %  or  1  out  of  41  sham  test  events).  The 
low  incident  rate  in  sham  test  events  allowed  us  to  associate  the  presence  of  body 
movements  to  the  administration  of  microwave  with  confidence,  especially  when  a  high 
incidence  rate  of  microwave  evoked  body  movements  (more  than  80  %)  was  noted. 

Thus,  the  range  of  response  rate  is  more  than  30  folds.  Body  movements  evoked  by 
other  stimuli,  such  as  acoustic  and  tactile  stimuli,  provide  additional  confidence  and 
positive  control  for  the  study. 

The  difference  between  incidence  rates  of  the  body  movements  evoked  by  pulse 
bursts  and  gated  CWs  of  equivalent  powers  was  not  noted.  Thus,  current  results 
indicated  that  2:1  pulse  enhancement  hypothesis  was  not  valid. 

The  incidence  rate  of  the  microwave  evoked  body  movements  increased 
proportionally  with  microwave  dose  (SA)  for  microwave  dose  rate  (SAR)  fixed  at  8 
W/kg.  The  incidence  rate  reached  a  plateau  at  20  J  or  1  kJ/kg  if  duration  of  microwave 
administration  was  not  considered.  For  SA  higher  than  20  J  or  1  kJ/kg,  the  incidence 
rate  of  the  microwave  evoked  body  movements  increased  proportionally  with  average 
incident  power  or  whole-body  average  SAR.  A  response  plateau  was  noted  at 
approximately  20  W  incident  power  or  1  W/kg.  Evoked  body  movements  was  identified 
in  mice  exposed  to  a  whole-body  average  SAR  as  low  as  0.36  W/kg,  the  basis  (0.4  W/kg) 
of  the  IEEE  C95. 1-1991  personnel  protection  guideline  for  a  controlled  environment. 
Therefore,  IEEE  personnel  protection  guideline  may  be  invalid  under  certain 
circumstances  [Brown,  Lu,  Mathur  and  Wachtel  1991;  Lu,  Brown,  Mathur,  Gambrill, 
Serafini  and  Wachtel  1991;  Brown,  Lu  and  Elson  1994]. 


Study  of  the  latency  and  duration  of  the  evoked  body  movements  can  be  used  to 
quantify  the  response  strength  of  the  evoked  body  movements.  Difference  in  latency 
among  mice  subjected  to  microwave,  acoustic  and  tactile  stimuli  was  noted.  The  latency 
was  also  correlated  with  the  incidence  rate  of  evoked  body  movements.  On  the  contrary, 
no  such  correlation  was  noted  in  the  duration  of  response.  It  was  clear  that  the  more 
intense  the  stimulus  perceived  by  the  mouse  the  shorter  the  latency  and  the  higher  the 
incidence  rate.  However,  once  the  body  movements  were  initiated,  the  response  would 
run  a  full  course  irrespective  of  how  intense  the  stimulus  was  [Brown,  Lu  and  Elson 
1994]. 


Changes  in  rectal  temperature  as  a  result  of  any  of  the  above  exposures  could  not 
be  discriminated  easily.  The  minimum  and  maximum  amounts  of  bulk  heating  without 
thermal  loss  in  these  microwave  exposures  were  between  0.05  and  0.38  °C.  The  actual 
measurement  of  the  rectal  temperature  increase  in  mice  which  received  20-32  J  of 
microwave  energy  was  between  0.08  and  0.17  °C,  and  the  rate  of  increase  was  between 
0.028  and  0.056  °C/s.  These  values  were  in  the  vicinity  of  biological  noise  and  instrument 
errors.  None  of  rectal  temperature  changes  could  be  used  to  predict  the  occurrence  of 
the  microwave  evoked  body  movements.  On  the  contrary,  skin  temperature  changes 
associated  with  microwave  exposure  could  be  determined  easily  in  anesthetized  mice.  It 
was  noted  that  the  highest  skin  temperature  associated  with  microwave  energy  in  mice 
which  received  20-32  J  occurred  at  0.5  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose.  The  range  of  skin 
temperature  changes  at  this  site  was  between  1.4  and  1.6  °C  and  the  heating  rate  was 
between  0.4  and  0.7  °C/s.  Therefore,  skin  could  be  the  primary  site  in  which  the  stimulus 
for  the  microwave  evoked  body  movements  originated.  Due  to  high  skin  heating  rates, 
these  microwaves  must  have  been  perceived  by  the  mice  as  an  intense  thermal  sensation 
but  not  a  pain  sensation  because  the  temperature  increments  were  well  below  the 
threshold  for  thermal  pain  [Lu,  Brown,  Mathur,  Gambrill,  Serafini  and  Wachtel  1991; 
Brown,  Lu  and  Elson  1994]. 

The  incident  rate  of  microwave -evoked  body  movements  increased  proportionally 
with  the  magnitude  of  skin  temperature  increment  and  skin  heating  rate.  These 
relationships  could  be  used  to  extrapolate  for  an  absolute  threshold  (0  %  incidence  rate), 


28 


i.e.,  1.21  °C  and  0.24  °C/s.  The  equivalent  SAR  value  for  0.24  °C;s  is  834  W/kg  which  is 
2  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  the  whole-body  average  specific  absorption  rate 
resulted  from  these  pulsed  microwaves.  Therefore,  the  microwave -evoked  body 
movements  represent  a  biological  response  from  highly-localized  microwave  absorption 
[Lu,  Brown,  Mathur,  Gambrill,  Serafini  and  Wachtel  1991;  Brown  Lu  and  Elson  1994], 


Preliminary  Thermometric  Studies  on  Microwave  Exposure  Reported 
to  Cause  Retinal  Damage  in  the  Rabbit  (Protocol  N-14-90) 


Pulsed  microwave-induced  retinal  injuries  were  noted  in  reports  by  different 
groups  of  investigators.  The  threshold  for  microwave-induced  retinal  injuries  appeared 
to  be  lower  than  the  threshold  of  an  injurious  whole-body  averaged  specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR,  4  W/kg)  and  the  permissible  local  SAR  (8  W/kg)  for  personnel  protection.  In 
addition,  pulsed  microwaves  appeared  to  be  more  potent  in  inducing  ocular  injuries  than 
the  continuous  wave  microwaves.  Due  to  deficits  in  these  reports  concerning  microwave- 
induced  retinal  injuries,  a  study  was  initiated  to  evaluate  the  potential  microwave  induced 
injuries  in  Dutch  belted  rabbits. 

Dutch  belted  rabbits  were  selected  as  an  experimental  model  because  of  their 
pigmented  eyes  and  because  it  is  a  good  toxicological  practice  to  be  able  to  extrapolate 
from  more  than  one  species  of  animals  to  human.  Due  to  the  anatomical  positions  of 
rabbit’s  eyes,  two  microwave  dose/dose  rates  can  be  delivered  simultaneously  to  eyes  of 
each  rabbit.  Therefore,  the  number  of  animals  needed  for  evaluation  of  retinal  injury 
and  determination  of  threshold  for  such  injury  decreases.  Dose  determination  is 
important  in  toxicological  evaluation.  However,  microwave  dose/dose  rate  is  represented, 
depending  on  the  underlying  hypothesis,  by  absorbed  energy,  SAR,  and  by  the  change  in 
tissue  temperature  resulting  from  the  interaction  between  microwave  absorption  and 
thermoregulation.  Thus,  the  microwave -induced  tissue  temperature  changes  are 
subjected  to  the  influence  of  ambient  conditions.  The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to 
determine: 

♦  the  reliability  of  the  dosimetric  method, 

♦  the  microwave  dose/dose  rate  delivered  to  the  rabbits  and 

♦  the  ocular  and  rectal  temperature  changes  resulting  from  microwave  energy 
absorption. 

Prior  to  the  initiation  of  planed  research,  microwave  exposure  equipment  has  to 


30 


be  configured  to  suit  research  goals.  The  design  criteria  for  the  microwave  exposure 
equipment  calls  for  a  narrow  beam  at  1.25  GHz  to  obtain  a  maximum  ratio  of  the  power 
density/power  output  of  the  transmitter  and  to  avoid  exposing  surrounding  tissue  as  much 
as  possible.  Dielectric  lens  and  dielectric-loaded  waveguide  applicators  were  considered 
and  evaluated  by  the  engineering  staff.  Half-beam  width  and  power  density  per  watt 
output  were  used  for  evaluation.  A  1"  Teflon  loaded  WR650  open-end  waveguide  was 
selected  because  it  provided  most  desirable  characteristics  of  adequate  focusing  without 
appreciable  attenuation  along  the  beam  path. 

Five  male  Dutch  belted  rabbits  between  1.5  and  2.0  kg  were  used.  During 
thermometry  (determination  of  thermal  dose),  rabbits  were  anesthetized  with  ketamine- 
xylazine  anesthesia  and  local  xylocaine  infiltration.  A  fistula  was  placed  below  each  eye 
immediately  beneath  the  mucosal  membrane  of  the  conjunctiva  for  placement  of  the 
microwave  transparent  temperature  probe  (Luxtron)  to  a  depth  of  2.0  cm.  Seven  ocular 
temperatures  (0,  0.5,  1.0  and  1.5  cm  from  the  surface  of  the  eyelid  at  the  incident  side 
and  0.5,  1.0  and  1.5  cm  from  the  surface  of  the  eyelid  at  the  exit  side  of  the  microwave). 
An  additional  probe  was  inserted  to  5.5  cm  into  rectum  for  rectal  temperature 
measurement.  The  rabbit  was  maintained  under  anesthesia  by  continuous  ketamine- 
xylazine  anesthetics.  The  rabbit  was  exposed  by  placing  the  right  eye  at  the  geometric 
center  of  a  Teflon-loaded  waveguide  at  a  distance  of  7.6  cm.  Four  hour  continuous 
exposures  were  used.  The  microwave  parameters  were  1.25  GHz,  1  MW  peak  power, 

10  jjs  pulse  width,  0.86  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate  and  an  8.6  W  average  output  power. 

The  exposure  was  performed  in  an  anechoic  chamber  which  was  maintained  between  22 
and  25  °C.  The  ocular  temperatures  and  the  rectal  temperature  were  acquired  at  0.1  Hz. 
Each  rabbit  was  sacrificed  with  intracardic  injection  of  sodium  pentobarbital  after 
thermometry  and  the  carcass  was  used  for  ocular  dosimetry.  Results  and  discussion  will 
be  presented  after  ocular  dosimetry. 

A  critical  and  essential  element  in  a  study  of  biological  effects  of  microwave 
radiation  is  the  determination  of  the  dose  and/or  dose  rate  administered.  The 
microwave  dose  rate  is  denoted  by  the  local  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  and  the 
whole-body  average  specific  absorption  rate.  Both  of  these  SARs  constitute  the  basis 


# 


for  comparison  among  laboratories  that  employ  different  exposure  methods  and  form  the 
basis  of  all  current  standards  for  protecting  personnel  against  radiofrequency  radiation 
which  include  microwaves.  Whole -body  calorimetry  is  used  to  determine  the  whole -body 
specific  absorption  rate  by  determining  the  amount  of  energy  within  the  object  with 
known  mass  being  exposed  to  radiofrequency  radiation.  The  calorimetric  dosimetry  will 
be  discussed  in  a  different  section.  Thermometry  is  used  to  determine  the  local  SAR(s) 
at  the  point(s)  of  measurement(s).  Due  to  the  dynamic  nature  of  thermal  diffusion 
through  conduction  and  convection,  and  various  ambient  environments  which  interact 
with  the  conduction  and  convection,  the  tolerance  and  sources  of  experimental  errors  are 
to  be  accounted  for  to  obtain  reliable  and  replicable  results.  The  thermometric 
dosimetry  procedure  used  in  this  laboratory  was  first  developed  in  the  rat  model  [Lu, 
Brown,  Johnson,  Mathur  and  Elson  1991a;  1991b;  1992;  Brown,  Lu  and  Elson  1994], 
perfected  in  the  rabbit  ocular  model  [Gambrill  and  Lu  1992;  1993;  Lu,  DeAngelis  and 
Gambrill  1992;  1993],  and  applied  to  an  in  vitro  dosimetry  for  the  rat  lens  [Lu.  Gambrill 
and  Brown  1994]. 

In  principle,  the  local  microwave  dosimetry  utilizes  the  thermal  nature  of  the 
absorbed  energy  for  determining  the  amount  of  energy  absorbed.  A  microwave 
transparent  temperature  measurement  system  (Luxtron)  was  used  to  monitor  changes  in 
object  temperature  before,  during  and  after  microwave  exposure.  The  rate  of 
temperature  change  during  microwave  exposure  was  adjusted  for  pre-exposure  profile 
and  post-exposure  cooling.  Results  of  initial  calculations  based  on  thermal  characteristics 
of  the  tissue  revealed  that  deviation  from  a  linear  function  (assuming  a  constant  rate  of 
energy  deposition)  was  less  than  1%  if  the  exposure  time  was  limited  to  10  seconds  (s). 
Therefore,  linear  functions  are  anticipated  before,  during  and  after  microwave  exposure 
if  each  period  is  limited  to  10-20  s.  Furthermore,  the  rate  changes  due  to  thermal 
diffusion  is  linear  within  a  short  period  of  time  indicating  that  the  average  rate  between 
pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  period  equals  the  average  rate  of  changes  in  thermal 
gradients  during  microwave  exposure.  Thus,  simple  subtraction  will  eliminate  the  errors 
contributed  by  thermal  diffusion/thermal  gradient. 

In  order  to  obtain  reliable  data  from  the  Luxtron  microwave  transparent 


32 


thermometiy  system,  temperature  data  were  acquired  at  10  Hz,  the  maximum 
operational  speed  of  the  thermometry  system.  However,  the  10  Hz  output  of  the  system 
was  rather  noisy.  The  oscillation  frequency  of  the  output  noise  was  about  2  Hz  and  the 
amplitude  of  the  output  noise  was  about  0.8  °C.  Infrequent  sampling  would  have 
rendered  the  temperature  data  inaccurate  and  useless.  Since  the  output  noise  revolved 
around  an  average  value  and  did  not  change  significantly  with  different  readings,  two 
methods  were  used  to  suppress  this  higher  frequency  noise.  They  were  data  averaging 
and  electronic  filtering.  Data  averaging  utilized  the  datum  with  its  adjacent  data  to 
represent  the  best  possible  value  of  the  determination.  The  amplitude  of  oscillating 
noise  could  be  reduced  according  to  the  number  of  adjacent  data  being  averaged  and 
retained  underlying  rate  changes.  A  nine-sample  averaging  procedure  provided  an 
optimal  degree  of  noise  reduction  without  excessive  degree  of  averaging.  However,  a  10 
sample  averaging  procedure  was  selected  for  routine  use  and  a  BASIC  program  was 
written  to  handle  the  data  averaging.  A  1-Hz  low  pass  electronic  filter  was  used  for 
suppressing  higher  frequency  noise.  The  1-Hz  electronic  filtering  method  was  essentially 
as  effective  in  noise  suppression  as  the  post-acquisition  10  sample  averaging  procedure 
with  the  exception  of  a  0.7  s  time  shift  of  the  trace.  Therefore,  the  1-Hz  low  pass 
electronic  filter  was  used  for  on-line  data  acquisition  and  10  sample  averaging  procedure 
was  used  for  post-acquisition  noise  suppression  of  the  filtered  data. 

A  computerized  multiple  regression  procedure  using  commercial  software 
(SigmaPIot)  was  developed  to  determine  the  pre-exposure,  exposure  and  post-exposure 
rate  of  temperature  change  (in  °C  s'1)  and  to  calculate  the  SAR  (in  W/kg)  by: 

SAR=  C(A«,  -  ((Ap,,  +  A.J/2) 

Where  C  is  the  specific  heat  capacity  for  the  tissue,  0.83  kcal  kg 1  °Cl  or  3474  J  kg 1  °C1. 
The  temperature  trace  was  divided  into  three  different  segments.  The  data  were  fitted 
until  intercept  points  of  any  two  segments  (i.e.,  pre -exposure -exposure  and  exposure- 
post-exposure)  coincided.  The  multiple  regression  procedure  was  to  provide  a  visual  aid 
to  eliminate  decision  and  calculation  biases  caused  by  an  inconsistent  curve  fitting 
routine.  Thus,  a  microwave  dosimetry  method  was  developed  from  theoretical  and 


practical  considerations.  The  current  procedure  can  be  performed  in  a  dynamic  system 
and  does  not  require  a  time  consuming  equilibration  of  the  sample  to  the  environment. 

Sixtv-eight  exposures  (8  files  per  exposure,  544  files)  in  rabbits  were  performed 
and  analyzed.  The  sensitivity  of  the  current  microwave  dosimetric  method  was  on  the 
order  of  0.02  ’C/s  or  SAR  of  69  W/kg  for  a  10  s  exposure.  The  0.2  °C  (0.02  ’C/s  x  10  s) 
reflected  the  instrumentation  error  (Luxtron)  which  cou.d  not  be  remedied  by  filtering, 
post-acquisition  noise  suppression,  or  data  fitting.  The  error  of  the  determination  (based 
on  the  coefficient  of  variance  from  4  replicates)  was  inversely  proportional  to  the  specific 
absorption  rate.  To  maintain  an  average  coefficient  of  variance  in  4  replicates  less  than 
10  %,  the  SAR  needed  to  be  higher  than  300  W/kg  or  the  heating  rate  needed  to  be 
higher  than  0.086  °C/s  or  0.86  °C  in  10  s  exposure  time,  and  0.43  °C  in  20  s  exposure 
time.  However,  the  average  dosimetric  data  4  replicates  was  highly  accurate  since  the 
difference  between  dosimetry  performed  with  500  W  and  1000  W  was  less  than  1  c/r  .  In 
short,  a  reliable  and  replicable  dosimetric  procedure  was  developed. 

Microwave  absorption  in  the  rabbit  eyes  was  inhomogeneous.  The  highest 
microwave  absorption  at  retina  was  1.02  W'/kg  per  watt  incident  power  at  0.5  cm  from 
the  incident  interphase  into  the  eye.  The  microwave  absorption  decreased  exponentially 
from  a  distance  of  1  cm  (0.73  W/kg  per  watt  incident  power)  into  the  eye  facing  incident 
field  and  down  to  the  point  of  exit  path  of  the  microwave  at  the  eye  facing  away  from 
the  incident  wave  (0.082  W/kg  per  watt  incident  power).  The  ratio  between  maximum 
and  minimum  ocular  specific  absorption  rate  was  12.4.  The  average  specific  absorption 
rate  for  the  eye  at  the  incident  site  of  the  microwave  was  0.755  ±  0.038  W/kg  (Mean  ± 
S.E.,  n=40)  per  watt  incident  power  and  for  the  eye  at  the  exit  path  of  microwave  was 
0.245  ±  0.027  W/kg.  Therefore,  the  average  ratio  between  eyes  at  the  incident  site  and 
exit  path  was  3.08.  Two  microwave  specific  absorption  rates  can  thus  be  simultaneously 
delivered  to  the  the  rabbit  if  the  microwave  transmitting  path  is  parallel  to  the  horizontal 
axis  formed  by  the  eyes. 

The  hyperthermic  potency  of  localized  1.25  GHz  microwave  exposure  was 
evaluated  in  anesthetized  rabbits  using  8.6  watt  average  incident  power  that  pulse 


34 


parameters  were  l  V1W  peak  power.  10  ,js  pulse  width  and  0.86  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate. 
Hyperthermia  (increase  in  body  temperature  other  than  due  to  fever)  was  observed  in 
rabbits  subjected  to  above  exposure  for  four  hours.  Hyperthermia  was  noted  at  7  sites  at 
both  eyes  and  in  the  rectum.  In  contrast  to  inhomogeneous  SAR  (maximum 
SAR/minimum  SAR  =  12.4),  the  ocular  temperature  changes  were  relatively 
homogeneous.  The  temperature  increments  from  the  datum  immediately  before 
exposure  were  between  2.59  ±  0.28  °C  (Mean  ±  S.E.,  n=5)  and  3.35  ±  0.26  5C.  The 
ratio  of  maximum  and  minimum  temperature  increments  was  1.29.  The  difference 
among  these  7  ocular  temperature  increments  was  not  statistically  significant.  The  ocular 
temperature  increments  were  barely  dependent  on  local  SARs  but  highly  dependent 
upon  the  depth  from  the  ocular  surface  in  each  eye.  Thus,  radiating,  conductive  and 
convective  heat  losses  at  corneal  and  eyelids  could  play  a  modifying  and  interacting  role 
on  temperature  increments  in  the  eye.  Within  the  eye,  the  primary  mechanism  of  heat 
diffusion  is  by  conduction  since  blood  circulation  for  convective  heat  dissipation  is 
primary  at  the  iris  and  retina.  Therefore,  very  complex  thermodynamics  could  be 
anticipated. 

Because  of  the  exposure  configuration,  the  power  density  decreased  by  more  than 
30  dB  (one  thousandth)  of  the  highest  power  density  in  10  cm  from  the  center  of  the 
microwave  field  where  the  eye  facing  the  waveguide  was  placed.  In  essence,  lower  chest, 
abdomen  including  rectum  and  hind  quarters  of  the  rabbit  were  exposed  to  a  negligible 
microwave  fields.  Therefore,  an  increase  in  rectal  temperature  was  not  anticipated  if  a 
heat-sink  effect  was  not  in  effect.  Present  results  indicated  that  rectal  temperature 
increased  by  2.74  ±  0.30  °C,  which  was  not  different  from  the  ocular  temperature 
increments.  Dynamically,  the  rectal  temperature  increase  was  delayed  in  relation  to 
ocular  temperatures.  In  other  words,  the  convective  heat-loss  mechanism  in  the  eye  and 
its  surrounding  tissues  redistributed  the  absorbed  microwave  energy  in  the  form  of  heat 
to  the  rest  of  body,  the  heat  sink  effect. 

Rectal-ocular  temperature  gradients  were  noted.  The  rectal-ocular  temperature 
gradients  were  positive  and  decreased  with  the  depth  into  the  orbit.  These  gradients 
represented  the  dynamic  end-results  of  local  tissue  metabolic  heat  production  (including 


35 


energy  deposition  from  microwave  absorption,  other  heat  source  such  as  uitrasound. 
infrared,  etc.),  conduction  and  convective  heat  distribution,  and  radiant,  conductive  and 
convective  heat  exchange  between  the  body  surface  and  the  environment.  Temperature 
gradients  were  too  complex  to  model  reliably.  The  preferred  method  of  identification  of 
change  in  tissue  temperature  change  is  by  experiment.  The  rectal-ocular  temperature 
gradient  was  usually  reduced  by  the  end  of  these  4  hour  localized  microwave  exposures. 
The  maximum  magnitude  of  reduction  in  7  rectal-ocular  temperature  gradients  was  -1.08 
±  0.19  JC  (Mean  ±  S.E.,  n=  5)  and  none  was  lower  than  -1.6  ’C.  These  results 
indicated  that  magnitude  of  ocular  temperatures  could  rise  higher  than  that  of  rectal 
temperature.  Because  of  individual  differences,  precise  prediction  of  ocular  temperature 
from  rectal  temperature  could  not  be  achieved.  However,  the  upper  limit  of  ocular 
temperature  could  be  deduced  from  the  rectal  temperature. 

Relatively  uniform  ocular  temperature  changes  from  variable  local  ocular  SARs 
can  assist  in  elucidating  the  planned  research  on  mechanism  of  microwave-induced 
retinal  injury.  The  experimental  design  for  microwave  induced  retinal  injury  would 
benefit  by  subjecting  one  eye  of  the  rabbit  to  microwave  exposure  above  the  ’threshold" 
SAR  and  the  other  eye  below.  Under  this  experimental  condition,  a  thermal-dependent 
injury  may  be  deduced  if  retinal  injury  occurred  in  both  eyes  and  an  SAR-dependent 
injury  may  be  deduced  if  ocular  injury  occurs  in  the  eye  with  higher  SAR  only  [Lu. 
DeAngelis  and  Gambrill  1992;  1993], 


Induction  of  Ocular  Injuries  in  Rabbits  by  High  Peak  Power  but  Low 
Average  Power  Pulsed  Microwaves  (Protocol  N-Ol-92)  (in  progress) 


Recent  advances  in  studying  retinal  injuries  induced  by  high  peak  power  puised 
microwaves  indicates  the  need  to  confirm  the  enhancement  and/or  specificity  of  peak 
power  in  causing  retinal  injuries.  The  threshold  for  pulsed  microwave  induced  retinal 
injuries  was  reputed  to  be  lower  than  an  average  ocular  SAR  of  4  W/kg  for  4  hours 
daily,  3  exposures  per  week  for  3  to  11  exposures  in  monkeys.  This  threshold  for  retinal 
injury  represented  the  only  known  injury  at  or  lower  than  4  W/kg,  a  SAR  which  was 
considered  to  be  incapable  for  inducing  any  type  of  injury  by  several  national  and 
international  committees  which  reviewed  and  recommended  protection  guidelines  for 
personnel  protection  against  the  harmful  effects  of  radiofrequency  radiations  including 
microwaves.  However,  several  confounding  factors  were  apparent  in  the  experimental 
design  and  execution.  They  were 

♦  long  distance  transport  (30  miles  each  way)  between  the  laboratory  and  the 
exposure  facility  weekly, 

♦  repetitive  use  of  chemical  restraint  before  and  after  each  exposure, 

♦  repetitive  use  of  chemical  restraint  and  drugs  for  electroretinogram  determination 
and  other  ocular  examinations, 

♦  varied  number  of  exposures  to  induce  retinal  injuries,  and 

♦  inadequate  number  of  control  (sham-exposed)  subjects. 

That  the  retinal  injury  required  repetitive  exposures  points  to  a  possible  accumulation  of 
injury  over  time.  Due  to  the  profound  importance  and  implication  of  microwave-induced 
retinal  injuries  in  a  soldier’s  ocular  health,  a  series  of  experiments  was  designed  to  study 
this  effect  in  absence  of  confounding  factors. 

Male  Dutch  belted  rabbits  were  selected  as  an  experimental  model  based  on  their 
pigmented  eyes,  a  SAR  for  each  eye  from  each  microwave  exposure  and  a  good 
toxicological  practice  for  extrapolation  of  a  known  effect  from  more  than  one  species  to 


37 


human.  Experimental  protocol  was  followed  meticulously  to  avoid  introducing 
undesirable  confounding  factors  into  the  experiment.  Anesthesia  and  chemical  restraint 
was  not  used.  Electroretinograph  and  other  eye  examines  were  not  incorporated  except 
daily  eye  examination  under  regular  laboratory  lighting  to  exclude  the  presence  of 
corneal  injury  and  conjunctivitis.  Rabbits  were  adapted  to  a  restrainer  for  4  hours  daily 
the  week  before  being  subjected  to  the  sham-exposure,  pulsed  microwave  exposure  or 
continuous  wave  microwave  exposures.  Each  rabbit  was  exposed  to  one  of  those  three 
different  exposures.  The  sequence  of  these  three  exposures  was  rotated  in  sequence 
such  that  equal  number  of  animals  would  be  subjected  to  any  one  of  the  three  exposures. 
Ears  were  taped  together  with  a  labeling  tape  to  prevent  ear  movements  which  could 
cause  accidental  exposure  to  higher  field  intensity.  They  were  exposed  for  4  hours  daily 
without  anesthesia  or  chemical  restraint  in  three  consecutive  days  per  week.  The  rabbit 
was  placed  at  7.6  cm  from  the  opening  of  the  Teflon-loaded  waveguide  with  the  right  eye 
in  the  geometric  center  of  the  opening  and  the  axis  of  eyes  in  line  with  the  direction  of 
propagation.  The  microwave  used  was  1.25  GHz  with  horizontal  electric  polarization  and 
vertical  magnetic  polarization  to  limit  the  amount  of  tissue  being  exposed.  At  the 
designated  time  after  the  designated  number  of  exposures,  they  were  anesthetized  with 
intramuscular  katamine-xylazine  injection  followed  by  lethal  dose  of  intracardiac  sodium 
pentobarbital  injection  and  pneumothorax.  Both  eyes  were  extirpated  and  fixed  in  a 
formaldehyde-glutaraldehyde  fixative  after  separating  the  eye  into  cornea,  lens  and 
retina-sclera  by  circumcision  at  the  limbus.  Each  eye  was  coded  with  a  rabbit  number 
and  its  position  (left  or  right)  for  identification.  Twenty-four  hours  later,  the  eye  was 
transferred  to  a  buffered  formaldehyde  fixative  until  it  could  be  processed  into  paraffin 
block  and  sectioned  into  4 sections,  mounted  on  glass  slides  and  stained  with 
Hematoxylin  and  Eosin  for  histological  evaluation.  Histological  evaluation  was  done 
blind  without  revealing  the  treatments  to  the  pathologist. 

A  microwave  transparent  temperature  probe  (Luxtron  MAM-05  probe)  was  used 
to  monitor  rectal  temperature  5  cm  in  depth  continuously.  During  the  exposure  (sham, 
pulsed  or  CW),  the  rabbit  could  become  restless  which  required  interruption  of  the 
exposure  to  realign  the  animal  to  original  exposure  position.  The  number  of  restless 
episodes  and  changes  in  rectal  temperature  were  recorded  for  assessing  the  extent  of 


38 


# 


behavioral  arousal  and  thermal  stress.  Initially,  rabbits  were  exposed  for  three  daily 
exposures  as  following: 

♦  sham  exposure,  a  simulation  of  microwave  exposure  conditions  without  applying 
the  microwave  power, 

♦  pulse  exposure,  1.25  GHz.  1  MW  peak  power,  10  jjs  pulse  width,  0.8  Hz  pulse 
repetition  rate,  8.6  watts  average  incident  power,  and 

♦  CW  exposure,  1.25  GHz,  8.6  watts  incident  power. 

The  average  ocular  SAR  was  6.49  ±  0.33  W/kg  (Mean  ±  S.E.)  for  the  eye  (right  eye) 
facing  the  waveguide  applicator  and  2.11  ±  0.23  W/kg  for  the  eye  (left  eye)  facing  away 
the  waveguide  applicator.  These  SARs  bracketed  the  reputed  threshold  for  microwave 
induced  retinal  injury  (4  W/kg).  Five  rabbits  were  exposed  to  each  type  of  exposures.  A 
total  of  15  rabbits  were  used.  These  fifteen  rabbits  were  sacrificed  24  hours  after  the 
third  exposure.  One  case  of  sub-retinal  exudation  was  noted  in  one  of  the  left  eyes  (2.11 
W/kg  x  4  hours  x  3)  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave.  A  retina  break  was  found  in  one  of 
the  sham-exposed  rabbits.  No  other  retinal  changes  were  noted  in  the  rest  of  the  rabbits. 

Because  of  this  low  probability  of  histopathological  changes,  three  rabbits  were 
exposed  to  the  same  ocular  oARs  (6.49  W/kg  in  the  right  eye  and  2.11  W/kg  in  the  left 
eye)  either  in  pulsed,  CW  or  sham  exposure  only  and  their  retinal  histopathology  was 
studied  one  week  after  the  completion  of  3  daily  exposures  to  allow  an  adequate  of  time 
for  injury  to  manifest  if  such  injury  existed.  Retinal  histopathologic  change  was  absent 
in  these  three  rabbits.  Three  additional  rabbits  were  exposed  to  the  same  ocular  SARs 
either  in  pulsed,  CW  or  sham  exposure  only  but  the  number  of  exposures  was  increased 
to  9  in  3  daily  exposures  per  week.  The  retinal  histopathology  was  studied  24  hours  after 
the  completion  of  exposures.  Again,  no  apparent  retinal  histopathologic  changes  were 
noted  among  these  three  rabbits. 

Baseline  rectal  temperatures  immediately  before  exposures  in  these  21  rabbits  (7 
in  each  exposure  regimen)  were  39.07  ±  0.07  °C  (mean  ±  S.E.,  n=  21,  sham-exposed 


39 


group),  38.91  ±  0.05  °C  (pulsed  group),  and  38.94  ±  0.05  °C  (CW  group).  The 
difference  among  these  groups  of  rabbits  was  statistically  insignificant  (Fl2fi0)=  2.20:  p> 
0.05)  and  the  largest  difference  was  0.16  °C  indicating  an  uniform  pre-exposure 
conditions  among  these  three  groups  of  rabbits.  The  time  average  rectal  temperature 
change  from  its  own  baseline  rectal  temperature  was  used  to  quantify  the  change  of 
rectal  temperature  in  these  rabbits  during  the  entire  4  hour  exposure  period.  Sham 
exposed  rabbits  were  characterized  by  cooling  or  a  decrease  in  rectal  temperature  (-0.46 
±  0.06  °C,  mean  ±  S.E.,  n=21).  Both  hyperthermia  (increased  rectal  temperature)  and 
cooling  could  be  noted  in  rabbits  exposed  to  pulsed  or  CW  microwaves.  The  average 
rectal  temperature  change  from  baseline  values  was  0.19  ±  0.07  °C  (n=  21)  in  pulsed 
group  and  -0.08  ±  0.08  °C  (n=21)  in  CW  group.  The  difference  among  these  three 
groups  was  statistically  significant  (F(2o0)=  7.86,  p<  0.001).  Therefore,  hyperthermia  in 
exposed  rabbits  was  clearly  evident  and  the  magnitude  of  hyperthermia  was  higher  in 
pulsed  than  CW  exposed  groups. 

Rabbits  could  become  restless  in  the  restrainer  within  a  period  of  4  hours.  In  the 
sham  exposed  group,  the  number  of  restless  episodes  ranged  from  0  to  12  with  an 
average  of  5.8  ±  0.9  episodes  (mean  ±  S.E.,  n=  21  in  7  rabbits).  In  the  pulsed  exposed 
group,  the  number  of  restless  episodes  was  slightly  less  than  that  of  sham  exposed  group 
and  ranged  between  1  to  12  episodes.  The  average  was  4.6  ±  0.7  episodes  (n=  21  in  7 
rabbits).  The  restless  behaviors  appeared  to  be  enhanced  in  rabbits  exposed  to  CW 
microwaves.  The  number  of  restless  episodes  ranged  between  0  and  36  in  these  rabbits. 
The  average  restless  episodes  was  12.2  ±2.1  episodes  (n=  21  in  7  rabbits).  The  restless 
enhancement  in  the  CW  exposed  group  was  statistically  different  from  sham  exposed  and 
pulse  exposed  groups  (F(260)=  8.77,  p  <  0.001,  Duncan’s  New  Multiple  Range  Test). 
Rabbits  showed  signs  of  enhanced  restlessless  (more  than  12  restless  episodes  in  4  hours) 
in  7  of  the  21  CW  exposures.  However,  correlation  of  the  occurrence  of  enhanced 
restless  to  which  of  the  three  individual  exposures  within  each  individual  rabbit  was  not 
fruitful. 

Apparently,  localized  microwave  exposure  at  these  SARs  (6.49  W/kg  in  the  right 
eye  and  2.11  W/kg  in  the  left  eye)  was  incapable  of  inducing  retinal  injury  in  rabbits  even 


40 


in  the  presence  of  discemable  hyperthermia.  The  latency  of  injury  and  the  ccumuiative 
nature  of  the  microwave  injury  (theoretical  basis  for  repetitive  exposures)  could  not  be 
evaluated  due  to  the  absence  of  retinal  injury.  These  rabbits  appeared  to  be  able  to 
tolerate  the  exposures  without  other  ill  effects  except  an  restless  enhancement  during 
CW  exposures.  It  was  decided  to  increase  the  number  of  exposures  and  SARs  to 
increase  the  probability  of  retinal  injury.  Six  4  hour  exposures  (3  daily  exposures  per 
week  for  2  weeks)  and  one  week  latent  period  were  incorporated  into  a  new  study. 
These  exposures  were: 

♦  sham  exposure,  a  simulated  exposure  without  turning  on  the  power  to  the 
transmitter, 

♦  pulse  exposure,  1.25  GHz,  1  MW  peak  power,  10  fjs  pulse  width.  1.05  Hz  pulse 
repetition  rate,  10.5  W  average  incident  power,  and 

♦  CW  exposure,  1.25  GHz,  10.5  W  incident  power. 

The  average  ocular  SAR  was  7.93  ±  0.40  W/kg  (mean  ±  S.E.)  for  the  eye  facing 
waveguide  applicator  (right  eye)  and  2.57  ±  0.2 8  W /kg  for  the  eye  facing  away  from 
waveguide  applicator(left  eye).  The  endpoints  of  the  study  are  retinal  histopathologv. 
hyperthermia  potency,  and  behavioral  arousal. 

Four  rabbits  have  been  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave,  three  to  CW  and  two  to 
sham  exposures.  Evaluation  of  endpoints  of  this  study  is  still  in  progress. 

Inability  to  induce  retinal  injury  in  rabbits  is  a  very  likely  outcome  of  the  current 
study.  It  can  be  interpreted  that  the  susceptibility  to  the  microwave  induced  retinal 
injury  is  different  among  different  species  of  animals.  A  contributing  factor  for  this 
genetic  dependency  is  the  difference  in  anatomy  of  eyes  between  monkeys  and  rabbits. 
Three  different  histopathological  changes  were  noted  in  the  monkey  subjected  to 
microwave  exposure,  i.e.,  pyknotic  degeneration  of  nuclei  at  pigmented  epithelium,  pin¬ 
head  retinal  detachment  and  karyolysis  in  the  cone  photoreceptor  at  the  fovea  and 
macula.  Pyknotic  degeneration  of  the  pigmented  epithelium  was  not  noted  in  rabbits. 


41 


Two  cases  of  retinal  detachments,  in  the  form  of  subretinal  exudation  and  retinal  break, 
have  been  found  in  the  present  study.  However,  these  two  cases  of  retinal  detachment 
occurred  evenly  between  sham  exposed  and  pulse  exposed  rabbits.  Association  of  retinal 
detachment  to  microwave  exposures  cannot  be  concluded  due  to  a  lack  of  statistical 
power  to  substantiate  such  a  claim.  Because  of  low  probability  of  occurrence,  large 
treated  and  control  populations  have  to  incorporate  to  provide  adequate  statistical  power 
for  associating  this  retinal  injuiy  (retinal  detachment)  to  microwave  exposure.  It  is  clear 
that  such  association  cannot  be  accomplished  because  the  limited  number  of  rabbits  used 
in  the  present  study.  The  rabbit  retina  does  not  have  a  fovea  and  only  a  few  cone  cells 
are  present  in  the  functional  macula  area.  A  working  hypothesis,  that  microwave 
radiation  only  targets  the  cone  photoreceptors  but  leaves  rod  photoreceptors  intact,  has 
been  forwarded  from  observation  of  the  microwave  induced  retinal  injury  in  monkeys. 
Absence  of  discernable  cone  photoreceptor  karyolytic  degeneration  associated  with 
microwaves  tends  to  support  the  working  hypothesis  that  microwave  radiation  did  not 
injure  the  rod  photoreceptors.  On  the  other  hand,  absence  of  more  advanced 
histopathological  changes  in  cone  photoreceptors  remained  to  be  demonstrated. 

Confounding  factors  in  monkey  experiments  performed  in  the  other  laboratory 
can  be  the  source  of  variation  in  species  susceptibility  to  microwave  induced  retinal 
injury.  Synergistic  interaction  between  microwave  and  drug  in  inducing  microwave 
associated  ocular  injuries  has  been  demonstrated  in  monkeys.  Therefore,  synergistic 
interaction  by  the  confonding  factors  may  contribute  to  the  species  difference  in 
susceptibility  to  microwave  induced  retinal  injury.  This  hypothesis  can  be  studied  by 
incorporating  confounding  factors  in  monkey  experiments.  Most  important  factors  are 
repetitive  use  of  chemical  restraint,  and  chemical  restraint,  drug  and  strong  light  in 
electroretinographic  evaluation  and  other  ocular  examinations  [Lu,  Gambrill  and  Elson 
1993;  Gambrill,  Elson  and  Lu  1994], 


42 


Microwave  Dosimetry  of  the  Rat  Lens  In  Vitro 

(Protocol  N-02-93) 

Injuries  to  the  eye  caused  by  intense  microwave  radiation  have  been  known  for 
many  years.  It  has  been  suggested  that  lenticular  temperature  elevation  above  a  critical 
level  may  be  sufficient  to  cause  microwave  induced  cataracts.  However,  results  of  the 
past  research  (Protocol  N-05-86)  in  this  laboratory  demonstrated  that  the  microwave- 
induced  cataract  did  not  require  the  cited  critical  lenticular  temperature  for  induction  of 
cataracts  in  rat  lens  in  vitro.  By  present  technical  standards,  lenticular  dosimetry  in  that 
protocol  (N-05-86)  was  found  to  be  inadequate  when  an  in  depth  review  of  the  past 
research  was  made.  We  have  recently  developed  a  reliable  thermometric  dosimetry 
method  for  an  in  vivo  determination  of  the  microwave  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  in 
specimens  accurately  (Protocol  N- 14-90).  Because  of  the  health  implication  of  lenticular 
injuries  in  humans,  it  is  necessary  to  determine  a  more  accurate  dose  in  the  rat  lens  than 
the  previous  values  used  in  Protocol  N-05-86.  These  dosimetric  determinations  were  also 
used  to  test  the  validity  of  the  thermometric  procedure. 

The  915  MHz,  1250  MHz  CW,  and  pulsed  exposure  systems  were  reassembled 
and  recalibrated  for  lenticular  dosimetry.  Lens  exposure  cells  for  these  exposure  systems, 
perfusion  apparatus  and  a  precision  water  bath  were  also  reassembled  and  tested. 

Fresh  lenses  were  obtained  from  rats  for  dosimetry.  Sixty-four  day  old  rats  were 
euthanized  individually  in  a  polycarbonate  cage  with  carbon  dioxide  from  a  100  % 
carbon  dioxide  cylinder.  Eyes  were  removed  immediately  after  death.  Each  lens  was 
obtained  by  dissecting  the  eye  following  the  outline  of  the  Limbus.  A  microwave 
transparent  temperature  probe  (Luxtron  MPM  probe,  <  1  mm  in  diameter)  was  inserted 
into  the  lens  through  the  lenticular  with  a  dissecting/positioning  guide  fabricated  from  an 
18  G  hypodermic  needle.  The  tip  of  the  microwave  transparent  temperature  probe  was 
positioned  in  lenticular  cortex  to  avoid  the  penetration  of  the  lenticular  nucleus.  Three 
additional  probes  were  placed  above  the  lenticular  probe  with  5  mm  spacing  to 
characterize  the  SAR  distribution  within  exposure  cell.  These  dosimetries  were 


43 


performed  at  37  °C  intra-lenticular  temperature.  The  perfusate  (physiologic  saline, 

0.9%)  was  wanned  continuously  in  a  37.5  °C  precision  water  bath  to  compensate  for  the 
heat  loss  in  the  perfusion  loop.  The  perfusion  rate  was  60  to  80  ml/min.  The  flow  rate 
was  adjusted  until  all  4  temperatures  spaced  1.0  cm  apart  in  the  exposure  stabilized  and 
equalized  for  at  least  one  minute.  The  perfusion  was  stopped  at  the  beginning  of  each 
dosimetiy  run  to  prevent  convective  heat  loss  from  the  perfusate.  After  each  dosimetry 
trial,  the  lens  was  perfused  until  all  4  temperatures  stabilized  at  37  °C.  Each  lens  was 
exposed  four  times  to  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves.  The  exposure  duration  was  20  s  for 
each  dosimetiy  run.  The  dosimetry  procedure  was  described  earlier,  namely,  a  segment 
analysis  method  to  compensate  the  exposure  rate  of  temperature  changes  with  weighed 
pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  rate  of  temperature  changes.  The  following  microwave 
exposures  were  evaluated: 

♦  915  MHz  pulsed  microwave,  15  kW  peak  power,  20  /^s  pulse  width,  50  Hz  pulse 
repetition  rate,  15  W  average  incident  power, 

♦  915  CW  microwave,  13  W  average  incident  power, 

♦  1250  MHz  pulsed  microwave,  10  kW  peak  power,  20  pi s  pulse  width,  100  Hz  pulse 
repetition,  20  W  average  incident  power,  and 

♦  1250  MHz  CW  microwave,  16.5  W  average  incident  power. 

Twelve  lenses  were  used  to  obtain  384  temperature  files  in  96  exposures. 

The  intra-lenticular  SAR  was  6.46  ±  0.98  W/kg  per  watt  (mean  ±  S.D.,  n=24,  4 
replicates  of  6  lens)  of  the  pulsed  1250  MHz  microwave  and  6.26  ±1.10  W/kg  of  the 
CW  1250  MHz  microwave.  The  difference  between  these  two  values  was  ±1.6  %  of  the 
average  value.  The  intra-lenticular  SAR  was  10.01  ±  1.50  W/kg  per  watt  of  the  915 
MHz  pulsed  microwave  and  9.81  ±  2.10  W/kg  per  watt  of  the  CW  915  MHz  microwave. 
The  difference  was  ±1.0  %.  The  differences  in  SARs  determined  in  the  perfusate 
between  CW  and  pulsed  microwave  was  ±0.08  %,  ±0.1  %,  ±0.4  %,  ±0.7  %,  ±1.3  %, 
and  ±2.0  %.  From  these  results,  it  can  be  concluded  that  the  result  of  SAR 
determination  is  dependent  on  average  power  and  independent  on  the  modulation. 


44 


These  results  are  consistent  with  the  theory  for  SAR  determination.  Therefore,  the 
current  local  dosimetry  developed  in  this  laboratory  is  a  procedure  with  high  degree  of 
precision  and  repeatability. 

There  was  a  fundamental  difference  in  the  SAR  pattern  surrounding  the  lens  in 
these  two  different  microwave  exposure  systems  operated  at  915  and  1250  MHz.  In  the 
1250  MHz  exposure  system,  the  SAR  was  6.36  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  in  the  lens. 
10.08  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  at  1  cm  above  the  lens.  12.92  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted 
at  2  cm  above  the  lens  and  17.36  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  at  3  cm  above  the  lens.  In 
the  915  MHz  exposure  system,  these  values  were  9.91  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  in  the 
lens,  and  14.08,  13.80,  and  7.54  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  at  1,  2,  and  3  cm  above  the 
lens.  Apparently,  neither  of  these  two  exposure  systems  provided  a  uniform  SAR  within 
the  exposure  cell  and  lenticular  exposures  performed  in  the  past  had  not  utilize  the 
relative  uniform  area  of  the  field  within  exposure  ceil  [Lu,  Gambrill  and  Brown  1994]. 
These  dosimetry  results  have  been  forward  to  the  Principal  Investigator  who  is 
responsible  for  Protocol  N-05-86. 


45 


Whole-Body  Calorimetric  Dosimetry 
(In  Support  of  the  Protocol  N- 10-88,  Effects  of  Continuous-Wave 
and  Extremely  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed  Microwave  on  Rats 
Responding  on  High  and  Low  Rates) 

In  studying  the  biological  effects  of  radiofrequencv  radiation  including 
microwaves,  the  investigator  needs  to  understand  and  characterize  the  amount  of  energy 
being  coupled  to  a  biological  specimen.  Dosimetiy  is  used  to  determine  the  amount  of 
energy  coupled  into  a  biological  specimen  which  includes  local  specific  absorption  rate 
(SAR)  and  whole-body  average  specific  absorption  rate.  Whole-body  dosimetry 
measures  the  integrated  or  volume  averaged  SAR,  whereas  local  dosimetry  deals  with 
SARs  in  a  specific  site  of  the  biological  specimen.  Both  of  these  SARs  are  used  to 
describe  the  energy  coupling  in  biological  specimen  and  as  a  basis  of  any  rational 
personnel  protection  guideline.  This  section  deals  with  a  cost-effective  and  accurate 
whole-body  dosimetiy  method  developed  in  this  laboratory. 

Based  on  the  assumption  that  all  the  radiofrequency  energy  absorbed  bv  a 
biological  specimen  will  eventually  be  converted  to  heat,  a  calorimetric  dosimetry  method 
has  been  developed  in  this  laboratory.  The  concept  was  not  new  but  details  in 
methodology  were  frequently  missing,  inadequate,  cumbersome  or  containing 
uncertainties.  Calorimetric  methods  used  in  the  past  utilize  a  Dewar-flask  calorimeter,  a 
twin-well  calorimeter,  or  dual-gradient-layer  calorimeter  to  measure  the  amount  of  heat 
energy  in  the  specimen.  The  Dewar-Flask  calorimeter  is  based  on  the  final  temperature 
equilibrium  between  specimen  and  transfer  medium  (usually  water),  between  transfer 
medium  and  calorimeter,  and  between  specimen  and  calorimeter.  The  method  depends 
entirely  on  the  accuracy  of  the  specific  heat  capacity  values  of  the  specimen,  transfer 
medium  and  calorimeter.  Control  specimens  are  required  to  obtain  the  difference 
between  exposed  and  control  specimens.  Although  the  cost  of  equipment  is  relatively 
low,  calibration  of  the  calorimeter  and  determination  of  the  precise  specific  heat  capacity 
of  the  specimen  and  calorimeter  is  difficult.  In  addition,  the  heat  loss  in  a  Dewar-flask 
calorimeter  during  actual  operation  cannot  be  accounted  for  easily.  Thus,  Dewar-flask 


46 


dosimetry  tends  to  yield  a  lower  value  than  other  dosimetric  methods. 


The  twin-well  calorimeter  is  a  piece  of  custom-made  equipment  which  is  available 
commercially  as  a  gradient  layer  calorimeter.  The  gradient  layer  calorimeter  measures 
the  rate  at  which  heat  passes  from  the  specimen  through  the  walls  of  the  calorimeter  to  a 
room  environment.  The  heat  flow  is  sensed  by  multi-junction  thermopile.  The  heat  flow 
rate  can  be  calibrated  easily  with  a  high  degree  of  precision  and  accuracy  and  it  does  not 
depend  on  the  knowledge  of  the  specific  heat  capacity  of  the  specimen,  transfer  medium 
or  calorimeter.  Integration  of  heat  flow  rate  over  time  yields  the  total  amount  of  energy 
dissipated  from  the  specimen  to  the  calorimeter  and  to  the  surrounding  environment.  A 
thin  layer  of  constant  temperature  high  specific  heat  capacity  fluid  is  usually  used  to 
prevent  the  room  environment  from  influencing  the  determination  of  the  heat  flow  rate. 
Therefore,  the  gradient  layer  calorimeter  overcomes  all  the  operational  deficits  and 
shortcomings  of  the  Dewar-flask  calorimeter.  Nevertheless,  a  control  specimen  is  still 
required  to  obtain  the  amount  of  energy  deposition  in  the  exposed  specimen.  Twin-well 
and  dual-gradient-layer  calorimetry  determines  the  difference  between  exposed  and 
control  specimens  following  a  prolonged  period  necessary  for  the  establishment  of  an 
identical  heat  content  between  specimens.  The  equilibrium  period  takes  4-11  hours  tc 
achieve.  The  procedure  can  only  be  performed  by  introducing  repetitively  the  same 
identical  pairs  of  specimens,  one  as  control  and  the  other  as  exposed,  into  the 
calorimeter  and  removing  one  specimen  for  exposure  while  maintaining  an  identical 
environment  for  the  control  specimen.  Matching  of  the  exposed  and  control  specimens 
is  a  pre-requisite  for  a  successful  operation.  Errors  can  be  introduced  easily  due  to 
inadequate  equilibrium,  difference  between  specimens  and  errors  introduced  by 
repetitive  introduction  of  the  specimens.  These  procedures  become  more  wasteful  with 
the  increasing  number  of  determinations  and  can  be  rather  time-consuming. 

To  overcome  wasting  specimens  and  to  avoid  uncertainties  in  dosimetry  by  a  twin- 
well  calorimeter,  a  calorimetric  dosimetry  procedure  using  a  single  gradient-layer 
calorimeter  was  designed.  The  design  features  included: 

♦  standardization  of  a  specimen  equilibration  procedure  and  criterion  such  that  a 


47 


§ 


» 


I 


uniform  and  replicable  thermal  content  of  a  specimen  can  be  obtained, 

♦  equilibration  of  the  specimen  temperature  (26  °C)  slightly  above  laboratory 
environment  (24  °C)  so  that  error  caused  by  introduction  of  the  specimen  is  a 
negligible  amount  and  characteristics  of  the  output  curve  will  be  distinguishable 
from  background  noise  of  the  calorimeter  output, 

♦  use  of  a  Styrofoam  box  to  minimize  heat  loss  during  microwave  exposure, 

♦  exact  replication  of  the  equilibration  and  exposure  procedures,  and 

♦  digitization  of  the  calorimeter  output  and  computerized  data  acquisition,  data 
storage  and  data  analysis  so  that  soft  and  hard  copies  of  the  data  can  be  easily 
reproduced. 

A  gradient-layer  Seeback  Envelope  Calorimeter  (Thermonetics  Model  SEC-A-1202)  with 
internal  dimensions  of  30  x  30  x  30  cm  was  used.  The  calorimeter  output  constant  was 
calibrated  by  an  electrical  heater,  distilled  water  samples  at  a  fixed  temperature  but 
variable  masses,  and  distilled  water  samples  at  fixed  mass  but  variable  temperature.  The 
output  of  the  calorimeter  was  monitored  by  a  nanovoltmeter  (Keithley  Model  181).  The 
digitized  output  of  the  nanovoltmeter  was  recorded  eveiy  15  s  by  a  personal  computer 
equipped  with  a  data-acquisition  hardware  using  a  data  acquisition  program  written  in 
QBASIC.  The  calorimeter  was  equilibrated  for  a  minimum  of  30  minutes  before 
introduction  of  the  specimen. 

Twenty-nine  fresh  Sprague -Dawley  rat  carcasses  with  an  average  body  mass  of  327 
grams  were  used.  Rats  were  euthanized  with  carbon  dioxide.  A  thermistor  based 
temperature  probe  (Yellow  Spring  Instruments,  YSI  423)  was  inserted  5  cm  into  the 
colon  of  the  carcass  and  then  the  carcass  was  placed  in  a  plastic  bag  and  submerged  with 
a  counter-buoyancy  weight  into  a  precision  water  bath  (Neslab  RTE  110,  set  at  26  °C) 
for  equilibration  to  predetermined  temperature  (26  °C).  Carcass  temperature  was 
assumed  to  be  uniform  when  the  colonic  temperature  equaled  the  bath  temperature  for 
at  least  3-5  minutes.  The  equilibrated  carcass  was  quickly  transferred  into  a  Styrofoam 
box  and  placed  at  the  exposure  position  in  the  anechoic  chamber  for  a  40  s  sham  or 
microwave  exposure. 


48 


I 


» 


The  microwave  exposure  was  a  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwave  in  an  anechoic 
chamber  equipped  with  a  corner  reflector.  Exposures  were  sham  (0  W)  and  pulsed 
^  microwaves  at  500,  1,000  or  1,500  W  (1  MW  peak  power,  10  fjs  pulses  at  50,  100,  150  Hz 

pulse  repetition  rates).  Each  exposed  carcass  was  transferred  immediately  into  the 
calorimeter.  Calorimeter  output  was  recorded  at  least  30  minutes  prior  to  the  exposure 
and  continued  until  the  calorimeter  output  returned  to  the  baseline  value.  The  duration 
►  of  data  acquisition  lasted  approximately  4  h.  Eight  carcasses  were  used  in  sham 

exposures  and  seven  carcasses  were  used  for  each  power  density  level  (0.75,  1.50  and 
2,25  W/cm2  corresponding  to  a  500,  1,000  and  1,500  W  incident  power). 

)  The  energy  content  of  the  sham  exposed  carcass  was  11.2  J/g  under  the  current 

procedure.  The  energy  content  of  the  carcass  increased  with  the  power  density  of  the 
pulse  microwave  exposure.  Linear  regression  of  all  the  data  yielded  a  slope  of  6.44  J/kg 
per  mW/cm2  (r=  0.997;  df=  27,  p<0.005).  The  correlation  coefficient  (0.997)  indicated 
^  a  very  small  deviation  from  linearity,  i.e.,  0.6  %.  For  40  s  exposure  time,  the  normalized 

whole  body  specific  absorption  rate  was  0.16  W/kg/mW/cm2.  The  free  field  whole-body 
average  absorption  rate  was  calculated  to  around  0.37  W/kg/mW/cm2  without  the  corner 
reflector.  It  would  appear  that  absorption  cross-section  in  presence  of  the  corner 
^  reflector  reduced  to  43%  of  the  free  field  radiation  of  the  same  field  intensity.  On  the 

other  hand,  a  10  dB  field  enhancement  was  achieved  by  the  presence  of  the  corner 
reflector.  Therefore,  the  overall  absorption  enhancement  ratio  of  the  corner  reflector 
was  4.35  or  6.36  dB.  A  highly  reliable  and  cost-effective  whole-body  calorimetric 
dosimetry  method  is  developed.  The  procedure  used  can  also  be  extended  to  determine 
the  complex  specific  heat  capacity  of  the  animals  [Mathur,  Akyel  and  Lu  1991;  1992]. 


» 


49 


Subcutaneous  And  Skin  Surface  Temperature  Increments 
in  Rats  Exposed  to  One- second  Gated  CW  Microwaves 
(In  Support  of  the  Protocol  N-04-91,  Modification  of  Acoustic 
and  Tactile  Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses) 

Microwave-evoked  body  movements  were  initially  considered  to  be  a 
representative  example  of  "non-thermal"  biological  effects  and/or  direct  neural  effects  of 
radiofrequency  radiation  including  microwaves.  A  non-thermal  mechanism  was  alleged 
on  two  observations: 

♦  microwave-evoked  body  movements  occured  in  the  absence  of  increased  rectal 
temperature,  and 

♦  the  effective  amount  of  microwave  energy,  when  averaged  over  an  entire  body, 
was  equal  to  less  than  the  amount  of  thermal  energy  to  cause  a  0.1  °C  increase 
which  is  considered  to  be  insignificant  biological  noise. 

However,  recent  studies  of  the  microwave  evoked  body  movements  in  mice  (Protocol  N- 
11-88,  Reflexive  Responses  Evoked  by  High  Peak/Low  Average  Power  Microwaves 
Pulses)  have  indicated  that  the  "non-thermal"  concept  of  the  microwave-evoked  body 
movements  was  inappropriate  because  the  microwave-evoked  body  movements  occurred 
in  absence  of  a  change  in  rectal  temperature  but  in  the  presence  of  significant 
subcutaneous  temperature  change. 

Microwave  evoked  body  movements  were  similar  to  "startle".  A  second  species  of 
laboratory  animal,  the  rat,  was  selected  for  use  in  studying  the  microwave -evoked  body 
movements  for  two  reasons.  These  are  that  previous  "startle"  studies  have  used  rats  and 
that  it  represents  good  proctice  to  extrapolate  to  man  based  on  research  on  more  than 
one  species  of  experimental  animals.  In  addition,  there  exists  substantial  published 
knowledge  and  data-bases  on  startle  and  neural  circuits  for  comparison.  A  1.25  GHz  L- 
band  waveguide  exposure  system  (Protocol  A-01-90,  Pilot  Study  for  Modification  of 
Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses)  was  designed  for  this  purpose.  Due  to  similarities  in 
incident  fields  and  head  structures  between  mice  and  rats,  it  was  considered  prudent  to 
evaluate  subcutaneous  temperatures  of  the  rat  exposed  to  microwaves. 


Each  rat  was  anesthetized  with  sodium  pentobarbital  intraperitoneai  injection  (60 
mg/kg).  The  hair  was  clipped  from  the  head  and  neck  regions.  An  18  G  thin-wall 
hypodermic  needle  was  inserted  from  the  neck  region  to  the  tip  of  the  nose  following  the 
midline  of  the  head.  A  microwave  transparent  temperature  probe  (Luxtron  MAM-05) 
was  inserted  through  the  bore  of  the  hypodermic  needle.  The  hypodermic  needle  was 
then  withdrawn  to  the  back  of  the  Luxtron  probe  (12")  connector.  The  temperature 
probe  was  advanced  carefully  to  the  tip  of  the  nose  which  provided  sensing  points  at  0.5. 
1.0,  1.5,  and  2  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose.  A  second  microwave  transparent 
temperature  probe  (Luxtron  MAM-05)  was  attached  to  the  dorsal  skin  surface  in  parallel 
to  the  first  probe  with  a  piece  of  labeling  tape.  The  incident  powers  were  40.  80  and  160 
W  in  the  L-band  waveguide  exposure  system  for  1  s.  Four  replicate  exposures  were 
studied. 

The  same  animal  was  also  used  for  studying  the  subcutaneous  and  rectal 
temperature  changes  in  the  neck  region  and  in  the  colon.  The  MAM-05  probe  was  again 
inserted  through  the  bore  of  an  18  G  hypodermic  needle  which  was  inserted  under  dorsal 
skin  between  scapulae  and  following  the  midline  of  the  neck  and  the  head  to  1.7  cm 
from  the  tip  of  the  nose.  The  4  sensors  of  the  MAM-05  probe  were  at  2.2,  2.7,  3.2  and 
3.7  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose.  The  position  of  2.2  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  was 
approximately  at  the  outside  of  the  waveguide.  An  additional  probe  was  inserted  into 
the  rectum  to  a  depth  of  5.5  cm  which  provided  5.0,  4.5,  4.0  and  3.5  cm  depth  from  the 
rectal  orifice.  The  incident  powers  were  40,  80  and  160  W.  Four  replicates  were  used 
for  each  power  level. 

Both  raw  data  and  0.1  Hz  low-pass  filtered  data  from  Luxtron  3000  were  collected 
with  a  computer  acquisition  hardware  and  software  system  (ASYSTENT+)  at  a  10  Hz 
acquisition  rate.  The  data  acquisition  periods  were  10  seconds  before  exposure,  1  second 
of  exposure  and  14.6  seconds  after  exposure.  The  10  seconds  pre-exposure  timing  was 
maintained  precisely  for  marking  the  beginning  of  the  exposure  in  order  to  capture  the  1 
s  temperature  rise  due  to  the  microwave  absorption.  A  total  of  192  files  (4  replicates  of 
16  different  tissue  sites  subjected  to  3  power  levels)  were  analyzed. 


None  of  the  4  rectal  temperatures  showed  a  discemable  change.  On  the  other 
hand,  0.11  ±  0.03  °C  (mean  ±  S.E.,  n=4)  to  0.23  ±  0.01  °C  could  be  noted  in  the 
cranial  subcutaneous  tissue  of  the  rat  exposed  to  a  40  W  incident  power.  The 
temperature  increment  due  to  a  1  s  80  W  pulse  ranged  between  0.28  ±  0.01  ’C  and  0.33 
±  0.04  °C  in  the  exposure  area,  peaking  anteriorly  at  0.5  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose. 
The  temperature  increment  dropped  significantly  posteriorly  away  from  the  exposure  to 
0.19  ±  0.02  °C  at  2.2  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  and  blended  with  the  noise  of  the 
instrument,  0.09  ±  0.01  °C.  At  160  W  incident  power,  the  range  of  temperature 
increments  were  between  0.55  ±  0.03  and  0.65  ±  0.04  °C  in  the  exposure  area  and 
between  0.35  ±  0.02  and  0.15  ±  0.01  °C.  Therefore,  the  microwave  induced 
subcutaneous  temperature  increase  was  clearly  evident  and  different  from  the 
temperature  profile  in  the  mouse  exposed  in  a  different  waveguide  exposure  setups.  The 
magnitude  of  the  temperature  increase  in  the  exposed  area  of  the  rat  was  more  uniform 
than  the  mice. 

The  incidence  rates  of  microwave -evoked  body  movements  were  86  %  at  160  W. 
41  %  at  80  W,  and  16  %  at  40  W.  The  rate  of  spontaneous  body  movements  in  sham 
exposure  was  8  %.  The  incidence  rate  of  the  microwave  evoked  body  movements  was 
proportional  to  the  incident  power  and  to  the  average  subcutaneous  temperature 
increment.  Extrapolation  of  the  linear  curve  to  the  incidence  rate  of  the  spontaneous 
body  movements  (absolute  threshold)  yielded  a  22  W  incident  power  or  a  0.12  °C 
subcutaneous  temperature  increase  in  the  cranial  region  of  the  rat.  The  whole-body 
average  absorption  rate  was  73  W/kg  (22  W  /  0.3  kg)  at  the  extrapolated  threshold.  The 
effective  absolute  threshold  converted  from  a  0.12  °C/s  was  417  W/kg  (4.18  J/cal  x  830 
cal/°C  g  x  0.12  °C/s).  In  the  mouse,  the  corresponding  extrapolated  whole-body  average 
threshold  was  300  W/kg  and  the  subcutaneous  threshold  was  1,000  W/kg.  It  would 
appear  that  the  rat  was  even  more  prone  to  exhibit  evoked  body  movements  by 
microwave  exposure  than  the  mouse.  The  extrapolated  whole-body  threshold  for 
microwave-evoked  body  movements  in  the  mouse  and  rat  were  lower  than  the  current 
IEEE/ANSI  personnel  protection  guideline  for  a  controlled  environment  if  it  only  occurs 
as  one  pulse  in  every  6  minutes.  The  extrapolated  local  SAR  for  evoked  body 
movements  in  the  mouse  (2.8  W/kg)  was  less  than  the  allowed  local  SAR  (8  W/kg)  in  a 


control  environment  and  in  the  rat  (1.2  W/kg)  less  than  the  allowed  local  SAR  in  an 
uncontrolled  environment  (1.6  W/kg)  if  it  occurs  as  one  pulse  in  every  6  minutes.  The 
progress  of  this  research  can  have  a  profound  impact  on  the  setting  of  standard  [Raslear, 
Akyel.  Lu,  Swearengen,  Varle,  DeAngelis  and  Seaman  1992]. 


Tempo  Dosimetry 

(In  Support  of  Protocol  N-21-88,  Nervous  System  Effects  of  TEMPO  Radiation  l, 
and  Protocol  N-06-90,  Time  Perception  in  Rats:  The  Effect  of  High  Power  Pulsed 

Microwave  Irradiation) 

The  Transformer  Energized  Megavolt  Pulsed  Output  (TEMPO)  transmitter  is  a  3 
GHz  power  source  with  extremely  high  peak  power  (700  MW),  narrow  pulse  width  (80 
ns),  slow  pulse  repetition  rate  (0.125  Hz)  and  low  duty  cycle  (10^  ).  The  transmitted 
power  varies,  a  characteristics  inherent  to  the  virtual  cathode  oscillators,  from  less  than 
100  MW  to  700  MW  within  the  pulse.  In  terms  of  energy  transmitted  (=  16  J),  the 
TEMPO  pulse  may  be  represented  by  a  rectangular  pulse  of  200  MW  for  80  ns  (16  J  /  80 
ns).  The  average  transmitted  power  is  2  W  (200  MW  x  lO-*).  A  longitudinally  slotted 
circular  waveguide  is  used  as  an  antenna  which  radiates  a  fan-shape  (narrow  horizontal, 
wide  vertical)  horizontally  polarized  beam.  Subjects  were  exposed  in  a  dual  comer 
reflector  assembly,  2.25  m  from  the  antenna.  The  comer  reflectors  provide  a  10  dB 
enhancement  of  the  free  field  power  density.  Therefore,  the  free-field  power  density  was 
0.1  mW/cm2  per  watt  transmitted  power  and  1  mW/cm2  with  the  comer  reflector.  Thus, 
at  the  peak  transmitted  power  (700  MW),  TEMPO’S  exposure  system  achieves  a  power 
density  of  700  kW/cm2  or  an  E-field  strength  of  1.6  MV/m  with  the  comer  reflector. 
These  pulse  characteristics  are  quite  different  from  those  in  the  Cober  exposure  system 
which  provided  1.25  GHz,  1  MW  (variable  peak  power),  10  /xs  rectangular  pulses  up  to 
150  Hz.  Direct  application  of  the  Cober  dosimetry  data  is  hindered  by  the  difference  in 
carrier  frequency. 

Microwave  dosimetric  methods  (whole-body  average  SAR  by  calorimetric  method 
and  local  SARs  by  thennometric  method)  developed  for  the  Cober  exposure  system  were 
applied  to  quantify  the  energy  coupling  into  the  experimental  subjects,  in  this  case,  rats. 
For  this  dosimetry,  the  TEMPO  transmitter  was  replaced  by  a  CW  power  source 
operated  at  1  kW  to  provide  adequate  energy  coupling  for  calorimetry  and  thermometry. 

Carbon  dioxide  euthanized  rat  carcasses  equilibrated  in  25  °C  water  bath  were 


54 


used  for  the  whole-body  average  SAR  determination  by  a  calorimetric  method.  They 
were  TEMPO-exposed  or  sham-exposed  in  a  Styrofoam  box  to  prevent  heat  loss.  The 
difference  between  normalized  heat  contents  of  TEMPO-exposed  and  sham-exposed 
carcasses  divided  by  the  duration  of  exposure  was  converted  to  whole-body  average  SAR. 
The  whole-body  average  SAR  was  0.036  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  or  0.072  W/kg  at  full 
power  (2  W)  of  the  TEMPO  exposure  system.  The  peak  whole-body  average  SAR  was 
25.2  MW/kg  or  7.2  MW/kg  averaged  over  the  80  ns  pulse  duration. 

Twenty-four  different  locations,  including  brain,  skin  and  colon  were  selected  for 
the  thermometric  dosimetry.  Deep  anatomic  locations  were  rhinencephalon,  anterior 
cerebrum,  mid  cerebrum,  cerebellum,  and  rectum/colon  locations  3.0,  3.5,  4.0,  and  4.5  cm 
into  the  anus.  Sixteen  subcutaneous  locations  were  selected  to  represent  the  anatomical 
cross  section  of  the  rat  since  absorption  patter  of  a  3  GHz  carrier  frequency  would  not 
be  uniform  and  the  air-tissue  interphase  and  small  anatomical  cross  section  would  both 
enhance  absorption.  Therefore,  8  dorsal  cranial/facial  locations  were  selected:  0.5,  1.0. 
1.5,  2.0,  2.5,  3.0,  3.5,  and  4.0  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose.  Four  dorsal  tail  locations  (0.0. 
0.5,  1.0  and  1.5  cm  from  the  base  of  the  tail)  were  used  to  represent  another  sudden 
decrease  in  anatomical  cross  section  in  the  rat.  To  represent  a  larger  anatomical  cross 
section,  4  dorsal  subcutaneous  locations  at  the  back  (5.5,  6.0,  6.5  and  7.0  cm  from  the 
head,  corresponding  to  lower  chest  and  upper  abdominal  cavities)  were  used.  Four 
replicates  of  20  s  exposure  at  1,000  W  incident  power  were  used.  A  total  of  96 
temperature  files  were  evaluated. 

The  rat  absorbed  3  GHz  microwave  in  the  TEMPO  configuration  non-uniformly. 
Two  subcutaneous  SAR  hot  spots  were  noted  at  0.5  cm  from  the  tip  of  the  nose  (0.276 
W/kg  per  watt  transmitted)  and  1.5  cm  »nto  the  tail  (0.257  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted). 
However,  the  SAR  at  the  base  of  the  tail  was  not  measurable  and  increased  gradually 
from  the  base  of  the  tail  to  the  tail  tip.  A  Standing  wave  pattern  was  noted  at  the  facial 
and  colonic/rectal  regions.  In  fact,  two  of  the  deeper  locations  in  the  colon  proved 
unmeasurable  while  the  remaining  two  absorbed  at  less  than  10  %  of  the  SAR  hot  spot. 
The  SARs  in  the  brain  ranged  between  0.057  and  0.078  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  power 
indicating  a  relatively  uniform  absorption  region.  The  brains  absorbed  about  25  %  of 


the  energy  absrobed  by  the  SAR  hot  spot.  Subcutaneously,  the  dorsal  skin  absorbed  lb- 
26  %  of  the  amount  abosrbed  by  the  SAR  hot  spot.  The  subcutaneous  hot  spots 
produced  by  this  longetunidinally  slotted  circular  antenna  are  interesting.  These  hot 
spots  were  localized  where  vibrissae  and  bristle  hairs  were  concentrated.  Each  of  these 
structures  are  considered  organs  of  touch  in  this  species  of  animal  as  they  have  high 
concentrations  of  mechanical  receptors.  Microwave  evoked  body  movements  may  have  a 
lower  threshold  under  this  exposure  configuration  than  under  other  whole  body  exposure 
configurations  that  provide  a  more  uniform  SAR  profile  or  produce  a  SAR  hot  spot 
elsewhere  [Raslear,  Akyel,  Bates,  Lu,  Elson,  Akyel  and  Mathur  1993;  Raslear,  Akyel, 
Bates,  Belt,  and  Lu  1993]. 


Effect  of  Interaction  Between  Ambient  Temperature  and  SAR 
on  Microwave-Induced  Hyperthermia  In  Rats 
(Work  supported  by  PHS  Grant  ES0330  and  published  under  a  contract 
DAMD  1 7-8  9 -C -9201  with  the  Department  of  Microwave  Research, 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research) 

The  most  investigated  and  documented  effects  of  radiofrequency  radiation 
including  microwaves  on  biological  tissue  is  the  transformation  of  absorbed  energy  into 
kinetic  energy  of  the  absorbing  molecules,  which  produces  a  general  heating  in  the 
absorbing  medium.  This  process  creates  an  increase  in  exogenous  heat  load  to  the 
normal  metabolic  heat  load.  A  homeotherm  is  capable  of  maintaining  the  core  body 
temperature  in  a  very  narrow  range,  a  condition  known  as  euthermia,  when  it  is  exposed 
to  various  ambient  temperatures.  Homeotherms  maintain  this  euthermic  state  by  two 
major  mechanisms,  behavioral  and  autonomic  thermoregulation.  Behavioral  means  of 
controlling  or  selecting  a  micro-environment  may  not  always  be  available,  or  a 
homeotherm  may  intentionally  override  behavioral  thermoregulation  during  engagement 
in  other  more  urgent  activities.  It  also  requires  energy  expenditure  to  perform 
behavioral  thermoregulation,  therefore,  additional  metabolic  heat  load.  Autonomic 
thermoregulation  maintains  a  constant  core  body  temperature  by  activating  heat 
dissipation  and/or  heat  conservation  mechanisms  without  the  awareness  of  the  host. 
Hyperthermia,  in  contrast  to  fever,  is  from  an  exogenous  heat  source  and  a  state  of 
elevated  core  body  temperature  without  changes  in  the  thermoregulatory  set  point.  The 
body  temperature  is  being  controlled  by  a  controller  and  it  is  also  a  signal  source 
providing  inputs  for  the  controller  (hypothalamus)  to  integrate  and  to  initiate  the 
effector.  It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  change  in  thermoregulation  without  a  change  in  body 
temperature  whether  the  change  is  detected  by  the  investigator  or  not.  Thermosensors 
are  located  in  the  peripheral  superficial  tissue  (skin)  and  central  (hypothalamus  and 
extrahypothalamus)/deep  body  tissues.  While  the  peripheral  superficial  tissue  is 
influenced  by  ambient  condition,  the  central/deep  body  tissue  remains  relatively  constant 
in  various  ambient  conditions.  The  skin  also  serves  as  an  important  thermoregulatory 
effector  wherein  the  majority  of  the  radiant,  conductive,  convective,  and  evaporative  heat 


loss  occur. 


It  has  been  known  in  dogs  that  the  magnitude  of  microwave-induced 
hyperthermia,  defined  as  an  elevation  in  core  body  temperature,  was  affected  by  \mbient 
temperature.  The  majority  of  studies  on  the  biological  effects  of 

radiofrequency/microwave  radiation  utilized  rodents  exposed  to  such  radiations,  however, 
these  exposures  were  under  various  ambient  conditions.  The  potential  interaction 
between  radiofrequency/microwave  energy  and  ambient  condition  on  hyperthermic 
potency  have  not  been  elucidated  completely.  Since  the  majority  cf  reliable  and 
replicable  biological  effects  of  radiofrequency/microwave  radiation  are  usually 
accompanied  by  an  increase  in  core  temperature,  it  is  important  to  assay  the 
hyperthermic  potency  of  radiofrequency/microwave  radiation  under  various  ambient 
conditions.  In  addition,  the  tail  is  a  major  organ  for  heat  loss  and  thermosensor  organ  in 
the  rat.  Therefore,  it  was  also  included  in  this  study. 

Sixty-four  to  65-day-old  male  Long-Evans  hooded  rats  were  used.  Their  body 
weights  were  310  ±  18  g  (mean  ±  S.D.,  n=184)  ranging  between  260  and  378  g.  They 
were  acclimated  and  gentled  to  adapt  them  to  experimental  procedures  and  the 
unfamiliar  stimuli  which  could  contaminate  the  experimental  results.  Rats  were 
subjected  to  23  different  treatments  in  foamed  polystyrene  cages  (20x20x30  cm)  with 
polystyrene  grid  bottoms  and  fiberglass  screen  tops.  They  were  unanesthetized  and 
unrestrained  during  these  experiments.  Rats  were  subjected  to  these  experiments  four  at 
a  time  in  an  anechoic  chamber  (1.2x1. 2  m)  which  was  housed  in  a  customized 
environmental  chamber  (1.8x3.0xl.8  m).  The  average  air  flow  inside  these  cages  was  1.6 
m/s.  The  treatments  included  various  ambient  temperatures  (18,  24,  28,  32,  and  36  °C) 
and  various  microwave  exposures  (0.2,  2,  4,  6,  8,  10,  and  10  W/kg  whole  body  average 
specific  absorption,  SAR)  each  at  three  different  ambient  temperatures  (18,  24,  and  28 
°C).  The  ambient  temperatures  were  maintained  within  ±0.15  °C  and  relative  humidity 
was  maintained  between  45  and  50  %  at  each  ambient  temperature.  The  animal  was 
equilibrated  at  24  °C  for  2.5  h  and  remained  undisturbed  for  an  additional  0.5  h  during 
the  switching  to  a  new  ambient  temperature.  The  duration  of  exposure  was  2  h  to  allow 
animals  to  fully  readjust  to  the  exposure  regardless  whether  changes  in  ambient 


58 


temperature  or  microwave  exposure/ambient  temperature  were  made.  Coionic 
temperature  (5  cm  into  rectal  orifice,  YSI  423)  and  tail  skin  temperature  (0.5  cm  from 
the  base  of  the  tail,  YSI  427)  were  taken  immediately  after  the  exposure  at  1400  hours, 
the  mid-light  point  of  12L/12D  cycle  (light  on:  0800  to  2000  hours).  The  2.45  GHz 
continuous  wave  microwaves  were  used.  Statistical  analysis  included  analysis  of  variance, 
a  post  hoc  Dunnett’s  test,  student  t-test,  and  regression  analysis.  The  null  hypothesis  that 
no  change  existed  was  rejected  at  the  a=  0.05  level. 

Rats  were  able  to  maintain  a  constant  colonic  temperature  in  ambient 
temperature  ranging  between  18  and  28  °C.  However,  hyperthermia  was  noted  in  rats 
subjected  to  32  and  36  °C.  Microwave  exposure  could  cause  an  increase  in  colonic 
temperature  in  rats.  The  minimal  hyperthermic  microwave  SAR  (threshold  SAR)  was 
inversely  proportional  to  the  ambient  temperature.  They  were  8  W/kg  at  18  °C.  6  W/Tcg 
at  24  °C,  and  2  W/kg  at  28  °C.  The  colonic  temperature  increments  was  roughly 
proportional  to  SAR  once  the  threshold  SAR  was  exceeded.  The  microwave 
hyperthermic  potencies  were  0.31  °C/W/kg  at  18  °C,  0.37  °C/W/kg  at  24  ’C  and  0.46 
°C/W/kg  at  28  °C.  Therefore  for  a  microwave  SAR,  it  will  be  less  likely  to  observe  a 
colonic  temperature  change  as  the  ambient  temperature  becomes  lower.  The 
hyperthermic  potency  of  a  given  SAR  increased  proportionally  with  the  ambient 
temperature. 

The  tail  skin  temperature  increased  proportionally  with  ambient  temperature. 

The  potency  of  ambient-air-induced  tail  temperature  increment  was  0.39  °C  tail  skin 
temperature  increase  for  every  1  °C  increase  in  ambient  temperature.  The  minimal 
threshold  SAR  that  could  induce  a  tail  skin  temperature  increase  was  2  W/kg  at  18  °C,  4 
W/kg  at  24  °C,  and  2  W/kg  at  28  °C.  Tail  skin  temperature  was  significantly  correlated 
with  SAR  at  each  ambient  temperature  (correlation  coefficient,  r=  0.97  to  0.99,  p< 
0.005).  The  potencies  of  microwave  exposure  on  tail  skin  temperature  were  0.49 
°C/W/kg  at  18  °C,  0.49  °C/W/kg  at  24  °C,  and  0.48  °C/W/kg  at  28  °C.  They  were  not 
different  from  each  other.  Therefore,  microwave  absorption  could  be  equated  to  change 
in  ambient  temperature  without  a  complex  formula,  i.e.,  each  1  W/kg  of  microwave 
absorption  in  rats  could  be  equated  with  a  1.26  °C  increase  in  ambient  temperature. 


The  relation  between  colonic  temperature  and  tail  skin  temperature  assumed  a 
"hockey  stick"  relation.  A  demarcation  tail  skin  temperature  (31.8  °C)  clearly  divided  the 
euthennic  (constant  core  body  temperature  and  variable  skin  temperature)  and 
hyperthermia  (core  body  temperature  above  normal)  of  the  homeotherm.  Microwave 
exposures  appeared  to  be  similar  to  changing  ambient  temperature.  Therefore,  the 
threshold  of  the  radiofrequency/microwave  thermal  effect  can  be  modified  by  ambient 
temperature.  The  influence  of  the  ambient  temperature  on  manifestation  of  the 
biological  effect  of  radiofrequency/microwave  radiation  should  be  considered  in 
protection  guideline  setting  [Lu  and  Michaelson  1992;  1993]. 


Pulsed  Microwave  Ocular  Exposure  of  the  Monkey 
(In  Support  of  the  Protocol  013-88  and  Protocol  N -016-92,  High-Peak-Power 
Microwaves:  A  Health  Hazard.  PI:  Henry  A.  Kues,  Johns  Hopkins  University) 


Research  in  biomedicine  is  of  interest  to  the  Department  of  Defense,  particularly 
in  providing  insight  into  the  processes  by  which  disease,  trauma,  or  environmental 
stresses  affect  living  systems.  In  the  framework  of  this  interest,  there  is  a  growing 
concern  over  potentially  hazardous  biological  effects  due  to  extended  low-level  or 
"unique"  exposures  to  non-ionizing  radiation  (radiofrequency/microwaves).  In  recent 
years  the  number  of  devices,  both  civilian  and  military,  which  produce  this  type  of 
radiation,  has  proliferated.  In  the  performance  of  their  duties  some  military  personnel 
are  exposed  to  microwave  radiation  on  a  daily  basis.  In  most  cases  these  daily  exposures, 
from  radars  and  various  communication  equipment,  are  below  levels  thought  to  be  of 
biological  significance.  However,  with  the  move  toward  radars  of  higher  peak  power  and 
the  development  of  new  high-peak-energy  devices,  present  human  safety  guidelines  may 
not  be  adequate.  This  is  especially  apparent  when  considering  the  fact  that  the  present 
scientific  base  for  understanding  the  results  or  implications  of  repeated  low-level  or 
single  or  multiple  high-peak  pulse  exposures  is  virtually  non-existent  or  controversial  at 
best. 


It  has  been  demonstrated  that  low-level  non-ionizing  radiation  may  present  a 
hazard  to  human  ocular  health.  Exposure  to  low-level  pulsed  microwaves  can  cause 
corneal  endothelium  cell  death  and  disruption,  iris  vascular  leakage,  choroidal  leakage, 
photoreceptor  (both  cone  and  rod)  damage,  and  changes  in  electroretinography.  The 
primaiy  objective  of  this  study  was  to  establish  whether  high-peak  pulsed  microwaves 
constitute  more  or  less  of  a  hazard  to  human  eyes  that  may  be  exposed  than  previously 
known.  To  reach  this  objective,  the  subhuman  primate  (Macaca  fascicularis  and  the 
Macaca  mulatta)  is  an  excellent  model  in  that  the  anatomical  structure  and  physiology  of 
these  primate  eyes  are  almost  identical  to  that  of  human  eye.  This  study  is  relevant  to 
soldier’s  health  in  defining  the  potential  for  ocular  trauma  caused  by  the 
radiofrequency/microwave  radiation  in  a  controlled  laboratory  environment. 


Male  or  female  Rhesus  monkeys  (Macca  mulata  or  depending  on  availability 
Cynomolgus  monkeys,  Macca  fascicularis)  were  used  at  3  years  of  age.  Prior  to  exposure 
by  the  microwave  irradiation,  the  primates  were  subjected  to  the  following  diagnostic 
procedures  at  the  Wilmer  Institute  to  establish  baseline  normality.  For  handling 
purposes  the  animals  were  given  an  intramuscular  injection  of  ketamine  hydrochloride, 
100  mg/kg.  Each  animal’s  throat  was  sprayed  with  2  %  lidocaine  to  prevent  laryngeal 
spasm,  intubated,  and  the  animal  maintained  on  halothane  gas  anesthesia,  using  a  Fraser 
Harlke  small  animal  anesthesia  machine.  The  following  ocular  diagnostic  procedures  for 
baseline  were  performed  under  halothane  anesthesia: 

♦  Baseline  Ocular  Fluorophotometry 

Each  primate  was  given  a  0.2  ml  IV  injection  of  sodium  fluorescein  for 
fluorophotometry.  This  procedure  was  repeated  on  three  separate  occasions  to 
establish  normal  curves, 

♦  Electroretinographic  Responses  (ERG) 

a)  White  light  stimulus 

b)  Photopic 

c)  Scotopic 

d)  Flicker, 

♦  Anterior  chamber  examination  and  photodocumentation 
Slit-lamp  examination  of  the  cornea,  lens,  iris,  aqueous, 

♦  Corneal  endothelial  examination  and  photodocumentation 

a)  Visual  examination  with  specular  microscope 

b)  Contact  specular  photomicrograph  of  the  corneal  endothelial  cells, 

♦  Retinal  examination  and  photodocumentation 

a)  Visual  funduscopic  examinations 

b)  Color  fundus  photographs  (8  stereo  fields) 

c)  Cross  polarization  fundus  photographs. 

Prior  to  initiation  of  the  microwave  exposures,  all  experimental  subjects  were 
placed  in  restraining  chairs  and  allowed  to  acclimate  to  the  handling  and  restraint 


62 


procedure.  For  microwave  exposures,  these  animals  were  transported  from  the  Wilmer 
Institute  to  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  Department  of  Microwave 
Research  in  an  appropriate  transport  cage  in  an  environmentally-controlled  vehicle 
provided  by  Johns  Hopkins  Applied  Physics  Laboratory. 

Upon  arrival  at  the  Walter  Reed  facility  each  primate  was  given  an  intramuscular 
injection  of  ketamine  hydrochloride  (10  mg/kg)  and  positioned  in  a  custom-made 
restraining  chair.  The  animal  was  allowed  to  recover  from  the  ketamine,  then  positioned 
in  front  of  the  microwave  source  for  a  period  of  four  hours  over  three  consecutive  days 
each  week.  Throughout  the  exposure,  subjects  were  visually  monitored  on  closed-circuit 
television  for  signs  of  undue  stress  or  other  problems  such  as  movements  of  the  subject. 
Significant  misalignments  between  the  monkey  and  the  antenna  were  corrected  by 
interrupting  the  exposure  for  realignment. 

After  the  daily  exposure,  each  animal  was  given  another  IM  injection  of  ketamine 
and  returned  to  its  cage  at  Walter  Reed  facility.  Following  the  third  day’s  exposure, 
each  monkey  was  returned  to  the  Wilmer  Institute  for  diagnostic  fluorophotometiy. 

After  three  weeks  of  exposure,  a  complete  set  of  ocular  diagnostic  procedures  was 
performed  for  comparison.  Each  animal  was  then  sacrificed  with  an  IV  overdose  of 
sodium  pentobarbital  (>  100  mg/kg)  and  the  eye  enucleated  for  histologic  examination. 

The  personnel  at  the  Department  of  Microwave  Research,  Division  of 
Neuropsychiatry,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  namely,  the  Ogden 
BioServices  personnel  were  to  provide  technical  support  in  constructing  an  appropriate 
monkey  restraining  chair,  microwave  exposure  and  monitoring  equipment,  and  provide 
routine  maintenance  of  the  monkeys  at  the  Walter  Reed  facility.  The  microwave 
exposure  equipment  used  was  a  Cober  transmitter  fitted  with  power  monitoring  devices, 
and  a  open  end  L-band  waveguide  as  an  antenna.  These  exposures  were  performed  in 
an  anechoic  chamber  under  the  Standard  Operating  Procedure  for  Cober  transmitter 
operation,  maintenance,  and  RF  equipment  calibration.  The  Cober  transmitter  was 
operated  at  1.25  GHz  in  pulsed  mode.  The  peak  power  was  set  at  1  MW  while  the  pulse 
width  and  pulse  repetition  rate  varied  according  to  request  made  by  the  principal 


investigator  in  advance. 


Because  the  contractor  was  not  privy  to  the  results  of  these  investigations,  the 
following  results  were  extracted  from  a  series  of  abstracts  published  bv  the  principal 
investigator  [Kues,  McLeod,  D’Anna,  Lutty,  Gambrill  and  Elson  1989;  Kues,  McLeod, 
D’Anna,  Johnson,  Perry  and  Monahan  1991;  Kues  and  Monahan  1592;  Kues,  D’Anna, 
Johnson,  Lutty,  and  Monahan  1993].  Anesthetized  adult  Cynomogus  monieys  were 
exposed  for  four  hours  per  day  on  two  consecutive  days  to  1.25  GHz  microwaves  (1  MW 
peak  power,  10  fjs  pulse  width,  0.225  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate)  at  12.5  mW/cnr.  The 
average  ocular  SAR  was  3.6  W/kg  at  the  center  of  the  eye.  Fluorescein  iris  angiography 
was  performed  following  the  last  daily  exposure.  Wide  field  specular  microscopy  and 
slit-lamp  examinations  were  conducted  24  hours  later.  Several  animals  were  sacrificed 
for  histologic  examination  after  three  2-day  exposure  sessions  (6  exposures  total)  spaced 
at  2-week  intervals.  Results  indicated  that  ocular  changes  were  similar  to  those  produced 
by  2.45  GHz  radiation,  including  corneal  endothelial  changes,  iris  vascular  leakage, 
formation  of  macro-melanosomes  and  melanosome  complexes  in  the  ciliary  body  pigment 
epithelium,  vacuolation  of  the  iris  posterior  pigment  epithelium  and  disruption  of 
photoreceptor  outer  segments. 

Electroretinograph,  a  non-invasive  diagnostic  technique  was  used  to  evaluate  the 
microwave  induced  retinal  injury  in  adult  rhesus  monkeys.  Baseline  electroretinogram 
(ERG)  measurements  were  obtained  before  microwave  exposure  and  after  7  four-hour 
exposures  to  pulsed  microwaves  (1.25  GHz,  1  MW  peak  power,  0.5  pulse  width,  16  Hz 
pulse  repetition  rate)  at  an  average  ocular  SAR  of  3.5-4.0  W/kg.  During  exposure,  all 
subjects  were  nonanesthetized  but  restrained.  A  comparison  between  pre-  and  post¬ 
exposure  ERGs  indicated  a  50%  reduction  in  the  scotopic  single  flash  response  and  a 
90%  reduction  in  the  30-Hz  flicker  response  following  microwave  exposure.  The  single 
flash  photopic  response  was  completely  extinguished  in  the  post-exposure  ERG.  A 
significant  time  delay  in  the  electrophysiological  response  following  light  stimuli  was 
noted.  Result  of  ERG  measurements  made  1  week  after  the  last  microwave  exposure 
showed  a  return  of  all  ERG  components  to  normal.  The  ERG  changes  pointed  to  a 
high  probability  of  cone  photoreceptor  damage.  Subsequent  histological  examination  of 


6the  exposed  eyes  confirmed  the  degeneration  (karyolysis)  of  cone  photoreceptors  in  the 
fovea  and  macula  of  the  eye  where  a  high  concentration  of  cone  photoreceptors  are 
found.  These  results  indicated  that  a  specific  population  of  cones  were  being  selectively 
damaged.  In  addition,  corneal  endothelial  lesions  and  increased  permeability  of  the  iris 
vasculature  were  also  demonstrated  in  these  monkeys  exposed  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed 
microwave  without  anesthesia.  These  ocular  injuries  were  not  observed  in  monkeys 
exposed  to  a  2.85  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  at  a  similar  SAR  (3.5  W/kg,  1  pulse  width. 
20  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate). 


Modification  of  Startle  by  Microwave  Puises  in  the  Rat 
(Protocol  A-fll-90,  Pilot  Study  for  Modification  of  Startle  by  Microwave  Puises  and 
Protocol  N -04-91.  Modification  of  Acoustic  and  Tactile  Startle  by  Microwave  Pulses) 

One  type  of  electromagnetic  energy  in  the  environment  of  Army  personnel 
consists  of  high  power  microwave  pulses  from  radar  transmitters  and  other  generators. 
The  pulses  are  too  brief  and  infrequent  to  cause  a  general  heating  of  the  whole  person. 
On  the  other  hand,  pulses  of  sufficient  intensity  are  known  to  result  in  animal  and 
human  auditoiy  sensations  and  in  modification  of  the  reflexes  of  mice.  As  higher  and 
higher  peak  powers  are  used,  it  becomes  increasingly  necessary  to  study  biological  effects 
over  a  range  of  pulse  intensities  to  understand  the  potential  impact  of  exposure  on  Army 
personnel. 

The  startle  response  consists  of  a  sequence  of  reflexive  muscular  contractions 
which  are  elicited  by  sudden,  intense  stimuli.  The  response  begins  within  a  few 
milliseconds  of  a  startling  stimulus  and  runs  its  course  within  a  hundred  milliseconds  or 
so.  Startle  has  been  observed  in  many  mammals,  including  humans,  and  is  thought  to  be 
related  to  rapid  escape  responses.  Startle  in  the  rat,  the  most  commonly  used 
experimental  animal,  is  elicited  by  certain  acoustic  and  tactile  stimuli.  The  startle 
response  evoked  by  intense  acoustic  pulses,  or  'acoustic  startle,"  is  most  often  studied. 

In  the  rat,  pre-pulses  (stimulus  preceding  the  startle  stimulus  but  incapable  of  causing 
startle  by  itself)  of  photic,  tactile,  and  acoustic  stimuli  have  been  shown  to  modify  startle 
amplitude  and  latency  when  presented  in  respective  effective  time  windows  preceding  the 
startle  pulse. 

The  pulse  energy  that  could  elicit  the  microwave-evoked  body  movements  (a  form 
of  startle)  was  higher  than  the  threshold  for  the  microwave  acoustic  effect.  The 
dependence  of  the  microwave-evoked  body  movements  on  microwave  hearing  needs  to 
be  evaluated.  Therefore,  two  hypotheses  were  proposed  as  the  main  thrust  of  the 
proposed  research.  They  were: 


♦  Microwave  pulses  cause  the  same  modification  of  acoustic  startle  as  do  sensory 
stimuli,  and 

♦  A  functional  auditory  periphery  is  necessary  for  microwave  pulse  modification  of 
startle. 

In  order  to  perform  these  tasks,  a  new  microwave  exposure  apparatus  was 
designed  and  constructed,  and  a  surgical  procedure  for  deafening  the  animal  was 
developed.  The  development  of  deafening  procedure  was  in  corporation  with  the 
Division  of  Veterinary  Medicine,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research. 

For  startle  measurement,  a  ventilated  plastic  cylinder  which  restricts  extraneous 
motion  and  contains  a  piezoelectric  motion  detector  was  designed  and  fabricated.  The 
microwave  exposure  device  was  a  downward  pointing  WR650  waveguide  with  an 
endplane  short  and  a  hole  in  one  broad  wall  to  accept  the  cylindrical  animal  holder.  The 
ventilated  cylinder  was  placed  on  a  support  made  from  a  semicircular  metal  tube 
mounted  to  the  waveguide  and  moved  through  the  waveguide  hole  to  position  the  head 
of  the  animal  inside  the  waveguide.  A  speaker  was  located  on  the  opposite  broad  wall  of 
the  waveguide  to  deliver  startling  acoustic  stimuli  and  acoustic  pre-stimuli  through  a 
metallic  screen.  The  startling  acoustic  stimulus  was  gated  white  noise  with  a  duration  of 
50  ms,  onset  and  offset  times  of  less  than  1  ms,  and  intensity  of  100-120  dB  SPL  (sound 
pressure  level)  in  the  animal  holder.  The  acoustic  pre-stimuli  were  either  a  gated  tone 
or  a  click.  The  frequency  range  of  the  tone  was  5-10  kHz  with  an  intensity  of  50-80  dB 
SPL.  The  pre-stimulus  tone  preceded  the  startling  stimulus  by  0-200  ms,  lasted  100-200 
ms  with  onset  and  offset  times  of  5  ms.  The  click  was  generated  by  a  80-120  fjs  voltage 
pulse  applied  to  the  speaker  producing  a  50-80  dB  SPL  sound,  and  preceded  the 
startling  stimulus  by  0-200  ms. 

Pulses  of  Air  (puffs)  were  applied  to  the  back  of  the  animal  through  a  hole  in  the 
cylindrical  animal  holder  for  startling  tactile  stimuli.  The  hole  accepted  a  plastic  tube 
which  was  connected  to  a  compressed  air  source.  An  electrically  activated  valve  is  briefly 
opened  under  computer  control  to  apply  a  short  burst  of  air  to  the  animal.  The  air 


67 


pressure  was  48-52  psi  (330-350  kPa). 


The  microwave  exposure  apparatus  with  speaker/air  puff  attachments  was 
mounted  inside  a  ventilated  sound  attenuating  chamber.  The  background  noise  level  was 
67  dBA.  Microwave  pulses  at  1.25  GHz  could  be  transmitted  through  WR650  waveguide 
equipped  with  directional  couplers  and  crystal  detectors  for  microwave  power 
measurements.  The  brain  SAR  was  determined  to  be  18.8—21.5  W/kg  per  watt 
transmitted.  For  precision  and/or  accuracy,  the  presentation  of  the  acoustic,  tactile  and 
microwave  pre-stimuli  and  stimuli  was  controlled  by  the  computer. 

The  amplitude  of  the  piezoelectric  film  output  was  used  to  measure  the  amplitude 
of  acoustic  startle  response  and  latency  from  termination  of  the  acoustic  startling 
stimulus  (100  dB  SPL,  50  ms)  to  response  (startle)  were  used.  Acoustic  pre-pulses  (tone, 
60  dB  SPL,  100  ms  before  stimulus)  were  effective  in  prolonging  the  latency  of  response 
and  suppressing  the  startle  amplitude.  This  result  indicated  the  appropriateness  of  the 
exposure  apparatus  and  animal  model  selected. 

Initially  (Seaman  ?nd  Beblo  1992),  the  modification  of  acoustic  startle  by 
microwave  pulses  was  tested  in  4  Long-Evans  rats.  A  1.25  GHz  microwave  pre-pulse 
(100  ms  before  acoustic  startling  pulse)  of  1.1  kW  peak  power  (0.8-1.0  /zs  pulse  width,  23- 
48  kW/kg  brain  absorption  rate,  22-43  mJ/kg  brain  specific  absorption  per  pulse)  could 
not  suppress  the  amplitude  of  the  acoustic  startle  (100  dB  SPL,  50  ms)  but  prolonged  the 
latency  of  the  acoustic  startle.  A  microwave  pre-pulse  (100  ms  before  acoustic  startling 
pulse)  at  5.2  kW  peak  power  (0.8-1.0  fjs,  63-111  W/kg  brain  absorption  rate,  59-107  mJ/kg 
brain  specific  absorption  per  pulse)  failed  to  modify  either  latency  or  the  amplitude  of 
the  response  to  the  acoustic  startling  stimulus  (100  dB  SPL,  50  ms). 

Modification  of  the  acoustic  startle  by  microwave  pulses  was  further  tested  in  a 
larger  group  of  male  Long  Evans  rats  (twelve),  each  subjected  to  10  presentations  of  8 
experimental  conditions  over  5  testing  sessions  [Seaman,  Beblo  and  Raslear  1992a; 

1993a;  1994].  Each  experimental  condition  was  presented  in  random  order.  Microwave 
pre-pulses  were  1  /zs  pulse  of  the  1.25  GHz  microwave  operated  at  1.5  and  5  kW  peak 


68 


powers  which  delivered  3(K  d  100  kW/kg  average  brain  specific  absorption  rates  or  30 
and  100  mJ/kg  brain  specific  absorption.  The  acoustic  startling  pulses  were  50  ms  broad¬ 
band  noise  at  106  dB  SPL.  The  8  experimental  conditions  were  microwave  pre-pulse 
only,  acoustic  startle  only,  and  microwave  pre-pulses  delivered  at  201,  101,  51.  3  and  1 
ms  before,  and  1  ms  after  the  acoustic  startling  pulse.  Startle  amplitudes  were 
measured  from  strip  chart  records. 

The  1.5  kW  microwave  pre-pulse  failed  to  modify  the  amplitude  of  the  acoustic 
startle.  In  contrast,  the  5  kW  microwave  pre-pulse  significantly  suppressed  the  amplitude 
of  the  acoustic  startle  with  a  lead  time  between  51  and  201  ms.  Therefore,  microwave 
pulses  of  adequate  intensity  could  modify  (suppress)  startle  if  it  was  applied  in  a  short 
period  before  the  startling  stimulus.  These  results  appeared  to  be  inconsistent  with  the 
absence  of  acoustic  startle  modification  by  a  similar  microwave  pre-pulse  in  the  initial 
experiment  using  a  different  group  of  animals.  The  apparent  inconsistency  could  have 
resulted  from  a  larger  group  of  animals  and  better  control  of  the  microwave  pre-pulses  in 
the  later  experiment  than  in  the  initial  experiment.  It  could  be  concluded  from  these 
experiments  that  there  exists  a  threshold  for  microwave  pre-pulses  to  influence  the 
acoustic  startle. 

The  modification  of  the  tactile  startle  was  evaluated  in  14  animals  [Seaman,  Beblo 
and  Raslear  1992b;  1993b;  1994].  The  startling  tactile  stimulus  was  a  50  ms  burst  of 
compressed  air  delivered  to  the  back  of  the  neck  at  48-52  psi  (330-350  kPa).  An  acoustic 
click  (94  dB  SPL  peak,  80-120  jjs)  was  used  as  a  positive  control  to  identify  the  presence 
of  the  modification  of  the  tactile  startle  by  pre-pulse.  The  microwave  pre-pulse  used  was 
a  single  8  /js  pulse  generated  by  an  Epsco  PH40K  at  5  kW  peak  power  which  provided  a 
100  kW/kg  brain  specific  absorption  rate  and  800  mJ/kg  brain  specific  absorption.  The 
tactile  startle  modification  by  acoustic-click  and  microwave  pre-pulses  was  tested  in 
separate  testing  sessions.  During  each  session,  6  experimental  conditions  were  presented 
in  random  order.  These  experimental  conditions  were  tactile  startle  only  and  pre¬ 
stimulus  delivered  at  lead  times  of  150,  100,  50  and  0  ms  relative  to,  and  50  ms  after  the 
onset  of  the  startling  air  burst.  Each  animal  experienced  4  presentations  of  each 
experimental  condition  in  each  testing  session.  Seven  animals  were  tested  with  acoustic 


69 


clicks  first;  the  other  seven,  with  microwave  pre-pulses  first.  The  animal  motion  detector 
output  was  monitored  on  a  digital  storage  oscilloscope  and  on  a  Gould  TA2000  strip 
chart  recorder. 

For  acoustic-click  pre-pulse,  the  mean  amplitude  of  the  startle  response  was 
lower,  but  statistically  insignificant,  in  150  and  100  ms  conditions  than  in  the  condition  in 
which  the  tactile  startling  stimulus  was  administered  alone.  The  startle  amplitude 
suppression  could  be  noted  statistically  in  the  50  ms  condition  only.  The  result  was 
consistent  with  the  notion  that  acoustic  pre-stimulus  reduced  startle  amplitude  at  lead 
times  of  50-100  ms. 

The  microwave  pre-pulse  could  not  modify  the  tactile  startle  if  it  was  administered 
before  the  tactile  startling  stimulus.  A  slight  but  insignificant  enhancement  of  the  startle 
amplitude  was  noted  when  microwave  "pre-stimulus”  coincided  with  the  tactile  startling 
stimulus.  The  tactile  startle  amplitude  was  significantly  enhanced  if  the  microwave  pre¬ 
pulse  was  delivered  50  ms  (-50  ms  condition)  after  the  onset  of  the  tactile  startling 
stimulus  which  lasted  50  ms.  This  enhancement  indicated  that  the  animal  could  have 
perceived  the  strength  of  the  startling  stimulus  by  summing  the  tactile  startling  stimulus 
and  the  microwave  "pre-stimulus"  which  occurred  immediately  after  the  tactile  stimulus. 

One  of  the  hypotheses  that  explains  microwave-evoked  body  movements  ("startle") 
was  microwave  hearing  via  thermoelastic  expansion  waves  sensed  by  the  cochlea.  The 
movement  of  the  cochlea  fluid  is  essential  in  generating  the  auditory  sensation  through 
the  auditory  pathway.  A  deaf  rat  model  with  a  bilateral  patent  cochlea  is  essential  to 
evaluate  the  accuracy  of  this  hypothesis.  Deaf  rats  do  not  occur  in  any  great  frequency 
and  ototoxicity  of  antimicrobials  cannot  produce  consistent  deafness  by  cochlea 
dysfunction.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  develop  a  surgical  procedure  for  deafening  rats 
with  patent  cochlea  to  obliterate  the  primary  site  of  microwave  hearing. 

A  surgical  procedure  for  bilateral  cochleotomy  in  rats  was  developed  [Swearengen, 
Kittell,  Davis,  Raslear,  Beblo  and  Colleton  1993].  This  procedure  began  with 
anesthetizing  the  rat  with  a  intramuscular  injection  of  5  mg/kg  xylazine  and  45  mg/kg 


70 


ketamine  hydrochloride.  When  a  surgical  plane  of  anesthesia  was  attained,  which  was 
determined  by  the  lack  of  digital  and  corneal  reflexes,  the  rat  was  given  0.027  mg/kg 
butorphanol  tartrate  subcutaneously  and  2200  IU/100  g  procaine/benzathine 
intramuscularly.  The  anesthetized  rat  was  placed  in  a  stereotaxic  device  which  allowed 
vertical  and  long  axis  rotational  positioning  of  the  head.  The  surgical  field  was 
disinfected  by  applying  5  %  povidone-iodine  solution  to  pinna,  external  auditory  canal, 
and  surrounding  areas.  A  4-5  mm  cutaneous  incision  was  made  starting  at  the  intertragic 
notch  extending  ventrally  down  the  surface  of  the  skin  surrounding  the  opening  to  the 
external  auditory  canal.  The  incision  was  extended  down  the  ventral  aspect  of  the 
external  auditory  canal  to  the  external  auditory  meatus  with  a  pair  of  iris  scissors.  The 
tympanic  membrane  was  ruptured  as  the  malleus  was  grasped  with  a  pair  of  splinter 
forceps.  The  malleus  (hammer  bone)  was  withdrawn  and  the  remnants  of  the  tympanic 
membrane  removed.  The  incus  bone  was  removed  if  visible.  The  promontory  was 
located  in  the  middle  ear  and  the  lateral  wall  of  the  cochlea.  The  promotory  was  used  as 
the  drilling  landmark.  A  0.024"  wire  gauge  drill  bit  mounted  on  a  brass  handle  was  used 
to  perforate  the  cochlea  at  promotory.  A  blunted  26-gauge  0.5”  needle  attached  to  a 
tuberculin  syringe  fitted  with  a  rubber  bulb  was  used  to  penetrate  into  the  cochlea  and  to 
remove  endolymph  and  perilymph  by  suction.  When  all  signs  of  fluid  drainage  were 
absent,  a  4-5  mm  piece  of  sterile  3-0  silk  suture  was  wedged  into  the  cochlea  through 
the  cochlear  opening  with  approximately  2  mm  extending  into  the  middle  ear.  A  small 
piece  of  sterile  absorbable  gelatin  sponge  was  placed  in  the  middle  ear  to  absorb  any 
residual  endolymph  or  perilymph  and  help  to  stabilize  silk  wick.  No  skin  closure  was 
performed.  The  rat  was  turned  over  and  the  same  procedure  was  performed  on  the 
opposite  ear.  Sham  cochleotomy  included  the  same  medications  and  preparations  and 
the  initial  incision  of  the  intertragic  notch.  The  sham  cochleotomy  prevented  any  visual 
bias. 


Postoperative  cares  included  administration  of  Butorphanol  tartrate  (0.027  mg/kg) 
at  8-h  interval  for  72-h  to  alleviate  pain  associated  with  the  surgeiy  and  administration  of 
the  procaine/benzathin  penicillin  72-h  after  the  surgery.  Startle  tests  were  performed 
between  7  and  14  days  after  surgeiy. 


71 


The  startle  tests  included  a  tactile  (50  ms  air  burst)  and  an  acoustic  (100  ms  of 
the  117  dB  SPL  noise)  stimuli.  The  threshold  for  auditory  stimulus  to  elicit  a  startle 
response  is  approximately  90  dB  SPL  for  rats,  therefore,  the  acoustic  stimulus  (117  dB) 
was  at  least  two  orders  of  magnitude  higher  (more  than  100  times)  in  intensity  than  the 
acoustic  startling  threshold.  The  air  burst  was  used  to  positively  identify  that  the  startle 
response  in  deafened  rats  was  not  obliterated  by  the  surgical  procedures  and  to  serve  as 
the  baseline  for  identifying  the  suppression  of  the  acoustic  startle  in  deafened  rats. 

Twelve  bilateral  cochleotomized  rats  and  two  sham  bilateral  cochleotomized  rats  were 
tested.  Tactile  startle  were  positively  identified  in  all  these  rats  regardless  of  the  type  of 
the  surgery.  Acoustic  startles  were  also  present  in  sham-cochleotomized  rats.  In 
cochleotomized  rats,  the  amplitude  of  the  acoustic  startle  response  was  lower  than  the 
amplitude  of  the  tactile  startle  response.  In  fact,  the  majority  of  the  cochleotomized  rats 
failed  to  shown  any  startle  by  this  intense  acoustic  stimulus  even  under  repetitive  testing. 
Due  to  the  low  rate  and  low  amplitude  of  the  acoustic  startle  responses  in 
cochleotomized  rats,  it  could  be  concluded  that  the  surgical  procedure  was  appropriate 
for  the  purpose  of  this  research. 

Histological  examination  were  performed  at  the  conclusion  of  the  development 
stage  of  the  cochleotomy  procedure.  No  evidence  of  secondaiy  bacterial  inflammation 
was  observed  within  the  semicular  or  spiral  canals  of  any  of  cochleotomized  rats.  In 
addition,  none  of  the  test  group  displayed  any  clinical  signs  of  vestibular  dysfunction  such 
as  head  tilt,  circling  and  loss  of  balance.  Where  wick  placement  was  found,  a  very 
localized  granulomatous  reaction  (scar  tissue)  was  seen  immediately  surrounding  the  wick 
within  the  cochlea. 

Microwave-evoked  body  movements  were  suspected  to  be  an  end  result  of  the 
microwave  hearing  which  required  an  intact  cochlear  function.  With  the  success  of 
developing  a  cochleotomy  procedure,  hypothesis  testing  on  the  dependence  of  the 
microwave  startle  (microwave -evoked  body  movements)  on  hearing  can  be  performed. 
This  hypothesis  was  tested  in  14  rats,  7  were  deafened  by  cochleotomy  and  the  remaining 
rats  received  sham  cochleotomy.  A  1.25  GHz  microwave  generated  by  a  Epsco  PH40  K 
transmitter  was  used  as  a  test  stimulus.  Gated  CWs  were  used  instead  of  high  peak 


power  pulsed  microwave  stimuli.  Microwave  stimuli  of  40,  80  and  160  W  for  1  s 
corresponding  to  0.8,  1.6  and  3.2  kW/kg  brain  specific  absorption  rates  were  used.  The 
corresponding  brain  specific  absorptions  were  0.8,  1.6  and  3.2  kJ/kg.  These  peak  brain 
specific  absorption  rates  were  at  least  1-2  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  the  effective 
microwave  pre-pulse  (100  kW/kg)  used  for  acoustic  startle  modification  but  the  brain 
specific  absorptions  were  at  least  3  orders  of  magnitude  higher  than  the  effective 
microwave  pre-pulse  (0.8  J/kg).  The  rationale  for  these  differenc  between  microwave 
stimuli  and  microwave  pre-pulse  was  to  elicit  startle  by  an  intense  stimulus,  not  to  modify 
startle,  caused  by  an  intense  stimulus,  a  pre-pulse  which  in  itself  could  not  elicit  a  startle. 
Each  rat  received  randomly  10  microwave  and  2  sham  trials  at  each  power  level  on  two 
different  days.  Interval  between  trials  averaged  about  90  s.  Outputs  of  the  motion 
detector  were  recorded  on  a  Gould  TA2000  strip  chart  recorder.  The  progress  of  the 
experiment  was  monitored  on  a  digital  storage  oscilloscope. 

The  incidence  rate  of  the  spontaneous  movements  were  8  and  12  %  respectively 
in  hearing  (sham  cochleotomized)  and  in  deafened  (cochleotomized)  rats.  The  startle 
incidence  rate  increased  with  the  microwave  doses  regardless  of  the  surgical  treatments. 
The  startle  incidence  rates  were  23,  56  and  72  %  in  the  deafened  rats  and  they  were  16, 
43  and  85  %  in  the  hearing  rats  subjected  to  40,  80  and  160  W  microwave  stimuli.  The 
response  curves  were  not  different  between  each  other  as  indicated  by  an  insignificant 
difference  between  least-square  fitted  slopes  [Raslear,  Akyel,  Lu,  Swearengen,  Varle, 
DeAngelis  and  Seaman  1992]. 

It  can  be  concluded  from  these  results  that  auditoiy  sensations  secondary  to 
microwave  exposure  cannot  account  for  the  microwave  evoked  whole-body  movements  or 
startle.  Since  heating  potential  of  these  microwave  stimuli  (0.23-0.92  °C)  were  of 
biological  significance,  the  direct  effect  on  central  nervous  system  could  not  be 
eliminated  entirely. 


73 


CONCLUSIONS 


OGDEN  is  determined  to  continue  to  provide,  under  the  general  guidance  of  the 
COR  and  appropriate  WRAIR  program  managers,  high-quality,  peer-reviewed  scientific 
journal  publishable  research  support.  Specific  research  protocols  will  focus  primarily  on 
the  behavioral  and  biological  effects  of  the  electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave 
region  of  the  spectrum.  OGDEN  researchers  will  continue  to  investigate  potential 
hazards  of  the  RF  Directed  Energy  Sources  to  personnel  operating  in  a  tactical 
environment  using  the  existing  TEMPO,  COBER,  UWB  and  EMP  sources  supplied  by 
the  Government. 

OGDEN  will  continue  to  give  priority  to  behavioral  and  CNS  experiments  with  a 
commitment  to  highest  scientific  standards  resulting  in  high  quality  peer-reviewed 
publications.  We  understand  that  the  DMR  research  efforts  in  high  power  microwave 
fields  have  little  precedent  and  are  considered  innovative  and  pioneering. 

In  recent  years,  scientists  and  epidemiologists  found  growing,  well-publicized  but 
inconclusive  evidence  that  electromagnetic  fields  might  increase  the  risk  of  certain 
cancers  and  brain  tumors.  Many  physicists  doubted  any  RF-cancer  link  because  there 
were  no  plausible  mechanisms  by  which  electromagnetic  fields  could  affect  biological 
tissue.  However,  in  the  last  two  years,  microscopic  magnets  made  of  crystals  of  the  iron 
mineral  magnetite  were  found  in  human  brain.  Homing  pigeons,  whales,  salmon  and 
some  bacteria  were  known  as  having  similar  structures.  Increasing  emphasis  given  to 
avian  responses  after  exposure  to  nonionizing  radiation,  some  evidence  on  human  visual 
abnormalities  associated  with  high-energy  microwave  exposure,  and  our  own  finding  of 
disturbed  circadian  rhythmicity  in  rats  after  exposure  to  TEMPO  pulses  provide  a  new 
ground  to  start  a  new  line  of  research. 

To  determine  safe  exposure  levels  for  exposure  to  electromagnetic  radiation 
characteristic  of  military  equipment  and  systems,  we  propose  to  study  behavioral  and 
biological  effects  of  long  term  exposure  to  low  level  microwave  fields.  Most  of  the 


74 


experiments  designed  to  date  study  acute  effects  of  RF  fields.  However,  in  real  life, 
complaints  of  the  military  personnel  range  from  short-term  incapacitation  to  long  term 
health  consequences.  The  length  of  the  future  contract  will  allow  our  scientists  to  design 
experiments  that  will  investigate  long  term  effects  of  repeated  low  level  exposure  to 
continuous,  pulsed  microwave  fields,  electromagnetic  pulses  and  ultra-wide  band 
electromagnetic  radiation. 

Department's  new  UWB  exposure  system  will  allow  our  investigators  to  study  the 
effects  of  this  new  system  in  a  controlled  laboratory  setting.  Dr.  Akyel  already  has 
approved  protocol  to  study  behavioral  effects  of  UWB  exposures.  OGDEN  staff  is  in 
the  process  of  designing  an  operant  chamber  that  will  be  suitable  for  the  behavioral 
analysis  of  the  rats  exposed  to  such  fields.  With  the  approval  of  the  COR.  for  acute 
exposure  designs,  OGDEN  scientists  would  like  to  give  emphasize  on  in-field 
experiments  rather  than  after-effects  experiments. 


75 


REFERENCES  -  PUBLICATION  LIST 


♦  Akyel,  B.,  and  Y.  Akyel  [1991]:  Altruistic  behavior  and  prosocial  moral  reasoning 
among  Turkish  high  school  students.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Third  Annual 
Convention  of  the  American  Psychological  Society,  Washington,  D.C. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.  [1990]:  Post-exposure  effects  of  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses  on 
operant  behavior.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Second  Annual  Convention  of  the 
American  Psychological  Society,  Dallas,  Texas. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.  [1991].  Behavioral  sequelae  of  high  power  microwave  fields.  Current 
Psychology:  Research  and  Reviews  10:  211-220. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.  [1992]:  Behavioral  effects  of  high  power  microwaves.  Invited 
presentation.  BHS  Seminar.  Armed  Forces  Radiobiology  Research  Institute, 
Bethesda,  MD. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  and  M.  Belt  [1992]:  A  microwave  transparent  operant  chamber  for 
rats.  Physiology  and  Behavior  51:  647-650. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  M.  Belt,  T.G.  Raslear,  and  R.M.  Hammer  [1993]:  The  effects  of  high- 
peak  power  pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  rat.  In:  Electricity 
and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  M.  Blank  (Ed.),  San  Francisco:  San 
Francisco  Press,  pp.  668-670. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  M.  Blair,  R.  Serafim,  B.  Akyel,  and  D.  Varle,  [1991]:  Effects  of  high- 
power  pulsed  microwave  fields  on  schedules  of  reinforcement.  Proceedings  of  the 
13th  Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  & 
Biology  Society  13:  956-957. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  E.L.  Hunt,  F.  Bates,  and  C.  Gambrill  [1988]:  Effects  of  high  powered 
pulsed  microwave  irradiation  on  rats  responding  on  high  and  low  rates.  Report 
presented  to  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command  under  the 
contract  #  DAMD17-85-C-5083. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  E.L.  Hunt,  C.  Gambrill,  and  C.  Vargas  [1991]:  Immediate  post¬ 
exposure  effects  of  high  peak  microwave  pulses  on  operant  behavior  of  Wistar 
rats.  Bioelectromagnetics  12:  183-195. 


76 


♦  Akyel,  Y.,  E.L.  Hunt,  and  C.A.  Vargas,  Jr.  [1989]:  Behavioral  recovery  from 
hyperthermia  induced  by  high-peak  power  microwave  pulses.  Proceedings  of  the 
11th  Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  & 
Biology  Society  11:  1138-1139. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1992].  Bilaterally  cochleotomized  rats  do  not  startle 
to  tactile  stimulus.  Abstracts  of  the  Fourth  Annual  Convention  of  the  American 
Psychological  Society,  San  Diego,  CA. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1993]:  The  effects  of  acute  EMP  fields  on  the 
behavior  of  rats.  Proceedings  of  the  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review 
Panel,  Williamsburg,  VA,  pp.  45-57. 

♦  Akyel,  B.,  T.G.  Raslear,  Y.  Akyel,  and  R.L.  Seaman  [1993]:  Automated 
measurements  of  the  microwave-evoked  whole-body  movement.  In:  Abstracts  of 
the  14th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦  Akyel,  B.,  T.G.  Raslear,  Y.  Akyel,  R.L.  Seaman,  S.-T.  Lu,  M.  DeAngelis,  S. 
Pournagash,  and  M.  Belt  [1993]:  Automated  measurements  of  the  microwave- 
evoked  whole-body  movement.  In:  Abstract  of  the  Fifteenth  Annual  Meeting  of 
the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  T.G.  Raslear,  F.  Bates,  and  M.  DeAngelis  [1992]:  Behavioral  responses 
of  acute  EMP  fields.  Proceedings  of  the  14th  Annual  International  Conference  of 
the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  Society  14:  287-288. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  T.G.  Raslear,  R.M.  Hammer,  and  M.  Belt  [1992]:  The  effects  of  high- 
peak  power  pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  rat.  In:  Abstracts 
of  the  First  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and 
Medicine.  Lake  Buena  Vista,  FL. 

♦  Akyel,  Y.,  T.  Raslear,  S.  Mathur,  R.  Serafini,  and  F.  Bates  [1990]:  Effects  of 
EMP  exposures  on  memory  functions  and  general  motor  activity  of  Wistar  rats. 
Report  presented  to  U.  S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command 
under  the  contract  DAMD17-89-C-9021. 


77 


♦  Akyel,  Y.,  T.  Raslear,  and  R.  Seradini  [1990]:  Exposure  of  rodents  in  a  parallel 
plate  EMP  simulator;  behavioral  effects.  Proceedings  of  the  12th  Annual  Interna¬ 
tional  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  &  Biology  Society  12: 
1551-1552. 

♦  Brown.  D.O.,  S.-T.  Lu,  and  E.C.  Elson  [1994]:  Characteristics  of  microwave 
evoked  body  movements  in  mice.  Bioelectromagnetics  15:  143-161. 

♦  Brown,  D.O.,  S.-T.  Lu,  S.  Mathur,  and  H.  Wachtell  [1991]:  Randomized  testing 
of  microwave  evoked  body  movements.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  EMBS  Conf. 

13:  964-965. 

♦  Gambrill,  C.S.,  E.C.  Elson,  and  S.-T.  Lu  [1994]:  Discrepancy  in  rectal 
temperature  responses  in  rabbits  subjected  to  cranial  pulsed  and  CW  exposures. 
In:  Abstracts  of  the  sixteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦  Gambrill,  C.S.,  and  S.-T.  Lu  [1992]:  Error  analysis  of  a  thermometric  microwave 
dosimetry  procedure.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress  for  Electricity 
and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

♦  Gambrill,  C.S.,  and  S.-T.  Lu  [1993]:  Error  analysis  of  a  thermometric  microwave 
dosimetry  procedure.  In:  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine, 
Ed.:  M.  Blank,  San  Francisco,  CA:  San  Francisco  Press,  Inc.,  1993,  pp  593-595. 

♦*  Kues,  H.A.,  S.A.  D’Anna,  M.A.  Johnson,  G.A.  Lutty,  and  J.C.  Monahan  [1993]: 
Absence  of  comparable  ocular  effects  in  animals  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave 
radiation  from  two  separate  systems.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Fifteenth  Annual 
Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

Kues,  H.A.,  D.S.  McLeod,  S.A.  D’Anna,  M.A.  Johnson,  C.R.  Perry,  and  J.C. 
Monahan[1991]:  Microwave-induced  electroretinographic  changes  in  the  primate. 
In:  Abstracts  of  the  Thirteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society. 


1  Publications  that  OBC  personnel  is  not  a  co-author. 


78 


♦  Kues,  H.A.,  D.S.  McLeod,  S.A.  D'Anna,  G.A.  Lutty,  C.  Gambrill,  and  E.C.  Elson 
[1989]:  Ocular  changes  following  exposure  to  high-pea,’:  pulsed  1.25  GHz 
microwaves.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Eleventh  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦2  Kues,  H.A.,  and  J.C.  Monahan  [1992]:  Pulsed  microwave-induced  ocular  changes 
in  the  restrained  non-human  primate.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress 
for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  D.O.  Brown,  C.E.  Johnson,  S.P.  Mathur,  and  E.C.  Elson  [1991a]: 
Cardiovascular  deficits  induced  by  localized  high  power  microwave  exposure.  In: 
Abstracts  of  the  Thirteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  D.O.  Brown,  C.E.  Johnson,  S.P.  Mathur,  and  E.C.  Elson  [1991b]: 
Bradycardia  and  decreased  pulse  pressure  in  rats.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE 
EMBS  Conf.  13:  906-961. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  D.O.  Brown,  C.E.  Johnson.  S.P.  Mathur,  and  E.C.  Elson  [1992]. 
Abnormal  cardiovascular  responses  induced  by  localized  high  power  microwave 
exposure.  IEEE  Trans.  BME  39:  484-492. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  D.  Brown,  S.  Mathur,  C.  Gambrill,  R.  Serafini,  and  H.  Wachtel  [1991]: 
Thermal  nature  of  microwave  evoked  body  movements.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE 
EMBS  Conf.  13:  997-998. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  M.L.  DeAngelis,  and  C.S.  Gambrill  [1992]:  Ocular  microwave 
thermometric  dosimetry  and  thermometry  in  the  rabbit.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First 
World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  M.L.  DeAngelis,  and  C.S.  Gambrill  [1993]:  Ocular  microwave 
thermometric  dosimetry  and  thermometry  in  rabbit.  In:  Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine.  Ed.:  M.  Blank,  San  Francisco,  CA:  San 
Francisco  Press,  Inc.,  1993,  pp  675-678. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  C.S.  Gambrill,  and  D.O.  Brown  [1994]:  Validation  of  a  thermometric 
microwave -dosimetry  procedure  in  vivo  and  in  vitro.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Sixteenth 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 


1  Publication  that  OBC  personnel  is  not  a  co-author. 


79 


♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  C.S.  Gambrill,  and  E.C.  Elson  [1993]:  Absence  of  behavioral  arousal  in 
rabbit  subjected  to  a  cranial  pulsed  microwave  treatment.  In:  Abstracts  of  the 
Fifteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  and  S.M.  Michaelson  [1992]:  Interaction  between  ambient  temperature 
and  SAR  on  microwave-induced  hyperthermia  in  rats.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First 
World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

♦  Lu,  S.-T.,  and  S.M.  Michaelson  [1993]:  Effect  of  interaction  between  ambient 
temperature  and  SAR  on  microwave-induced  hyperthermia  in  rats.  In:  Electricity 
and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine.  Ed.:  M.  Blank.  San  Francisco,  CA:  San 
Francisco  Press,  Inc.,  1993,  pp.  679-682. 

♦  Mathur,  S.P.,  Y.  Akyel,  and  S.-T.  Lu  [1991]:  Whole-body  dosimetry  in  a  gradient 
layer  calorimeter.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Thirteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

♦  Mathur,  S.P.,  Y.  Akyel,  and  S.-T.  Lu  [1992]:  Whole-body  dosimetry  using  a  single 
gradient  layer  calorimeter.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:  435-438. 

♦  Raslear,  T.G.,  and  Y.  Akyel  [1992]:  Null  responses,  decision  confidence,  and 
temporal  bisection  in  rats:  The  effect  of  high-power  pulsed  microwaves.  In: 
Abstracts  of  the  63th  Eastern  Psychological  Association  Annual  Meeting,  Boston, 
MA. 

♦  Raslear,  T.  G.,  Y.  Akyel,  and  F.  Bates  [1992]:  The  behavioral  effects  of  high-peak 
power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation  in  rats.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  Sixth  National 
Conference  on  High  Power  Microwave  Technology,  Lackland  AFB,  Texas. 

♦  Raslear,  T.  G.,  Y.  Akyel,  F.  Bates,  and  M.  Belt  [1993]:  The  effects  of  high-peak 
power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation  on  time  bisection  in  rats.  In:  Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  M.  Blank  (Ed.),  San  Francisco:  San 
Francisco  Press,  pp.  671-674. 

♦  Raslear,  T.G.,  Y.  Akyel,  F.  Bates,  M.  Belt,  and  S.-T.  Lu  [1993]:  Temporal 
Bisection  in  Rats:  the  effects  of  high-peak-power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation. 
Bioelectromagnetics  14:  459-478. 


♦  Raslear,  T.G.,  Y.  Akyel,  F.  Bates,  S.-T.  Lu,  E.C.  Elson,  B.  Akyel,  and  S.P.  Mathur 
[1993]:  The  behavioral  toxicology  of  high-peak,  low  average  power,  pulsed 
microwave  irradiation.  Technical  Report  001-92,  Washington,  D.C.:  Department 
of  Microwave  Research,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research. 

♦  Raslear,  T.G.,  Y.  Akyel,  R.  Serafini,  F.  Bates,  and  M.  Belt  [1991]:  Food  demand 
and  circadian  rhythmicity  following  high-peak  power  microwave  Irradiation. 
Proceedings  of  the  13th  Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE 
Engineering  in  Medicine  &  Biology  Society  13:  962-963. 

♦  Raslear,  T.G.,  Y.  Akyel,  R.  Serafini,  F.  Bates,  and  M.  Beit  [1991]:  Memory 
consolidation  in  the  rat  following  high-power  microwave  irradiation.  Proceedings 
of  the  13th  Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in 
Medicine  &  Biology  Society  13:  958-959. 

♦  Raslear,  T.G.,  Y.  Akyel,  S.-T.  Lu.  J.R.  Swearengen,  D.  Varle.  M.L.  DeAngelis. 
and  R.L.  Seaman  [1992]:  CW  microwave  fields  evoked  body  movements  in 
bilaterally  cochleotomized  rats.  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  14:  295-296. 

♦  Seaman,  R.L.,  and  D.A.  Beblo  [1992]:  Modification  of  acoustic  startle  by 
microwave  pulses  in  the  rat:  a  preliminary  report.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:  323- 
328. 

♦  Seaman,  R.L.,  D.A.  Beblo,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1992a]:  Modification  of  acoustic 
startle  amplitude  by  microwave  pulses.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress 
for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

♦  Seaman,  R.L.,  D.A.  Beblo,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1992b]:  Modification  of  tactile 
startle  amplitude  by  microwave  pulses.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress 
for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

♦  Seaman,  R.L.,  D.A.  Beblo,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1993a]:  Modification  of  acoustic 
startle  amplitude  by  microwave  pulses.  In:  M.  Blank  (ed.).  Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine.  San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press.  1993, 
pp  662-664. 

♦  Seaman,  R.L.,  D.A.  Beblo,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1993b]:  Modification  of  tactile 
amplitude  by  microwave  pulses.  In:  M.  Blank  (ed.),  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in 
Biology  and  Medicine.  San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press,  1993,  pp  665-667. 


Seaman,  R.L.,  D.A.  Beblo,  and  T.G.  Raslear  [1994]:  Modification  of  acoustic  and 
tactile  startle  by  single  microwave  pulses.  Physiol.  Beh.  55:  587-595,  1994. 
Swearengen,  J.R.,  C.L.  Kittell,  J.  A.  Davis,  T.G.  Raslear,  D.A.  Beblo,  and  C.A. 
Colleton  [1993]:  A  surgical  technique  for  bilateral  cochleotomy  in  the  Long-Evans 
rat.  J.  Invest.  Surg.  6:  431-437. 

Wachtel,  H.,  Y.  Akyel,  and  F.  Bates  [1987]:  Hypokinesis  produced  by  exposure  of 
the  mouse  brain  to  microwave  pulses  and  pulse  trains.  Report  presented  to  U.S. 
Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command  under  the  contract  # 
DAMD17-85-C-5083. 

Wachtel,  H.,  D.  Beblo,  C.  Vargas,  H.  Bassen  and  D.  Brown  [1989]:  Comparison 
of  the  efficiency  of  pulsed  versus  CW  microwave  fields  in  evoking  body 
movements.  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  11:  1136-1137. 


