AD 


Award  Number:  DAMD17-94-C-4069 


TITLE:  Services  to  Operate  and  Maintain  the  Microwave  Research 

Facility  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  Yahya  Akyel,  Ph.D. 


CONTRACTING  ORGANIZATION:  McKesson  Bioservices 

Rockville,  Maryland  20850 


REPORT  DATE:  May  2001 


TYPE  OF  REPORT:  Final  (Supplement) 


PREPARED  FOR:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT:  Approved  for  Public  Release; 

Distribution  Unlimited 


The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  author (s)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so 
designated  by  other  documentation. 


20010718  087 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


Form  Approved 
OMB  No.  074-0188 


Public  reporting  burden  for  this  collection  of  information  is  estimated  to  average  1  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources,  gathering  and  maintaining 
the  data  needed,  and  completing  and  reviewing  this  collection  of  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this  collection  of  information,  including  suggestions  for 
reducing  this  burden  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson  Davis  Highway,  Suite  1204,  Arlington,  VA  22202-4302,  and  to  the  Office  of 
Management  and  Budget,  Paperwork  Reduction  Project  (0704-0188),  Washington,  DC  20503 


1 .  AGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Leave  blank)  2.  REPORT  DATE  3.  REPORT  TYPE  AND  DATES  COVERED 

May  2001  Final  (Supplement)  (21  May  94-20  May  01) 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE  5.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 

Services  to  Operate  and  Maintain  the  Microwave  Research  DAMD17-94-C-4069 

Facility  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 

6.  AUTHOR(S) 

Yahya  Akyel,  Ph.D. 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

McKesson  Bioservices 
Rockville,  Maryland  20850 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 


E-Mail:  yahya.akyel@mbs-mckhboc.com 


9.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


10.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


11.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

This  report  contains  colored  photos 


12a.  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

Approved  for  Public  Release;  Distribution  Unlimited 


12b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODE 


13.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  Words) 

Due  to  growing  concerns  for  the  health  and  safety  of  military  personnel  and  civilians 
exposed  to  radio  frequency  radiation,  a  series  of  research  investigating  behavioral, 
neural,  biological,  cardiovascular  and  retinal  effects  of  high  peak  power  pulsed 
microwaves  (Mw) ,  ultra-wide-band  (UWB)  and  mm  waves  were  accomplished.  Up  to  20  W/kg, 
pulsed  1.25  GHz  Mw  did  not  cause  retinal  injuries.  Extremely  high  peak  power  9.2  GHz  Mw 
had  no  specific  effect  on  pacemaker  of  the  frog  heart  or  hippocampal  slices  but  a  specific 
inhibitory  effect  on  the  growth  rate  of  yeast  cells  was  suspected.  Synaptic  transmission 
of  frog  spinal  cord  was  not  a  target  of  41.1-42.4  GHz  CW  mm  waves.  Interaction  between 
1.25  GHz  pulsed  Mw  and  3-nitropropionic  acid  on  prepulse  inhibition  of  acoustic  startle 
was  found.  A  SAR  dependent  effect  on  Y-maze  performance  was  found  in  rats  exposed  to  2.45 
GHz  Mw,  A  SAR  dependent  hypotension  was  found  in  rats  exposed  to  UWB  pulses.  UWB  pulses 
could  inhibit  the  hyperactivity  caused  by  a  nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor.  The  UWB 
pulses  were  not  genotoxic.  A  general  mathematical  model  using  FDTD  techniques  to  estimate 
the  electric  field. in  a  large  GTEM  cell  was  developed  and  validaded.  Six  concept  papers 
have  been  published.  Details  of  accomplishments  and  a  list  of  publications  is  included. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS  15.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

Hiqh  peak  power  pulsed  microwaves,  ultra-wide-band  puses,  mm  waves,  _ 422 _ 

Neural,  retinal,  cardiovascular,  behavorial,  neutoxin,  growth,  gene  16.  PRICE  CODE 


17.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  REPORT 

Unclassified 


NSN  7540-01-280-5500 


18.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified  Unclassified 


20.  LIMITATION  OF  ABSTRACT 


Unlimited 


Standard  Form  298  (Rev.  2-89) 

Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std.  Z39-18 
298-102 


FOREWORD 


Opinions,  interpretations,  conclusions  and  recommendation  are 
those  of  the  author  and  are  not  necessarily  endorsed  by  the  U.S. 
Army. 

Where  copyrighted  material  is  quoted,  permission  has  been 
obtained  to  use  such  material . 

U\  Where  material  from  documents  designated  for  limited 
distribution  is  quoted,  permission  has  been  obtained  to  use  the 
material . 

H/>  Citations  of  commercial  organizations  and  trade  names  in 
this  report  do  not  constitute  an  official  Department  of  Army 
endorsement  or  approval  of  the  products  or  services  of  these 
organizations . 

or  In  conducting  research  using  animals,  the  investigator  (s) 
adhered  to  the  "Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
Animals,"  prepared  by  the  committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
animals  of  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources,  National 
Research  Council  (NIH  Publication  No. 86-23,  Revised  1985). 

jft-  For  the  protection  of  human  subjects,  the  investigator (s) 
adhered  to  policies  of  applicable  Federal  Law  45  CFR  46. 

In  conducting  research  utilizing  recombinant  DNA  technology, 
the  investigator (s)  adhered  to  current  guidelines  promulgated  by 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health. 

In  the  conduct  of  research  utilizing  recombinant  DNA,  the 
investigator (s)  adhered  to  the  NIH  Guidelines  for  Research 
Involving  Recombinant  DNA  Molecules. 

0^  In  the  conduct  of  research  involving  hazardous  organisms, 
the  investigator (s)  adhered  to  the  CDC-NIH  Guide  for  Biosafety  in 
Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories. 


PI  -  Signature  Date 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Cover . 1 

SF298 . 2 

Foreword . 3 

Introduction . 6 

Body  of  Report 

Research  on  High  Peak  Power  From  Radio  Frequency  Radiation  (RFR)  and  Neurotoxic 
Effects  of  RFR . 8 

Retinal  Effects  of  the  L-band  Radiation . 8 

Neural  Effects  of  Extremely  High  Peak  Power  Microwaves  In  Vitro . 10 

In  Vitro  Effect  of  Extremely  High  Peak  Power  Pulses  on  Cell  Growth . 13 

Neurotoxic  Effects  of  Radio  Frequency  Radiation . 15 

Biological  Hazards  of  Ultra  Wide  Band  (UWB)  Radiation  on  Cardiovascular  System  and 
Other  Cellular  Systems . 20 

Cardiovascular  Effects . 20 

Genotoxic  Effects  of  UWB  Pulses . 26 

Interaction  Between  Nitric  Oxide  Synthase  Inhibitor  and  Exposure  to 

UWB  Pulses . 26 

Finite  Difference  Time  Domain  (FDTD)  Techniques  to  Perform  Dosimetry  in  Biological 
Tissue  for  High  Peak  Power  RFR  and  UWB  Exposures . 28 

Concept  Paper  to  Identify  Strategies  to  Capture  the  Epidemiology  of  Microwave 
Exposure  to  Army  Personnel  and  the  Implication  to  Military  Perfornance . 30 

Conclusion . 37 

Personnel . 39 

Presentations  /  Publications  List . 40 


4 


Volume  II 


Copies  of  Publications  (1  -  14) 
Volume  III 

Copies  of  Publications  (15  -  20) 
Copies  of  Technical  Reports  (1-2) 


INTRODUCTION 


The  following  report  summarizes  the  performance  of  McKessonHBOC  Pharmaceutical 
Partners  Group,  Clinical  and  Biological  Services  (MCBS)  staff  at  the  Walter  Reed  Army 
Institute  of  Research  (WRAIR),  U  S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Microwave 
Bioeffects  Branch  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas  under  the  contracts  DAMD17-94-C-4069 
and  DAMD17-94-E-0001 .  MCBS  has  nine  years  contract  with  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research 
and  Acquisition  Activity  (USAMRAA)  to  operate  and  maintain  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch,  a 
Government-owned  Contractor-operated  (GOCO)  facility.  Reports  summarized  the  base  three 
years  (May  20,  1994  -  May  2,  1997)  and  the  first  option  years  (May  21,  1997  -  May  20,  1999) 
were  previously  filed  with  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command,  Fort 
Detrick,  Maryland  in  June,  1997  and  May,  1999.  The  present  report  reflects  the  efforts  of  MCBS 
staff  during  the  second  option  years  (May  21,  1999  -  May  20,  2001)  of  the  aforementioned 
contract 

Based  on  guidance  provided  in  the  contract  and  the  guidance  provided  by  the  Contracting 
Officer’s  Representative  (COR),  Mr.  Bruce  Stuck,  MCBS  The  research  objectives  are  twofold: 

•  To  operate,  maintain  and  provide  technical  support  for  all  the  U.S.  Army 
Electromagnetic  Bioeffects  Research  Program  (EMBRP)  Laboratories.  This  includes 
operation,  maintenance  and  repair  of  the  high  power  transmitters  and  all  related 
microwave  and  biomedical  instrumentation  used  in  the  Army  EMBRP  facility,  and 

•  To  furnish  biomedical  scientists  and  research  assistants  to  plan,  direct,  and  carry  out 
the  relevant  research  necessary  to  support  WRAIR’ s  EMBRP.  The  protocols  for 
research  performed  by  the  Contractor’s  scientists  are  subject  to  review/approval  by 
the  COR,  the  Commander,  WRAIR,  Laboratory  and  Animal  Care  and  Use  Committee 
(LACUC). 

Specifically,  the  MCBS  staff  is  to  focus  research  in  the  following  areas: 

•  Conduct  research  on  high  peak  power  effects  from  radio  frequency  radiation  (RFR) 
inherent  to  U.S.  Army  systems  to  assess  health  and  safety  for  military  personnel. 
Conduct  a  series  of  at  least  three  major  studies  exploring  the  potential  of  neurotoxic 
effects  of  radio  frequency  (RFR)  exposure.  These  studies  will  test  mechanisms  of 
neurodegenerative  disease,  following  up  on  current  studies  on  retinal  tissue  bioeffects 
and  epidemiological  studies  conducted  by  others  which  suggest  a  link  between 
neurodegenerative  diseases  and  RFR  exposure. 

•  Conduct  research  on  the  biological  hazards  of  ultra  wide  band  (UWB)  radiation  on 
the  cardiovascular  system  and  other  cellular  systems.  Produce  a  report  which  details 
the  research  results  and  discusses  implications  to  the  interim  guidelines  for  safe 


6 


exposure  to  UWB  radiation  promulgated  by  the  Tri  Service  Electromagnetic 
Radiation  Protection  Panel  (TERP)  and  soldier  performance. 

•  Collaborate  with  other  scientists  in  the  area  of  Finite  Difference  Time  Domain 
(FDTD)  techniques  to  perform  dosimetry  in  biological  tissues  for  high  peak  power 
RFR  and  UWB  exposure. 

•  Prepare  an  initial  concept  paper  to  identify  strategies  to  capture  the  epidemiology  of 
microwave  exposure  to  Army  personnel  and  the  implication  to  military  performance. 


7 


BODY  OF  REPORT 


RESEARCH  ON  HIGH  PEAK  POWER  EFFECTS  FROM 
RADIO  FREQUENCY  RADIATION  (RFR)  AND 
NEUROTOXIC  EFFECTS  OF  RFR 

Retinal  Effects  of  the  L-band  Radiation 

Radio  frequency  radiation  induced  alteration  of  biological  endpoints  generally  requires 
specific  absorption  rates  (SARs)  greater  than  4  W/kg  threshold  known  to  disrupt  ongoing 
behavior.  It  has  been  question  that  this  threshold  can  cause  retinal  injury  in  form  of 
electroretinogram  (ERG)  depression,  and  histological  and  ultrastructural  evidence  of 
degeneration.  Due  to  the  potential  importance  of  microwave  ocular  hazards  in  relation  to  health 
and  safety  of  soldiers,  sailors,  airmen,  and  the  general  public,  an  ocular  study  using  rhesus 
monkeys  was  requested  by  the  TERP. 

The  objective  of  the  research  was  to  identify  the  presence  or  absence  of  high  peak  power 
(1.25  MW/kg  peak  retinal  SAR,  5.59  p.s  pulse  width)  RFR  induced  retinal  injuries  by  studying 
changes  in  fundus  picture,  angiograph,  and  ERG  and  post-exposure  histopathology  of  monkeys 
exposed  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves.  The  average  retinal  SARs  were  at  0,  4.3,  8.4,  and  20.2 
W/kg  achieved  by  0,  0.59,  1.18  and  2.79  Hz  pulse  repetition  rates.  The  exposure  was  4  hr  per 
day  and  3  days  per  week  for  3  weeks,  for  a  total  of  nine  exposures.  The  following  special 
considerations  were  incorporated  in  the  experimental  design: 

•  Extensive  desitometry  and  dosimetry  were  performed  prior  to  experimentation, 

•  Transmitter  output  power  was  continuously  monitored  and  recorded, 

•  Extensive  pre-exposure  screenings  were  used  to  assure  the  retinal  normality  prior  to  the 
acceptance  of  experimental  subjects  into  the  study, 

•  All  diagnostic  procedures  were  applied  uniformly  to  all  subjects  regardless  of  treatment, 

•  Graded  multiple  retinal  doses  were  used  to  maximize  the  probability  of  observing  retinal 
changes  caused  by  microwave  exposures, 

•  Pre-exposure  baseline  were  used  for  individual  control, 

•  Data  obtained  in  the  exposed  monkeys  were  further  compared  to  those  of  sham-exposed 
monkeys  which  were  run  concurrently  with  the  experimental  monkeys, 

•  Ketamine  restraint  and  general  anesthesia  were  not  used  during  exposure, 

•  A  minimum  of  a  72  hour  recovery  period  was  mandatory  between  pre-screenings  and 
beginning  of  the  repeated  exposures. 


8 


•  Fluorophotometry  was  not  used, 

•  Exposures  were  randomized, 

•  All  investigators  except  one  (code  keeper)  were  blind  to  the  experimental  treatments, 

•  Long  distance  transportation  was  avoided,  and 

•  Experimental  subjects  were  transported  in  a  metal  cage  with  opaque  plastic  cover  and  in 
an  enclosed  air-conditioned  van. 

These  considerations  were  incorporated  to  ensure  data  quality  and  to  avoid  introducing 
unidentified  confounding  factors  and  unintentional  biases  by  investigators. 

Results  indicated  that  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  fundus  pictures  and  angiograms  were 
all  within  normal  limits.  The  response  of  cone  photoreceptors  to  light  flash  was  enhanced  in 
monkeys  exposed  at  8.4  or  20.2  W/kg,  but  not  in  monkeys  exposed  at  4.3  W/kg.  Scotopic  (rod) 
response,  maximum  (combined  cone  and  rod)  response,  and  Naka-Rushton  Rmax  and  log  K  of  the 
scotopic  b-wave  were  all  within  normal  range.  Post-exposure  retinal  histopathology  revealed  the 
presence  of  enhanced  glycogen  (periodic  acid  Schiff)  in  photoreceptors  among  sham  (2/5),  8.4 
W/kg  (3/3)  and  20.2  W/kg  (2/5)  exposed  monkeys,  while  enhanced  glycogen  storage  was  not 
observed  in  the  4.3  W/kg  (0/4)  exposed  group.  It  was  concluded  as  followed: 

•  Supra-normal  cone  photoreceptor  b-wave  was  SAR  dependent  and  may  be  an  early 
indicator  of  mild  injury, 

•  No  evidence  of  degenerative  changes  and  ERG  depression  was  seen, 

•  Retinal  injury  is  very  unlikely  at  4  W/kg  in  adult  rhesus  monkeys,  and 

•  Functional  changes  that  occur  at  higher  SAR  are  probably  reversible  since  we  saw  no 
evidence  of  histopathologic  correlation  with  ERG  changes. 

However,  these  results  did  not  address  the  sensitivity  of  retina  to  microwave  radiation  in  juvenile 
monkeys  nor  the  sensitizing  effect  of  glaucoma  medication  such  as  timolol  or  pilocarpine  on  the 
susceptibility  of  retina  and  corneal  endothelial  cells  to  microwave  induced  injuries.  Results  of 
this  study  is  reported  in  a  peer-reviewed  journal  article  and  a  Tri-Service  Technical  Report  which 
contains  all  the  details  including  tabulated  raw  data  of  individual  animals. 

Relevant  Publications 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Stuck,  B.;  Zwick,  H.;  D’Andrea,  J.A.;  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Merritt,  J.H.; 
Lutty,  G.;  McLeod,  D.  S.;  and  Johnson,  M.  [1999]:  Retinal  Effects  of  High  Peak  Power 
Microwaves  in  Rhesus  Monkeys.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  U  S.  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment,  Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment,  U.S.  Air  Force  Research 
Laboratory,  Technical  Report,  USAMRD  WRAIR  9907  006  TX,  NHRC-DET  99-01,  AFRL- 
HE-BR-TR- 1999-0231. 


9 


•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Stuck,  B.;  Zwick,  H.;  D’Andrea,  J.A.;  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Merritt,  J.H.; 
Lutty,  G.;  McLeod,  D.  S.;  and  Johnson,  M.  [2000]:  Effects  of  high  peak  power  microwaves 
on  the  retina  of  the  rhesus  monkey.  Bioelectromagnetics  2 1 :439-454. 


Neural  Effects  of  the  Extremely  High  Peak  Power  Microwaves  In  Vitro 

Numerous  experimental  studies,  as  well  as  observations  in  human,  have  indicated  that 
certain  types  of  microwave  exposure  might  be  a  risk  factor  or  a  cause  of  nervous  system 
pathologies,  including  neuropsychiatric  disorders,  asthenia,  neuropathy,  and  neurodegenerative 
diseases.  However,  mechanisms  of  neurotoxic  effect  of  microwaves  remain  unclear,  and  little  is 
known  about  the  prevention  and  therapy  of  the  microwave-induced  pathological  conditions. 

Of  particular  interests  are  new  types  of  microwave  emissions,  namely  the  extremely  high 
power  microwave  pulses  (EHPP),  which  are  produced  by  directed  energy  weapons  and  modern 
radars.  During  operation  of  EHPP  transmitters,  military  personnel  and  civilian  population  can  be 
exposed  to  sub-microsecond  pulses  emitted  at  peak  powers  of  hundreds  of  megawatts  or  even 
gigawatts.  EHPP  microwave  pulses  represent  a  new,  unknown,  and  potentially  hazardous 
environmental  factor.  This  dictates  the  need  for  detailed  research  into  biological  effects  of  EHPP 
to  identify  exposure  hazards  and  suggest  treatment  and  rehabilitation  procedure  for  EHPP- 
induced  injuries. 

Current  opinion  among  researchers  is  that  exposures  at  sufficient  high  pulse  power  will 
undoubtedly  be  very  harmful  to  cell  membranes,  cytoplasm,  and  organism  as  a  whole.  However, 
very  little  is  known  about  such  hazards.  Studying  these  EHPP  bioeffects  constitutes  a  new  area 
of  fundamental  research  with  important  implications  for  identifying  and  preventing  exposure 
hazards  in  DoD  operations.  At  present,  due  to  lack  of  scientific  data  on  EHPP  bioeffects,  safety 
guidelines  are  set  arbitrarily,  and  exposure  limits  in  different  countries  differ  by  orders  of 
magnitude.  Our  efforts  are  to  provide  critical  data  on  potential  hazards  to  the  nervous  system 
from  EHPP  exposure  and  to  form  the  basis  for  scientifically  justified  exposure  safety  guidelines. 

An  in  vitro  9.3  GHz  EHPP  exposure  system  for  small  biological  samples  was  designed, 
assembled  and  put  into  operation  in  this  laboratory.  The  system  can  provide  peak  SAR  as  high 
as  350-400  kW/g  and  fixed  pulse  duration  at  1  ps.  Recently,  the  system  was  upgraded  to  provide 
EHPP  pulses  with  2.5  times  higher  in  peak  SAR  and  variable  pulse  duration  between  0.5  and  2 
ps.  A  high-resolution  micro-dosimetry  method  based  on  microthermocouple  technique  has  been 
developed  in  this  laboratory.  It  was  used  to  determine  SAR  of  the  exposed  sample. 

Specific  biological  effect  associated  with  high  peak  power  microwaves  and  their  potential 


10 


health  hazards  are  among  the  most  debated  but  least  explored  problem  in  the  area  of  biological 
effects  of  RFR.  Initially,  pacemaker  function  in  isolated  heart  slices  was  studied.  The  study 
attempted  to  reveal  the  existence  of  specific  effects  of  high  peak  power  microwaves. 

Comparison  was  made  between  effects  of  EHPP  train  (1  p.s  pulse  duration,  250-350  kW/g,  9.2 
GHz)  and  of  relative  low  power  pulse  (LPP,  0.5-10  ps  pulse  duration,  3-30  W/g,  9.2  GHz)  of 
equal  average  SAR.  Results  indicated  that  the  inter-beat  interval  was  decreased  immediately  by 
a  single  LPP  or  EHPP  train  in  most  cases.  The  effect  was  proportional  to  microwave  heating, 
fully  reversible,  and  easily  reproducible.  The  magnitude  and  time  course  of  EHPP  and  LPP- 
induced  tachycardiac  effects  were  always  the  same.  Delayed  and  irreversible  effects  were  not 
observed.  The  same  tachycardiac  effect  could  be  repeated  in  a  single  preparation  numerous 
times  with  no  sign  of  adaptation,  sensitization,  long  lasting  functional  alteration,  or  damage.  A 
temporary  arrest  of  pacemaker  beating  could  be  observed  when  microwave  heating  exceeded 
limits  of  physiological  tolerance.  This  effect  also  did  not  depend  on  whether  the  critical 
temperature  rise  was  produced  by  LPP  or  EHPP  exposure.  Therefore,  it  is  concluded  that  no 
indications  of  EHPP  specific  effect  on  isolated  frog  heart  slices  was  found  within  the  study 
limits. 


Extracellular  population  spikes  of  CA1  area  of  rat  hippocampal  slices  were  used  to  reveal 
possible  modulation-specific  effect  of  RFR  on  the  neuron  circuitry  function.  The  brain  slices 
were  exposed  to  9.2  GHz  microwaves  in  a  custom-made  chamber  filled  with  artificial 
cerebrospinal  fluid  at  35.5  °C.  Stratum  radiatum  area  of  the  slice  was  stimulated  with  a  bipolar 
tungsten  electrode  at  30  s  intervals,  and  population  spikes  (PS)  were  recorded  with  a  glass 
electrode.  Experiments  began  after  30-  to  60-min  stabilization.  Each  experiment  included 
recording  of  the  PS  amplitude  for  5  min  before,  5  min  during  and  10  min  after  exposure.  Each 
slice  could  be  exposed  up  to  three  times;  various  regimens  of  RFR  and  sham  exposures  were 
alternated  in  random.  The  interval  between  sequential  exposures  was  more  than  15  min.  Data 
for  each  exposure  were  analyzed  as  an  independent  experiment.  In  the  first  series  of 
experiments,  the  modulation  frequency  was  fixed  at  16  Hz;  the  average  SAR,  peak  SAR,  and 
pulse  duration  were  0.06  -  7.2  W/g,  2.4  -  14.4  W/g  and  1 .55  to  3 1  ms,  respectively.  In  the 
second  series,  pulsed  or  CW  exposures  were  performed  at  the  average  SAR  of  2.4  W/g. 
Repetition  rates  were  10,  100  and  1,000  Hz,  while  the  peak  SAR  and  duty  cycle  were  kept 
constant,  i.e.,  12  W/g  and  0.02.  In  the  third  series,  CW  and  10-Hz  exposure  regimens  from  the 
second  series  were  repeated  in  order  to  validate  a  potential  modulation-dependent  RFR  effect. 

In  all  series,  RFR-induced  heating  was  directly  proportional  to  the  average  SAR,  up  to  4 
°C  at  7.2  W/kg.  These  experiments  established  that  various  exposure  regimens  did  not  cause 
reproducible  and  statistically  significant  effect  on  the  PS  if  the  temperature  during  exposure  did 
not  exceed  36.5  °C.  If  the  average  SAR  was  high  enough  to  exceed  this  temperature  limit, 
irradiation  caused  decrease  in  PS  amplitude.  This  effect  was  proportional  to  the  average  SAR 
and  heating.  Modulation  frequency,  peak  power  and  duty  cycle  appeared  to  be  of  no 


II 


significance.  Within  the  study  limits,  all  proven  effects  could  be  adequately  explained  by 
microwave  heating. 


Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation 

•  Pakhmov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Belt,  M.;  and  Murphy,  M  R.  [1999]:  Dose  dependencies  in 
bioeffects  of  extremely  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  In:  “Electromagnetic  Fields: 
Biological  Effects  and  Hygienic  Standardization,  (Proceedings  of  the  International  Meeting, 
may  18-22,  1998,  Moscow,  Russia)”  Repacholi,  M.H.;  Rubtsova,  N.B.;  and  Muc,  A.M.,  eds., 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  World  Health  Orgnaization,  pp.  325-334. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  In:  “Digest  of  Technical  Papers,  12th  IEEE  International  Pulsed  Power 
Conference,”  pp.  23-28. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  The  role  of  peak  and 
average  power  in  microwave  bioeffects  in  excitable  tissue  models.  In:  “Electromagnetic 
Fields  and  Human  Health,  Proceedings  of  the  Second  International  Conference  on  Problems 
of  Electromagnetic  Safety  and  Human  Health  (Sept  20-24,  1999,  Moscow,  Russia),  p.  330. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  First  International  Symposium  on  Nonthermal 
Medical/Biological  Treatments  Using  Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Ionized  Gases,”  p.21. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Search  for 
specific  physiological  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses.  In:  “Abstracts  of 
21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp.  200-201. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  [2000]:  High- 
resolution  microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  In:  “Radio  Frequency  Radiation 
Dosimetry,”  Klauenber,  B.J.,  and  Miklavcic,  D.  (ed.s.),  Netherlands,  Kluwer  Academic 
Publishers,  pp.  187-197. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Doyle,  J.;  Stuck,  B.E.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2000]: 
Comparative  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  and  a  brief  CW  irradiation 
on  pacemaker  function  in  isolated  frog  heart  slices.  Bioelectromagnetics  21  (4):  245-254. 


12 


•  Pakhomov,  A.;  and  Doyle,  J.  [2000]:  Effect  of  pulsed  microwaves  on  the  population  spike  in 
rat  hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Millennium  International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of 
Electromagnetic  Fields  Proceedings,”  Kostarakis,  P.;  and  Starvroulakis,  P.  (ed.),  pp.  480-485 
(ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  and  Mathur,  S.P.  [2000]:  Combined  effect  of  pulsed  microwaves 
and  glutamate  superfusion  on  the  population  spike  in  rat  hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Abstracts 
of  the  22nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp. 262-263. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Doyle,  J.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Murphy,  MR.  [2001]:  Retaining  of  the  long¬ 
term  potentiation  in  hipocampal  slices  after  high  peak  power  microwave  exposure  and 
heating.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  Second  International  Symposium  on  Nonthermal 
Medical/Biological  Treatments  Using  Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Ionized  Gases,”  May  21- 
23,  2001. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Doyle,  J.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2001]:  Effects  of  extremely  high 
power  microwave  pulses  on  the  population  spike  and  long-term  potentiation  in  rat 
hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  23rd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society,”  June  10-14,  2001. 


In  Vitro  Effect  of  Extremely  High  Peak  Power  Pulses  on  Cell  growth 

Exploring  the  dependence  of  a  microwave  bioeffect  on  SAR  is  a  laborious  process. 
Numerous  experiments  are  needed  to  collect  biological  data  after  exposure  at  different  SARs.  A 
new  technique  has  been  designed  to  explore  the  SAR  dependence  of  bioeffects  in  a  single 
experiment.  The  technique  utilizes  the  principle  that  SAR  decreases  exponentially  with  the 
distance  from  the  surface.  For  example,  SAR  falls  about  2  fold  for  every  mm  in  agarose 
solidified  cell  culture  medium  and  in  20  mm  falls  more  than  million  folds  (220).  Agarose 
solidification  prevents  cell  movements,  mixing  or  settling  during  the  exposure.  Therefore, 
agarose  gel-suspended  cells  can  be  exposed  to  a  continuous  spectrum  of  SARs  in  one  exposure. 
After  the  exposure,  dependence  of  microwave  effect  of  SAR  in  exposed  cells  can  be  studied 
using  available  biological  assays. 

A  system  utilizes  9.3  GFIz  CW  (1.3  W)  and  pulsed  microwaves  (0.5  ps  width,  250-270 
kW  peak  10  Hz  repetition  rate)  was  designed.  The  pulsed  microwave  was  transmitted  in  a 
WR930  waveguide  terminated  via  a  sapphire  matching  plate  into  a  custom-made  exposure 
chamber.  The  chamber  had  a  water  jacket  and  was  stabilized  initially  at  25  °C  by  circulating 
water  from  a  water  bath.  One  exposure  and  one  control  chamber  were  used.  Agarose  gels 
containing  yeast  (Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  BY4741)  at  2  x  106  cells/ml  in  YPD  medium  were 


13 


prepared  in  two  plastic  cuvettes  (10  x  10  x  35  mm).  The  cuvettes  were  put  in  the  exposure  and 
control  chambers  and  submerged  into  YPD  broth.  After  6  hour  exposure,  the  exposed  and 
control  gels  were  sliced  into  2-mm  thick  pieces  in  a  plane  perpendicular  to  the  gel  axis.  The  cell 
density  in  the  slices  was  measured  by  nephelometry  and  expressed  as  the  optical  density  (OD)  at 
600  nm.  Changes  in  cell  density  was  expressed  as  percentage  changes  in  OD  in  relation  to  the 
average  OD  of  slices  from  concurrent  control 

Local  SAR  values  were  calculated  by  analytical  formula,  by  FDTD  numerical  simulation 
and  also  measured  by  microthermocouple  technique.  Along  the  gel  long  axis,  the  time-average 
SAR  ranged  from  2  W/g  at  1  mm  from  the  matching  plate  to  1  pW/g  at  23  mm  for  both  CW  and 
pulsed  exposure.  The  corresponding  peak  SAR  was  390  kW/g  at  1mm  and  0.25  W/kg  at  23  mm. 

Both  CW  and  pulsed  irradiation  for  6  hours  induced  significant  temperature  increases  in 
the  entire  gel,  with  high  at  40.7  °C  and  low  at  27.5  °C.  Eight  CW  and  eight  pulsed  experiments 
were  performed.  Post-exposure  OD  ranged  from  95  to  210  %  of  the  control.  The  changes  in  OD 
correlated  well  with  the  temperature  profile.  The  optimal  temperature  for  yeast  growth  (34-35 
°C)  in  the  4th  slice  correlated  with  highest  OD  (200-210  %).  Slower  growth  at  both  higher 
(closer  to  the  matching  plate,  1  mm:  95-110  %)  and  lower  temperature  (away  from  the  matching 
plate,  decreased  to  160  %  in  4  slices)  resulted  in  a  lower  OD  or  growth. 

While  pulsed  and  CW  exposures  produced  exactly  the  same  heating,  an  unusual  OD 
variation  in  the  1st  slice  between  CW  (1 10.2  ±  3.3  %)  and  pulsed  (96. 1  ±  7.6  %)  exposures  (mean 
+  S.E.)  was  noted.  Due  to  large  variability  in  OD,  the  difference  was  not  statistically  significant 

(p<0.1). 

In  summary,  the  use  of  gel-suspended  cell  culture  proved  to  be  a  reliable  and  highly 
efficient  technique.  Current  results  are  indicative  of  a  specific  effect  of  extremely  high  peak 
power  pulses  at  peak  power  higher  than  20-30  kW/g.  To  confirm  the  existence  of  this  specific 
peak  power  effect,  optimization  of  assay  sensitivity  or  exposure  configuration  to  increase  spatial 
resolution  along  the  long  axis  of  gel  will  be  needed. 


Relevant  Publication  /  presentation 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Mathur,  S.,  Gajsek,  P.,  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2001]:  Use  of  gel-suspended 
cell  cultures  for  analysis  of  dose  dependence  of  microwave  bioeffects.  Abstract  submitted  to 
the  5th  International  Congress  of  the  European  BioElectromagnetics  Association  (EBEA), 
September  6-8,  2001. 


14 


Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Gajsek,  P.;  Allen,  L.;  Stuck,  B  E.;  and  Murphy,  M  R.  [2001]:  Comparison 
of  dose  dependences  for  bioeffects  of  continuous-wave  and  high-peak  power  microwave 
emission  using  gel-suspended  cell  cultures.  Bioelectromagnetics  (pending). 


Neurotoxic  Effects  of  Radio  Frequency  Radiation 

Evaluation  of  neurotoxic  effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  can  be  approach  in  two 
ways:  RFR  as  a  neurotoxin  by  itself  and  the  permissible  role  of  RFR  in  modifying  (synergism) 
toxic  effects  of  other  neurotoxins.  A  number  of  studies  have  demonstrated  that  low-intensity 
millimeter  waves  (MMW)  can  affect  the  function  of  membrane  and  excitable  tissues.  These 
effects  include  activation  of  Ca++  pump  in  sarcoplasmic  reticulum  of  skeletal  and  heart  muscles, 
modified  the  activation  characteristics  of  Ca++-activated  K+  channel,  suppression  or  facilitated 
transmembrane  chloride  current,  altered  action  potential  conduction  in  isolated  nerves  and 
cardiac  pacemaker  activity.  A  study  was  initiated  to  search  for  MMW  effect  on  key  processes  of 
inter-neuronal  interaction  on  mono-  and  poly-synaptic  transmission  in  the  central  nervous  system 
to  further  characterize  the  nature  of  RFR  effect  on  neural  transmission. 

Isolated  preparation  of  amphibian  spinal  cord  was  used  as  a  model  because  this 
preparation  offers  a  unique  combination  of  features  that  are  essential  for  electrophysiological 
studies  in  electromagnetic  fields.  It  is  particularly  important  that  the  afferent  input  and  the 
efferent  out  of  the  spinal  cord  are  anatomically  separated  (dorsal  and  ventral  roots,  respectively). 
For  synaptic  processes,  recording  and  stimulating  electrodes  can  be  attached  to  distal  ends  of 
roots,  at  distance  from  the  cord  itself.  Hence,  when  the  cord  is  exposed  to  RFR,  the  electrodes 
can  be  shielded  from  the  radiation,  thus  removing  artifacts  resulting  from  electrodes  in  the 
electromagnetic  fields.  It  has  been  established  in  this  laboratory  in  isolated  nerve  preparation 
that  the  RFR  effect  depended  on  frequency  rather  than  on  the  intensity.  Within  the  study  limits 
of  MMW,  41.34  GHz  was  the  most  effective  RFR.  A  100  MHz  deviation  to  either  direction 
decreased  the  effect  twofold,  and  a  200  MHz  deviation  eliminated  the  effect.  Therefore,  in  the 
present  study,  a  constant  frequency  of  41.34  GH,  or  various  frequencies  within  41.1-42.4  GHz 
band. 


Current  results  revealed  that  MMW  irradiation  at  the  incident  power  density  of  up  to  3 
mW/cm2  produced  either  a  minor  or  no  effect  on  synaptic  transmission  in  the  frog  spinal  cord. 
When  present,  the  MMW  effect  appears  as  mild  modulation  of  synaptic  transmission,  not  as 
suppression  or  facilitation.  MMW  sensitivity  appeared  to  vary  between  individual  preparations 


15 


and/or  depended  on  some  uncontrolled  and  unidentified  factors.  Results  of  this  study  did  not 
support  the  hypothesis  that  synaptic  transmission  is  a  target  for  MMW  bioeffects.  There  are  still 
additional  synaptic  processes  (pre-  and  post-synaptic  inhibition,  gap  junction  transmission, 
modifiability  phenomena,  etc.)  that  have  never  been  studied  in  experiments  with  MMW 
radiation.  Further  studies  are  needed  to  fully  resolve  the  issues  of  MMW  effects  on  synaptic 
processes  of  central  nervous  system. 

Military  personnel  can  be  subjected  to  a  variety  of  environment  factors  in  the 
performance  of  duties.  These  environmental  factors  include  toxic  chemical  compounds  used  as 
pesticides,  herbicides  or  nerve  agents.  Radio  frequency  radiation  is  an  additional  environmental 
factor  that  is  used  extensively  in  military  operations,  such  as  communication,  terrain  navigation, 
detection  and  tracking,  fire  control,  jamming,  interruption  and  killing  of  enemy  electronic 
devices.  It  can  be  said  that  modern  battlefield  maneuvers  will  not  be  effective  without  the  use  of 
RFR.  With  sufficient  intensities,  RFR  can  cause  physiological  stress,  psychological  stress  and 
physical  trauma.  Chemical  exposure,  hypoxic  condition,  physical  exertion  and  loss  of  blood  can 
result  in  tissue  that  increase  the  susceptibility  or  severity  to  RFR  injury  or  vise  versa.  Warfighers 
can  encounter  more  than  one  of  these  environmental  factors  at  the  same  time.  Through 
synergistic  actions,  these  environmental  factors  can  interact  with  each  other  concurrently  to 
aggravate  neuronal  injuries  beyond  the  extent  caused  by  each  individual  factor.  The  possibility 
of  interaction  among  these  environmental  factors  cannot  be  ignored. 

Common  mechanism  involved  in  various  types  of  cell  injury  are  production  of  reactive 
oxygen  species  (oxidative  stress),  free  radicals,  and  nitric  oxide,  increased  intracellular  calcium, 
and  membrane  depolarization  through  NMDA  glutamate  receptors  (excitotoxicity).  RFR  is  also 
known  to  cause  oxidative  stress,  free  radical  production,  and  decreased  cellular  metabolism. 
Neurotoxic  injuries  can  also  be  enhanced  indirectly  by  hypoxia  caused  by  chemical  exposure, 
hypoxic  conditions,  physical  exertion,  and  loss  of  blood.  Under  certain  conditions,  RFR  can 
compromise  circulatory  efficiency  in  cardiac  output  through  decrease  in  heart  rate  and  pulse 
pressure  and  by  a  decrease  in  blood  (tissue  perfusion)  pressure. 

A  neurodegenerative  model  in  rats  was  achieved  by  3-nitropropionic  acid  (3-NP) 
administration  (2  daily  10  mg/kg  injections)  to  initial  the  processes  of  hypoxia,  exitotoxicity  and 
oxidative  stress.  One  hour  after  the  last  3-NP  injection,  two  pulsed  microwave  “doses”  (1.25 
GHz,  5.9  ps,  10  Hz),  0.6  and  6  W/kg  were  used  to  evaluate  the  interaction  between  neurotoxin 
and  RFR.  Endpoints  are  spontaneous  activity,  prepulse  inhibition  of  acoustic  startle),  brain 
histology  and  ultrastructure  of  the  caudate  putamen. 


16 


Interaction  between  RFR  and  3-NP  appears  to  be  a  complex  function  of  time  and  RFR 
specific  absorption  rate.  Spontaneous  activity  was  lower  by  3-NP  at  3.5  hours  after  the  last 
injection,  but  microwave  exposure  had  no  effect.  Interaction  between  3-NP  and  microwave  on 
the  spontaneous  activity  was  not  significant.  Spontaneous  activity  decreased  at  1,2,  and  3  weeks 
after  exposure  independent  of  treatments,  3-NP  and  microwave  or  interaction  between 
treatments.  Habituation  appears  to  be  the  main  cause.  Histological  examination  of  brain,  liver, 
heart,  and  lung  at  second  day  and  4-5  weeks  after  treatment  showed  no  pathological  evidence  of 
microwave  or  3-NP  induced  injuries. 

Alterations  in  prepulse  inhibition  of  acoustic  startle  and  ultrastructure  of  neurons  at 
caudate  putamen  were  found.  Shortly  (3.5  hours)  after  administration,  3-NP  appeared  to  offset 
the  effect  of  6  W/kg  microwave  exposure  on  prepulse  inhibition  of  acoustic  startle.  On  the  other 
hand,  a  synergistic  effect  on  prepulse  inhibition  of  acoustic  startle  was  noted  between  3-NP  and 
0.6  W/kg  microwave  exposure.  Increased  intracisternal  width  of  rough  endoplasmic  reticulum 
and  the  thickening  of  nuclear  envelope  were  the  ultrastructural  alterations  of  neurons  at  the 
caudate  putamen.  Both  alterations  could  be  induced  by  3-NP  and  6  W/kg  but  not  the  0.6  W/kg 
microwave  exposure.  A  possible  synergistic  effect  between  3-NP  and  6  W/kg  microwave 
exposure  was  noted.  At  3  weeks  after  exposure,  reduction  in  prepulse  inhibition  was  prevented 
in  animals  received  3-NP  and  0.6  or  6  W/kg  microwave  exposure.  Ultrastructure  of  neurons  at 
caudate  putamen  is  presently  in  progress. 

Additional  RFR  neuotroxicity  testing  was  tested  in  rats.  Y-maze  was  used  to  evaluate 
memory  consolidation  as  an  endpoint.  The  RFR  exposure  in  a  circularly  polarized  waveguide 
exposure  system  was  2.45  GHz  continuous  wave  (CW)  microwave  at  0,  0.39,  3.85  and  6.37 
W/kg  for  30  minutes.  Twenty-four  hours  after  exposure,  Y-maze  performance  was  evaluated. 
The  increased  number  of  errors  made  by  rats  during  Y-maze  test  was  equivocal  with  possible 
increased  number  of  errors  in  rats  exposed  at  3.85  W/kg  but  not  at  0.39  and  6.37  W/kg.  On  the 
other  hand,  the  average  time  per  arm  entry  during  Y-maze  test  decreased  significantly  in  a 
“dose”  related  fashion.  Decrease  time  per  arm  entry  can  be  interpreted  as  a  decrease  in 
cautiousness  or  an  increase  in  boldness  of  rats’  behavior  after  exposure  to  RFR.  These  effects 
should  be  further  explored. 

Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation 

•  Akyel,  Y.;  Lu,  S-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Doyle,  J.  [1999]:  Dose-response  Characteristics  of 
Microwave-induced  Disturbance  on  foraging  patterns  in  rats.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  21st 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp.  24-25. 


17 


•  Brewer,  P.A.,  Mery,  L.R.,  Phelix,  C.F.,  and  Seaman,  R.L.  [2001]:  Monoamine  oxidase 
inhibition  enhances  ultrastructural  changes  in  rat  striatal  neurons  after  single  systemic 
injection  of  3-nitropropionic  acid.  Abstract  submitted  to  the  3 1st  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Society  for  Neuroscience,  November  10-15,  2001. 

•  Mery,  L.R.;  Phelix,  C.F.;  Wayner,  M.J.;  and  Seaman,  R.L.  [2000]:  Ultrastructure  changes  in 
rat  striatal  neurons  after  single  systemic  injection  of  3-nitropropionic  acid.  In:  “Abstracts  of 
30th  Annual  Meeting  of  Society  for  Neuroscience  Meeting,”  p.  1876. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Prol,  H.K.l  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [1999]:  Search  for  the  effect  of 
millimeter  waves  on  synaptic  processes  in  the  central  nervous  system.  In:  “Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,”  Bersani,  F.  ed.,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers, 
pp.  971-974. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  and  Wohlfeld,  B.J.  [1999]:  Activity  and  acoustic  startle  prepulse  inhibition  3-4 
hr  after  3-nitropropionic  acid  injection.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  1999  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Experimental  Biology  Society.” 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Phelix,  C.F.;  Bruno,  J.G.;  Kalns,  J.E.;  Dick,  E.J.Jr.;  Wohlfeld,  B.J.;  and  Kiel, 
J.L.  [1999]:  Exploration  of  a  neurodegeneration  model  for  use  in  microwave  studies.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp.  209-210. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Belt,  M  L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  and  Mathur,  S.P  [1999]:  Hyperactivity  caused  by  a 
nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor  is  countered  by  ultra-wideband  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics. 
20:431-439. 

•  Seaman,  R.  [2000]:  Effects  of  acute  systemic  3-nitropropionic  acid  administration  on  rat 
activity  and  acoustic  startle.  Neuroscience  Letters  280:183-186. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Dick,  E.  JJr.;  and  Gonzalez,  M.Y.  [2000]:  Effects  of  microwave 
exposure  and  3-nitropropionic  acid  on  rat  activity,  acoustic  startle,  and  brian  histology.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  22nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  p.  285-286. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Dick,  E.J.Jr.  [2001]:  Effects  of  pulsed  microwaves  and 
toxin-induced  hypoxia  on  rat  motor  activity,  acoustic  startle,  and  brain  histology. 
Bioelectromagnetics  (Pending). 

•  Seaman,  R.L.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Phinney,  A.M.,  and  Harris,  N.R.  [2001]:  Interaction  between  a 
neurotoxin  and  pulsed  microwaves.  In:  Abstracts  of  23rd  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  June  10-14,  2001. 


18 


•  Seaman,  R.L.,  and  Phelix,  C.F.  [2001]:  Changes  in  ultrastructure  of  rat  caudate-putamen 
neurons  with  a  neurotoxin  and  exposure  to  pulsed  microwaves.  Abstract  submitted  to  5th 
International  Congress  of  the  European  BioElectromagnetics  Association  (EBEA), 
September  6-8,  2001. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.,  and  Phelix,  C.F.  [2001]:  Acute  changes  in  rat  caudate-putamen  neuronal 
ultrastructure  due  to  3-nitropropionic  acid  and  microwave  exposure  are  not  reflected  in 
behavior.  Abstract  submitted  to  the  3 1st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Society  for  Neuroscience, 
November  10-15,  2001. 


19 


BIOLOGICAL  HAZARDS  OF  ULTRA  WIDE  BAND  (UWB)  RADIATION 
ON  CARDIOVASCULAR  SYSTEM  AND  OTHER  CELLULAR  SYSTEMS 

Cardiovascular  Effects 

The  aim  of  this  research  is  to  evaluate  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  Ultra- Wide-B  and 
(UWB)  pulses,  a  new  modality  in  radar  technology.  Additional  studies  has  been  performed 
since  the  initial  finding  of  an  UWB-induced  delayed  hypotension  (decrease  in  arterial  blood 
pressure)  [Lu  et  al.  1999b,  1999c],  Dose-response  characteristics  were  clearly  evident.  Delayed 
hypotension  could  be  induced  by  a  6  minutes  exposure  to  1  ns  UWB  pulses  at  85  to  95  kV/m 
peak  electric  fields.  Hypotension  could  be  induced  at  1,000  Hz  (1.89  mW/cm2,  0.12  W/kg 
average)  and  500  Hz  (1.06  mW/cm2,  0.065  W/kg  average)  but  not  at  250  Hz  (0.61  mW/cm2, 
0.038  W/kg  average)  and  125  Hz  (0.28  mW/cm2,  0.017  W/kg).  Figure  1,  2,  and  3  showed  the 
delayed  development  of  this  UWB-induced  hypotension  and  its  dose  response  characteristics. 
Surprisingly,  the  heart  rate  did  not  change  significantly  due  to  its  larger  variations  (Fig.  4). 

Several  important  features  of  this  UWB-induced  hypotension  deserve  attention.  They 

were: 

•  Delay  and  persistent  nature  of  the  effect  indicated  that  it  is  not  an  immediate 
physiological  adjustment  to  the  exposure, 

•  Threshold  (0.065-0. 12  W/kg)  is  at  or  below  the  current  personnel  protection 
guidelines  specified  as  peak  electric  filed  (100  kV/m)  or  specific  absorption  rate  (0.4 
W/kg  in  a  controlled  environment  and  0.08  W/kg  in  an  uncontrolled  environment), 

•  The  effect  is  not  thermal  in  nature  since  the  estimated  core  body  temperature  was  less 
than  0.012  °C,  and 

•  The  effect  may  have  health  implications  such  as  headache,  fainting,  fatigue  and 
decreased  performance  or  a  novel  therapeutic  modality  for  hypertension  if  associated 
symptoms  with  hypotension  are  absent  or  minimal. 

Apparently,  the  hypotensive  effect  did  not  occur  as  a  result  of  exposure  to  a  narrow-band 
(2.45  GHz)  continuous  wave  (CW)  exposure  at  higher  “doses”,  30  minutes  exposure  to  0.21, 
3.20,  and  6.59  W/kg  [Lu  et  al .,  2000a,  2000b],  Twenty-four  hours  after  treatment,  these  CW 
exposures  did  not  cause  a  degradation  in  physical  endurance  under  a  high  threat  and  highly 
motivated  testing  protocol  [Lu  et  al.  2000a,  2000b] .  Decreased  performance  due  to  hypotension 
cannot  be  resolved  since  endurance  was  not  tested  at  2  weeks  after  exposure  and  also  due  to  an 
absence  of  induced  hypotension.  Further  research  is  needed  to  resolve  the  role  of  UWB-induced 
hypotension  on  physical  endurance. 


20 


A  double  blind,  abbreviated  replication  study  was  subsequently  performed.  Data  analysis 
is  completed.  The  following  plots  (Fig.  5,  6,  7  and  8)  include  results  from  the  original  series  (left 
panel)  and  from  the  replication  study  (right  panel).  Baseline  drift  prevented  a  complete  success 
in  replication.  Holder  acclimation  in  the  replication  study  appeared  to  be  inadequate.  This  was 
clearly  shown  in  the  baseline  systolic  pressures  between  two  series.  In  the  replication  study,  rats 
showed  significant  reduction  in  systolic  pressure  from  those  of  sham-exposed  rats  in  Faraday 
cage  (controls)  at  0.3  hr  and  2  weeks  after  exposure.  Reduction  in  mean  arterial  pressure  was 
observed  at  0.3  hr  after  exposure.  Changes  in  diastolic  pressure  was  inconclusive  because  a  low 
baseline.  Decreases  in  heart  rate  at  0.3  hr  after  UWB  exposure  appeared  to  be  contributed  by 
increased  heart  rate  in  rats  exposed  in  Faraday  cage  (controls).  Overall,  rats  exposed  to  UWB 
appeared  to  maintain  a  lower  blood  pressure.  It  was  also  apparent  that  the  time  points  selected  in 
the  replication  study  were  biased  toward  no  effect,  i.e.,  effect  was  expected  at  only  one  (2  weeks 
post  exposure)  of  the  four  time  points.  A  more  balanced  design  and  resolving  baseline  drift  are 
essential  in  future  studies. 


Figure  5.  Systolic  Pressure  of  Rats  in  the  Replicate  Study 


23 


RE  (mm  Hg) 


380 
370 
360  - 


SHAM  (15),  ORIGINAL  STUDY 
m  500  Hz  (10),  ORIGINAL  STUDY 

1  FILED  SHAM  (14),  REPLICATION  STUDY 
500  Hz  (14),  REPLICATION  STUDY 


v  P<  0.05 


TREATMENT,  F(1  e4)=  7.82;  P<  0.01 
TIME,  Fp84)=  5.81;  P<  0.01 
INTERACTION,  F{23<04)=  0.94;  N.S. 


os#  r^> 


Figure  8.  Heart  Rate  of  Rats  in  the  Replicate  Study 


Relevant  Publication  /  presentation 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Mathur,  S.P.  [1999a]:  A  potential  low  dose  2.45  GHz  CW-induced 
Hypotension  in  Rats.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society”,  pp.  122-123. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Lee,  J.C.  [1999b]:  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic 
pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol.  Behav.  65(4/5):  753-761. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Lee,  J.C.  [1999c]:  Erratum:  Ultra-wideband 
electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol.  Behav.  67(3):  463. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [2000a]:  Absence  of  effects  of  2.45  GHz  microwaves 
on  physical  endurance,  motivational  levels  and  cardiovascular  functions.  In:  “Millennium 
International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields  Proceedings”, 
Kostarakis,  P.;  and  Stavroulakis,  P.  (eds.),  pp.  491-496  (ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [2000b]:  Effects  of  2.45  GHz  CW  microwave  on 
physical  endurance  and  motivational  levels  in  rats.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  22nd  Annual  Meeting 
of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  p.281. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.  [2001]:  Potential  application  of  UWB  pulses  in  lowering  blood  pressure.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  the  2001  Asia-Pacific  Radio  Science  Conference”,  August  1-4,  2001. 


25 


Genotoxic  Effect  of  UWB  Pulses 


A  widely  accepted  in  vivo  test  system,  rodent  micronuclei  assay,  for  detecting  genotoxic 
agents  was  used  to  assess  the  genotoxic  potential  of  the  UWB  pulses.  CF-1  mice  were  exposed 
for  15  minutes  to  600  Hz  UWB  pulses  at  91-103  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  0.92-0.97  ns 
pulse  duration  and  147-166  ps  rise  time.  The  presence  of  micronuclei  in  polychromatic 
erythrocytes  in  bone  marrow  and  peripheral  blood  was  determined  at  1 8  and  24  hours  after 
exposure.  In  addition,  positive  controls  were  used.  As  a  positive  control,  mice  were  injected 
intraperitoneally  with  mytomycin  C  (1  mg/kg  body  weight)  18  and  24  hours  before  sacrifice  for 
determination  of  the  presence  of  micronuclei  in  the  bone  marrow  and  peripheral  blood. 

Decreased  polychromatic  erythrocyte  and  increased  presence  of  micronuclei  were  noted  in 
mytomycin  positive  control.  However,  there  is  no  evidence  for  excess  genotoxicity  in  peripheral 
blood  or  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  under  the  present  experimental 
condition. 

Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation 

•  Vijayalaxmi,  Seaman,  R.L;  Belt,  M  L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Prihode,  T.J  [1999]: 
Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  Radiation.  Int.  J.  Radiat.  Biol.  75(1):  1 15-120. 

•  Vijayalaxmi;  and  Seaman.  R.L.  [1999]:  Micronuclei  in  the  peripheral  blood  and  bone 
marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation.  In:  “Abstracts  of 
the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  p.  214. 


Interaction  Between  Nitric  Oxide  Synthase  Inhibitor 
and  Exposure  to  UWB  Pulses 

In  a  past  study  on  the  effects  of  UWB  pulses  (600  Hz,  105  kV/m  peak  electric  field 
intensity,  165  ps  rise  time,  0.97  ns  pulse  duration)  in  CF-1  mice,  it  was  found  that  15,  30  and  45 
min  exposures  tend  to  increase  morphine-induced  analgesia  and  hypoactivity.  Nitric  oxide  is 
involved  in  normal  nociception.  Nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor  such  as  N°-nitro-L-arginine 
methyl  ester  (L-NAME)  is  known  to  enhanced  opioid  induced  analgesia  and  hypoactivity.  Thus, 
nitric  oxide  has  been  implied  in  modulation  of  the  opioid-induced  analgesia  and  locomotion.  It 
was  hypothesized  that  subtle  effects  of  UWB  pulses  could  change  the  effects  of  L-NAME  on 
nociception  and  motor  activity. 


26 


The  hypothesis  was  tested  in  CF-1  mice  injected  with  50  mg/kg  L-NMAE  and  subjected 
to  30  min  UWB  exposure.  The  pulse  parameters  were  102  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity, 
160  ps  rise  time,  0.90  ns  pulse  width  and  600  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate.  The  estimated  whole- 
body  averaged  specific  absorption  rate  was  0.037  W/kg.  Animals  were  tested  for  thermal 
nociception  response  on  the  surface  maintained  at  50  °C  and  for  spontaneous  locomotor  activity 
for  5  min.  As  expected,  L-NAME  increased  spontaneous  locomotor  activity  and  nociception 
threshold  indicated  by  lengthening  of  the  response  latencies.  The  L-NAME  induced 
hyperactivity  was  absent  after  UWB  exposure.  The  UWB  exposure  had  no  effect  on  increased 
nociception  threshold  induced  by  L-NAME.  Reduction  and  cancellation  of  effect  of  L-NAME 
on  spontaneous  locomotor  activity  suggests  activation  of  counteracting  mechanism  by  the  UWB 
pulses.  The  possible  mechanism  includes  increase  of  nitric  oxide  production  by  nitric  oxide 
synthase. 

Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Belt,  M.L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  and  Mathur,  S.P.  [1999]:  Hyperactivity  caused  by  a 
nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor  is  countered  by  ultr-wideband  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics  20 
431-439. 


27 


FINITE  DIFFERENCE  TIME  DOMAIN  (FDTD)  TECHNIQUES 
TO  PERFORM  DOSIMETRY  IN  BIOLOGICAL  TISSUES 
FOR  HIGH  PEAK  POWER  RFR  AND  UWB  EXPOSURES 


Due  to  its  short  pulse  duration  and  short  duty  cycle,  Ultra-Wide-Band  (UWB)  dosimetry 
in  biological  tissues  creates  a  unique  problem  in  the  radio  frequency  radiation  bioeffect  research. 
In  comparison  to  studies  using  narrow-band  RFR,  the  averaged  exposure  intensity  of  the  UWB  is 
relatively  low,  frequently  in  the  range  of  less  than  2  mW/cm2.  Conventional  indirect  dosimetry 
methods,  such  as  thermometry  and  calorimetry  lack  the  sensitivity  to  determine  specific 
absorption  rate.  Lack  of  appropriate  tissue  electric  field  measuring  device  prevents  investigators 
from  measuring  the  internal  E-field.  A  method  of  estimating  SAR  from  UWB  pulses  has  been 
devised  from  the  integration  of  the  entire  power  spectrum  of  the  UWB  pulse  and  the  SAR 
spectrum  of  an  appropriate  spheroid.  However,  validity  of  the  estimation  procedure  has  not  been 
verified.  Mathematical  modeling  can  be  used  to  estimate  the  field  experienced  by  an  object. 
Knowing  the  electrical  properties  of  the  object  being  tested,  one  can  then  estimated  the  SAR 
experienced  by  the  object.  The  finite  difference  time  domain  (FDTD)  method  is  widely  used  in 
tissue  dosimetry  of  RFR.  However  there  is  very  little  experimental  data  to  validate  FDTD 
modeling  results. 

The  electromagnetic  interaction  produced  inside  a  Gigahertz  Transverse  Electromagnetic 
Cell  (GTEM),  the  UWB  exposure  system  currently  in  use  for  biological  effects  of  UWB  pulses, 
can  be  analyzed  using  numerical  modeling  methods.  Although  the  field  characteristics  can  be 
measured  in  an  empty  GTEM  cell,  once  an  object  is  placed  in  the  GTEM  cell,  the  field  is 
disturbed  and  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  know  or  even  measure  the  field  experienced  by  the  object. 
Similar  validation  for  application  of  the  FDTD  modeling  is  also  required. 

A  general  mathematical  model  that  can  be  used  to  estimate  the  electrical  field  in  a  large 
class  of  TEM  cells  is  developed.  An  excitation  plane  was  used  to  simulate  the  input  to  the 
GTEM  cell  and  FDTD  method  was  then  used  to  calculate  the  field  anywhere  and  anytime  inside 
the  cell.  This  is  first  documented  use  of  FDTD  to  model  an  UWB  exposure  system.  The  model 
was  tested  on  the  simple  (square)  NBC  cell  and  on  a  flared  GTEM  cell.  The  results  have  been 
acceptable  in  all  cases.  The  effort  has  laid  the  foundation  for  further  research.  Future 
improvements  to  the  modeling  of  relative  small  objects  placed  in  the  cell.  When  accomplished, 
the  method  will  have  increased  the  scope  and  capability  of  electromagnetic  compatibility  and 
dosimetry  research. 

Empirical  methods  for  characterizing  absorption  of  RFR  in  biological  specimen  have 
limits  and  require  considerable  expertise  and  labor  intensive.  For  this  reason,  dosimetry 
modeling  has  become  an  important  tool  in  RFR  bioeffects  research.  As  indicated  earlier, 
validation  of  the  FDTD  modeling  of  RFR  absorption  is  required.  Efforts  have  been  made  to 


28 


validate  FDTD  predictions  using  rhesus  monkey  carcasses.  A  thermometric  method  was  used  to 
determine  SARs  empirically  in  these  carcasses.  Four  inline  RFR  transparent  fluorooptic  probes, 
a  total  of  16  sensors  were  used  to  track  temperature  changes  in  the  base  of  brain,  cerebral  cortex, 
spinal  cord  and  neck  muscle  at  800  and  500  MHz  using  two  transmitter/horn  antenna 
combinations.  The  rate  of  temperature  change  during  the  microwave  exposure  corrected  by  the 
rate  of  temperature  changes  before  and  after  exposure  was  converted  to  SARs  and  compared  to 
the  results  of  a  FDTD  estimation  of  a  monkey  model  constructed  with  various  tissue  types. 
Overall  measured  SARs  agreed  reasonably  well  with  calculated  values  approximated  by  FDTD 
predictions.  However,  clear  differences  between  two  transmitters  and  among  carcasses. 
Validation  of  FDTD  by  empirical  measurements  using  simple  model  is  currently  underway. 

Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation 

•  Samn  S.;  and  Mathur,  S.  [1999]:  A  mathematical  model  of  gigahertz  transverse 

electromagnetic  cell,  I.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  U.S.A.F.  Research  Laboratory,  Technical 
Report  AFRL-HE-BR-TR- 1999-02 19. 


•  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.;  Cox,  D.;  Henry,  P.;  Kosub,  K.;  Garay,  R.;  Hurt,  W.;  and 
D ’  Andrea,  J.  [2000]:  Verifying  FD-TD  Predictions  with  Thermometry  Measurements.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  the  22nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp. 202-203. 

•  Ziriax,  J.M.,  D’ Andrea,  J.A.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Cox,  D.  [2001]:  Verifying 
electromagnetic  Dosimetry.  In:  “Abstracts  of  2001  Asia-Pacific  Radio  Science  Conference,” 
August  1-4,  2001. 


29 


CONCEPT  PAPER  TO  IDENTIFY  STRATEGIES  TO  CAPTURE 
THE  EPIDEMIOLOGY  OF  MICROWAVE  EXPOSURE 
TO  ARMY  PERSONNEL  AND  THE  IMPLICATION 
TO  MILITARY  PERFORMANCE 

The  staff  scientists  in  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  have  made  extraordinary 
accomplishment  toward  concept  paper  to  identify  strategies  to  capture  the  epidemiology  of 
microwave  exposure  to  army  personnel  and  the  implication  to  military  performance.  These 
achievements  can  best  be  viewed  by  the  number  concept  paper  published  and  listed  in  the 
Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation  at  the  end  of  this  section.  Briefly,  concept  paper  on 
personnel  protection  standards,  behavioral  effect,  controversies  regarding  “non-thermal”  effects, 
on  biological  studies  in  Russia  and  the  former  Soviet  Union,  biological  effects  of  high  peak 
power  radio  frequency  pulses,  and  the  Army’s  contribution  in  RFR  biological  effects  research. 

A  synopsis  of  these  publications  with  contemporary  thinking  of  other  scientists  will  be  included. 
Readers  are  encouraged  to  consult  relevant  publication  for  appropriate  topic  of  interest. 

Personnel  protection  guidelines  and  standards  have  been  reviewed  by  one  of  our  staff 
member  as  a  co-author  [Gajsek  el  al.  2001],  It  is  well  known  that  the  RFR  personnel  protection 
guidelines  (standards),  now  in  effect  in  Eastern  European  countries,  are  much  lower  than  those  in 
the  U  S.  and  other  Western  countries.  The  U  S.  and  Western  RFR  standards  are  based  on 
established  acute  biological  effects  that  could  be  considered  as  an  adverse  effect.  The  frequency 
dependent  whole-body  averaged  specific  absorption  rate  (“dose  rate”  in  toxicology)  could  not 
account  for  frequency  or  modulation  specific  effects  or  effects  caused  by  partial  body  RFR 
exposure.  On  the  other  hand,  Eastern  European  standards  are  derived  to  protect  personnel  from 
potential  non-thermal  effects  caused  by  chronic  exposure  to  very  low  intensities,  where  a  “power 
load”,  the  product  of  field  intensity  and  duration  of  exposure  (i.e.,  “dose”  in  toxicology).  Most 
Eastern  European  experts  are  aware  that  their  standards  are  based  on  unconvincing  research 
evidence  that  requires  more  precise  specifications  and  improvements.  The  limiting  values  of  any 
standard  at  each  point  in  time  reflect  the  level  of  contemporary  knowledge  of  biological  effects 
and  methodologies.  The  historical  evolution  of  U.S.  volunteer  guidelines  represents  the 
importance  of  research  and  knowledge  in  setting  the  RFR  standards.  RFR  standards  are  based  on 
theoretical  estimates,  extrapolations  and  judgement  from  experimental  data  to  human 
implications.  Part  of  controversies  is  undoubtedly  evolved  from  for  absolute  assurance  and  proof 
of  safety. 

One  of  the  major  controversies  is  “thermal  versus  non-thermal”  biological  effects  of  RFR 
which  was  reviewed  by  one  of  our  staff  members  [de  Lorge  2000a],  The  conventional  definition 
of  “non-thermal  effect”  is  an  effect  caused  by  an  amount  of  RFR  energy  failing  to  produce  a 
detectable  rise  in  an  organism’s  temperature.  This  definition  ignores  the  physiological  process 
allowing  an  organism  to  be  able  to  compensate  for  RFR  energy  deposition.  Failure  of  detecting 


30 


a  rise  in  an  organism’s  core  body  temperature  frequently  is  not  a  proof  of  temperature  rise 
elsewhere  in  the  organism’s  body.  An  example  of  this  is  the  microwave  evoked  body 
movements  in  absence  of  changes  in  core  body  temperature  due  to  localized  microwave 
exposure.  However,  a  minimum  of  1.2  °C  change  in  skin  temperature  was  noted  at  the  absolute 
threshold  for  the  microwave  evoked  body  movements.  Non-thermal  biological  effects  of  RPR 
are  difficult  to  investigate  for  several  reasons  including: 

•  Absorbed  energy  is  hard  to  measure, 

•  Biological  endpoints  are  not  well  described, 

•  Target  organs  have  not  been  identified, 

•  Definitions  of  non-thermal  effects  vary  from  on  publication  to  another, 

•  Consistent  results  are  lacking,  and 

•  Lack  of  convincing  theory  to  explain  the  mechanism  of  effect. 

Radio  Frequency  in  sufficient  intensity  is  known  to  cause  lethality,  burn,  and 
disturbances  of  normal  functions  or  disruption  of  normal  structure  in  virtually  every  organ 
system  including  central  nervous  system.  In  addressing  the  health  and  safety  issues  of  the  RFR 
and  in  an  effort  to  coordinate  worldwide  research  on  biological  effects  of  RFR,  Rapacholi 
[Bioelectromagnetics  19:  1-19,  1998]  of  the  World  Health  Organization  summarized  the  needs  of 
additional  research  in  the  following  area: 

•  In  vitro 

•  Cell  kinetics  and  proliferation  effects; 

•  Effects  on  genes; 

•  Effects  on  signal  transduction  and  alterations  in  membrane  structure  and  functions; 

•  Biophysical  and  biochemical  mechanisms  for  effects  of  RFR; 

•  In  Vivo 

•  Cancer  promotion,  co-promotion,  progression,  and  synergistic  effects; 

•  Genotoxic,  immunological  and  carcinogenic  effects  of  chronic  low-level  exposure  to 
RFR; 

•  Effects  on  the  central  nervous  system; 

•  Melatonin  synthesis; 

•  Permeability  of  the  blood-brain  barrier 

•  Reactions  to  neurotropic  drugs. 

•  Structure  and  functions  of  the  eye; 

•  Epidemiological  studies 

•  Incidence  of  various  cancer; 

•  Headaches; 


31 


•  Sleep  disturbance; 

•  Other  subjective  effects; 

•  Adverse  pregnancy  outcome;  and 

•  Ocular  pathologies. 

Recent  interest  in  biological  effect  RFR  in  the  civilian  sector  is  undoubtedly  generated  by 
popularity  and  proliferated  use  of  cellular  (mobile)  telephones  and  sensation  aroused  by  lawsuits. 
Just  during  the  past  year  (August  2000),  a  Maryland  neurologist  is  suing  for  800  millions 
claiming  that  RFR  from  his  cellular  telephone  is  responsible  for  his  malignant  brain  tumor.  Two 
recent  epidemiological  studies  [Muscat  et  al.  JAMA  284:  3001-3007,  2000;  Hardell  et  al.  Med. 
Gen.  Med.  May  4:  E2,  2000]  did  not  find  an  overall  increase  in  risk  of  brain  tumor  associated 
with  cellular  phone  use.  However,  both  of  these  studies  indicated  an  increased  risk  of  brain 
tumor  with  the  side  of  brain  that  cases  held  their  cell  phones  (so  does  the  wire  telephone  use  in 
one  of  the  studies!).  Because  RFR  is  widely  used  by  the  general  population,  a  large  case-control 
study  (3,000  cases  and  3,000  controls)  coordinated  by  the  International  Agency  for  Research  on 
Cancer  is  in  progress.  Results  of  this  study  and  other  ongoing  studies  (at  least  four  other 
epidemiological  studies)  will  not  be  forthcoming  in  several  years.  Major  difficulties  in 
epidemiology  are  the  uncertainties  in  exposure  history  and  determination  of  which  of  the 
exposure  metrics  is  responsible  for  the  causation.  Research  in  the  laboratory  setting  can  usually 
resolve  these  difficulties  in  dosimetry. 

The  extent  of  public  concern  on  health  and  safety  aspects  of  cellular  telephone  is  evident 
by  the  number  of  studies  completed  and  ongoing.  Swicord  compiled  the  statistics  of  current 
mobile  telephone  related  studies  83  completed  and  54  ongoing  cancer  relevant  or  related  studies 
and  76  completed  and  61  ongoing  non-cancer  studies  (Swidord’s  presentation  can  be  viewed  at 
WEB  site:  http://www.sciencefags.com/database/board/download/FMKSHD0038.pdf). 

Additional  difficulty  in  characterizing  the  biological  effects  of  RFR  is  that  in  contrast  to 
chemical  toxin,  RFR  does  not  have  a  target  organ  or  organs.  Thus,  a  disease  entity  caused  by 
RFR  is  virtually  similar  to  disease  occurred  spontaneously.  RFR  may  also  interact  with  a  known 
disease  process.  Best  example  of  this  permissible  role  of  RFR  in  disease  process  can  be  viewed 
by  the  use  of  low-intensity  millimeter  waves  (MMW)  as  a  therapeutic  modality.  One  of  staff 
members  has  reviewed  the  therapeutic  utilization  of  low-intensity  millimeter  waves  [Pakahomov 
and  Murphy  2000a], 

The  effects  of  MMW  often  have  a  sharp,  resonance-like  dependence  on  the  radiation 
frequency,  but  relatively  little  on  the  radiation  intensity.  A  brief,  low  intensity  MMW  exposure 
can  change  cell  growth  and  proliferation  rates,  activity  of  enzymes,  state  of  cell  genetic 
apparatus,  function  of  excitable  membranes  and  peripheral  receptors.  It  can  alleviate  stress 
reactions,  stimulate  tissue  repair  and  regeneration.  In  other  words,  not  all  the  biological  effects 


32 


of  RFR  can  be  equate  to  health  hazards.  Careful  examination  and  review  are  required  to  place  an 
effect  of  RFR  in  its  perspectives,  injury  or  benefit. 

Because  of  different  modulation  characteristics  and  frequencies,  high  average  power  of 
RFR  devices,  and  high  peak  and  low  average  power  devices  in  military  environments,  the 
knowledge  obtained  in  mobile  telephone  studies  may  not  directly  applicable  to  military 
operations.  The  only  solution  in  relevancy  is  to  perform  independent  and  complementary 
research  relevant  to  RFR  used  in  the  military  environment.  Biological  effects  of  pulse 
modulation  has  been  reviewed  by  our  staff  members  on  research  performed  in  Russia  and  the 
former  Soviet  Union  (FSU)  [Pakhomov  and  Murphy  2000b],  and  in  the  U  S.  and  Western 
countries  [Lu  and  de  Lorge  2000], 

Analysis  of  biological  effects  and  health  implications  of  high  peak  power  RFR  is  a 
complicated  endeavor  by  itself.  The  task  is  further  compounded  by  the  recent  developments  in 
methods  of  generating  RF  pulses  by  shifting  from  narrow-band  pulses  to  carrierless  pulses. 
Conventional  radar  is  operated  in  a  narrow  band  mode  in  which  the  fractional  bandwidth  is  less  1 
%  of  the  center  (carrier)  frequency.  In  carrierless  RF  pulses,  the  frequency  domain  of  the  pulse 
can  span  from  DC  to  GHz  that  creates  new  challenges  in  dosimetry  and  in  the  potential  mode  of 
interactions  between  carrierless  pulses  and  biological  materials.  Recent  developments  in  AMT 
antenna,  SUOSUS  and  COMWIN  systems  exceed  the  coverage  of  current  personnel  protection 
guidelines  by  bringing  antenna(s)  close  in  contact  with  the  body  surface  (body-born).  Also  these 
new  communication  systems  intends  to  use  multiple  RFR  frequencies.  These  developments 
bring  out  the  least  studied  areas  of  biological  effects  of  RFR,  i.e.,  effects  of  partial  body  RFR 
exposure  and  multi-frequency  exposure. 

It  can  be  concluded  that  Russian/FSU  studies  constitute  an  important  source  of 
information  on  biological  effects  of  pulsed  RFR.  Emphasis  in  these  studies  was  given  to  RF- 
induced  changes  in  the  nervous  system  function.  Such  issues  as  RF-induced  carcinogenesis 
apparently  have  not  been  a  concern  and  were  not  studied  at  all.  Manny  (perhaps,  most)  of  the 
studies  were  flawed,  a  number  of  good-quality  studies  have  convincingly  demonstrated 
significant  biological  effects  of  pulsed  RFR.  Modulation  often  was  the  factor  that  determined 
the  biological  response  to  RF  irradiation.  Reactions  to  pulsed  and  CW  emissions  at  equal  time- 
averaged  intensities  in  many  cases  were  substantially  different.  These  results  showed  that 
biological  effects  of  pulsed  RF  may  involve  some  specific  mechanisms  of  interaction,  which  are 
not  understood  yet.  Most  reported  biological  effects  of  low-intensity  pulsed  microwaves  were 
just  subtle  functional  changes,  which  did  not  exceed  the  limits  of  normal  physiological  variation 
and  could  only  be  detected  by  sensitive  physiological  tests.  However,  some  studies  did  report 
pathogenic  effects.  An  independent  confirmation  of  these  findings  would  be  of  principle 
importance  for  understanding  health  hazards  from  RF  exposure  and  development  of  safety 
standards. 


33 


A  single  RF  pulse  lasting  from  microseconds  to  seconds  with  adequate  pulse  energy  is 
known  to  cause  drastic  acute  biological  effects.  Examples  in  descending  order  of  pulse  energy 
are  brain  enzyme  denaturation,  stun  and  seizure,  pain,  decreased  spontaneous  activity  and 
acetylcholine  concentration,  microwave  induced  whole-body  movements,  thermal  sensation, 
startle  modification  and  microwave  hearing.  The  first  four  effects  are  associated  with  significant 
bulk  heating  indicated  by  2  °C  or  more  increase  in  body  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  none  of 
the  last  four  effects  requires  a  significant  bulk  heating.  They  can  be  caused  by  administration  of 
a  single  pulse  incapable  of  imparting  adequate  energy  to  cause  an  elevation  in  core  temperature 
of  animals.  However,  whole-body  movements  can  be  evoked  by  a  single  pulse  that  results  in  0.2 
to  2  °C  increase  in  subcutaneous  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  a  thermal  sensation  is  elicited 
by  partial  body  exposure  in  which  less  than  0.1  °C  increase  in  cutaneous  temperature  is  noted. 
Startle  modification  and  microwave  hearing  are  produced  by  a  pulse  that  is  barely  capable  of 
transferring  enough  energy  to  cause  less  than  a  10'3  or  10'4  °C  increase  in  tissue  temperature  of 
animals.  The  mechanism  of  action  is  not  clear  in  startle  modification  and  microwave  induced 
whole-body  movements.  However,  the  mechanism  of  action  is  well  established  in  the 
microwave  auditory  effect  in  which  the  cranial  pressure  wave  created  by  thermoelastic  expansion 
associated  with  a  RF  pulse  is  sensed  by  hair  cells  of  the  cochlear.  The  activation  of 
thermoreceptors  is  undoubtedly  involved  in  thermo  sensation.  Both  startle  modification  and 
microwave  induced  whole-body  movements  appear  to  be  reflex  reactions  that  require  receptor, 
reflex  center  and  effectors.  In  other  words,  these  last  four  effects  are  originated  from  activation 
of  specialized  nerve  endings,  mechanisms  of  which  have  not  yet  been  adequately  investigated. 

The  threshold  of  a  single  pulse  effect  appears  to  have  a  critical  duration.  For  an  exposure 
period  shorter  than  the  critical  duration,  the  threshold  must  be  dependent  on  specific  absorption 
and  the  threshold  depends  on  specific  absorption  rate  if  the  exposure  duration  is  longer  than  the 
critical  duration.  Examples  can  be  found  in  microwave  hearing  and  microwave  induced  whole 
body  movements. 

It  has  been  proposed  that  high  peak  power  pulses  may  have  specific  effects  differing  from 
those  caused  by  a  CW  radiation.  In  addition,  pulse  modulation  has  been  suspected  to  cause 
enhancement  of  a  given  biological  effect  than  the  same  one  by  CW  radiation  of  equivalent 
average  SAR.  Microwave  hearing  can  be  considered  to  be  specific  to  pulse  modulation  since  it 
would  not  occur  without  the  RF  modulated  pulse  or  pulses.  On  the  other  hand,  pulse 
enhancement  is  not  established  reliably  since  many  studies  have  failed  to  demonstrate  its 
importance.  Later  studies  aimed  at  comparing  effectiveness  of  an  induced  biological  effect 
between  pulsed  and  CW  RFs  (duty  factor  >  10’4  or  ratio  of  peak  to  average  power  <  104)  usually 
failed  to  confirm  the  earlier  reports  that  indicated  the  existence  of  pulse  enhancement.  However, 
studies  have  not  been  done  to  confirm  or  deny  the  enhancement  effect  of  pulse  modulation  on 
injury  of  corneal  endothelium,  brain  cholinergic  activity,  and  possibly  on  consolidation  of 
working  memory.  A  variety  of  behavioral  effects  have  been  observed  in  experiments  employing 


34 


“TEMPO”  pulses.  On  the  other  hand,  well-trained  behaviors  are  resistant  to  alteration  by 
“TEMPO”  pulses. 

A  concrete  conclusion  regarding  biological  effects  of  carrierless  RF  is,  at  most,  tentative 
because  of  the  limited  number  of  studies.  The  carrierless  RF  includes  electromagnetic  pulse 
(EMP)  and  ultra-wide-band  (UWB)  pulses.  Although  unconfirmed,  a  single  EMP  pulse  with  a 
peak  electric  field  several  hundred  kV/m  might  interfere  with  the  ability  of  animals  to  run  a 
maze.  Other  than  that  report,  most  studies  indicate  no  observable  effect  with  EMP  pulses  with 
peak  electric  field  less  than  100  kV/m.  Studies  of  biological  effects  of  UWB  pulses  have  begun 
to  reveal  the  existence  of  UWB  bioactivity  at  peak  electric  field  intensity  around  100  kV/m. 
Because  of  health  and  medical  implications,  UWB-induced  hypotension  needs  to  be 
independently  confirmed  and  the  dose-response  characteristics  further  explored. 

It  is  fairly  clear  that  biological  effects  of  pulsed  RFR  involve  nervous  system,  central  and 
peripheral,  and  its  end-organ  functions.  Behavior  is  a  final  common  expression  of  virtually  all 
the  physiological  processes  with  perhaps,  the  exception  of  disease,  and  even  that  endpoint  is 
often  initially  expressed  as  a  behavioral  response.  Results  of  behavioral  experiments  also  form 
the  decision  bases  of  exposure  standards  in  place  of  most  countries  [de  Lorge  2000b].  If  low 
level  RF  radiation  produces  adverse  health  effects,  behavioral  changes  will  continue  to  be  the 
first  to  be  observed.  Since  cognitive  and  innate  behaviors  appear  to  be  more  sensitive  to 
disturbance  caused  by  RFR,  it  is  essential  to  incorporate  these  types  of  endpoints  in  the  study 
neural  effects  of  RFR. 

Relevant  Publication  /  Presentation 

•  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000a]:  Non-thermal  bioeffects  of  radio  frequency  radiation:  What  are  they? 

In:  ’’Millennium  International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields 
Proceedings”,  Kostarakis,  P.,  and  Stavroulakis,  P.  (eds),  pp.  342-346  (ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

•  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000b]:  Contemporary  research  on  the  behavioral  effects  of  radio  frequency 
radiation.  In:  “Radio  Frequency  Radiation  Dosimetry”,  Klauenberg,  B.J.,  and  Miklavcic,  D. 
(eds.),  Netherlands,  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers,  pp.  403-407. 

•  Gajsek,  P.,  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  and  Klauenberg,  B.J.  [2001]:  Electromagnetic  field  standards  in 
central  and  eastern  european  countries:  current  state,  and  stipulations  for  international 
harmonization.  Health  Physics  (in  press) 


35 


•  Lu,  S.-T.;  and  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Biological  effects  of  high  peak  power  radiofrequency 
pulses.  In:  “Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Volume  3,”  Lin,  J.C. 
(ed.).  New  York,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  pp.  207-264. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.  [2001]:  Research  on  biological  effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  at  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  2001  Asia-Pacific  Radio  Science 
Conference”,  August  1-4,  2001. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M  R.  [2000a]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  IEEE  Trans.  Plasma  Sci.  21  (4):  34-40. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  MR.  [2000b]:  A  Comprehensive  review  of  the  research  on 
biological  effects  of  pulsed  radiofrequency  radiation  in  Russia  and  the  former  Soviet  Union. 
In:  “Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Volume  3,”  Lin,  J.C.  (ed.),  New 
York,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  pp.  260-292. 


36 


CONCLUSION 


The  McKessonHBOC  Clinical  and  Biological  Services  (MCBS)  staffs  understanding  of 
technical  issues  and  insight  into  scientific  principles  have  been  the  keystone  of  success  for  the 
Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch’s  research  program.  Due  to  MCBS  staffs  efforts  in  planning  and 
managing  ongoing  research  programs,  and  the  dedication  and  enthusiasm  of  the  staff  members, 
the  scientific  productivity  of  the  program  has  been  outstanding.  During  the  past  two  years  of  the 
contract,  MCBS  employee  proved  that  they  were  determined  to  provide  high  quality  scientific 
products  under  the  general  guidance  of  the  COR,  appropriate  WRAIR  Program  Managers,  and 
Statement  of  Work  specified  in  the  contract.  Members  of  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch 
(staffed  entirely  by  McKessonHBOC  employees)  continued  to  enjoy  respects  from  other 
members  of  the  Tri-Service  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Program  at  Brooks  AFB  and  the 
biological  effects  research  community  in  general.  Despite  changing  composition  of  the  staff 
members  and  research  emphases,  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  stayed  highly  productive  and 
continued  to  support  the  needs  of  U  S.  Army  admirably. 

During  the  past  two  years,  MCBS  staff  published  20  papers,  2  technical  reports,  and  26 
meeting  abstracts.  Three  additional  manuscript  are  submitted  and  under  peer  review  process. 
Work  performed  by  MCBS  staff  met  and  often  exceeded  every  requirement  specified  in  the 
Statement  of  Work.  All  these  accomplishments  are  excellent  proof  of  the  productivity  and  the 
dedication  of  MCBS  staff.  Our  staff  members  do  realize  that  the  research  efforts  of  the  US  army 
in  high  power,  and  high  peak  power  RF  fields  have  little  precedence  and  are  considered 
innovative  and  pioneering.  The  progress  and  accomplishments  are  summarized  as  followed: 

•  Retinal  injuries  were  not  observed  in  rhesus  monkeys  subjected  repetitively  to  1.25 
GHz  pulsed  microwave  at  1.25  MW/kg  peak  retinal  SAR,  5.59  (is  pulse  duration  and 
4.3,  8.4  and  20.2  W/kg  average  SAR. 

•  Extremely  high  peak  power  (250-350  MW/kg,  1  (is,  9.2  GHz)  or  low  peak  power  (3- 
30  kW/kg,  05-10  (is,  9.2  GHz)  pulses  had  no  specific  effect  on  pacemaker  activity  of 
the  isolated  frog  heart  slices. 

•  Effects  of  pulsed  9.2  GHz  microwaves  on  hippocampal  slices  were  proportional  to 
average  SAR  and  heating  independent  of  modulation  frequency,  peak  SAR  or  duty 
cycle. 

•  A  specific  inhibitory  effect  of  9.3  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  on  growth  rate  of  yeast 
cells  was  suspected  at  20-30  MW/kg  peak  SAR.  Optimization  of  assay  sensitivity  is 
needed  to  confirm  the  existence  of  this  specific  extremely  high  peak  power  effect. 

•  Synaptic  transmission  of  the  frog  spinal  cord  was  not  a  target  of  4 1 .1-42.4  GHz 
microwaves  up  to  3  mW/cm2. 


37 


•  The  interaction  between  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  and  3-nitropropionic  acid  was 
revealed  in  prepulse  inhibition  of  acoustic  startle  and  ultrastructure  of  neurons  at 
caudate  putamen,  but  not  in  the  spontaneous  activity  of  rats. 

•  A  SAR  dependent  effect  on  Y-maze  performance  (decrease  in  cautiousness  or 
increase  in  boldness)  was  noted  in  rats  exposed  to  2.45  GHz  microwaves  at  0.39,  3.85 
and  6.37  W/kg. 

•  A  SAR  dependent  hypotension  was  found  in  rats  exposed  to  ultra-wide-band  pulses. 
The  threshold  was  lower  than  100  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity  and  0.08  W/kg 
average  whole-body  SAR.  An  abbreviated  double-blind  replication  study  was 
successful  in  identifying  the  ultra-wide-band  induced  systolic  hypotension. 

•  Genotoxic  effect  was  not  found  in  polychromatic  erythrocytes  in  bone  marrow  and 
peripheral  blood  of  rats  exposed  to  ultra-wide-band  pulses  (91-103  kV/m  peak 
electric  field  intensity,  0.92-0.97  ns  pulse  duration,  15  min). 

•  Exposure  to  ultra-wide-band  pulses  (102  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  0.9  ns 
pulse  duration,  600  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate,  30  min)  inhibited  the  hyperactivity  but 
had  no  effect  on  the  analgesic  effect  of  the  N°-nitro-L-arginine. 

•  A  general  mathematical  model  using  finite  difference  time  domain  techniques  that 
can  be  used  to  estimate  the  electrical  field  in  a  large  Gigahertz  Transverse 
Electromagnetic  Cell  was  developed  and  validated  with  actual  measurements. 

•  Six  concept  papers  have  been  published  on  current  knowledge  of  the  biological 
effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  and  pulsed  radiation. 

In  the  next  two  years,  MCBS  researchers  will  increase  collaborative  efforts  with 
researchers  from  various  universities.  The  main  foci  of  research  will  be  in  six  areas.  They  are: 

•  Neurotoxic  effect  of  microwave  radiation  on  the  nigrostriatal  dopaminergic  system, 

•  Effects  of  pulsed  electromagnetic  radiation  on  neurotoxin-induced  degenerative 
changes  in  brain  function  and  structure, 

•  Neurophsiological  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses, 

•  Ultra-wide-band  and  high  peak  power  pulsed  radiation  and  their  potential  for 
inducing  astrocyte  transformation  and  injury, 

•  Hypotensive  effect  of  ultra-wide-band  pulses,  and 

•  Non-thermal  biological  effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  from  body-worn 
antennas. 

MCBS  employees  are  dedicated  to  continue  to  promote  the  success  of  the  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  and  be  the  world  leader  in  military  relevant  biomedical  research.  We 
aim  to  assist  WRAIR  to  ensure  that  the  soldiers  will  have  the  best  possible  knowledge  and 
protection  against  environmental  electromagnetic  threats. 


38 


PERSONNEL 


The  following  McKessonHBOC  Clinical  and  Biological  Services  personnel  served  under 
the  present  contract: 


Dr.  Yahya  Akyel 

Principal  Investigator  /  Behavioral  Psychologist 

Dr.  John  0.  de  Lorge 

Program  Manager  /  Behavioral  Psychologist 
(resigned  on  1 1/30/2000) 

Dr.  Shin-Tsu  Lu 

Program  Manager  /  Radiation  Biologist 
Veterinarian 

Dr.  Andrei  Pakhomov 

Electrophysiologist 

Dr.  Ronald  Seaman 

Biomedical  Engineer  /  Physiologist 

Dr.  Satnam  Mathur 

Electrical  Engineer  /  Antenna  Design 

Dr.  Xiaoyi  Du 

N  europhysiologi  st 

Ms.  Lori  Allen 

Office  Manager  /  Safety  Officer 

Mr.  John  Ashmore 

Electronic  Technician 

Mr.  Norman  Harris 

Electronic  Technician  (resigned  on  12/15/2000) 

Ms.  Joanne  Doyle 

Biomedical  Technician 

Ms.  Monica  Gonzalez 

Biomedical  Technician  (resigned  on  01/31/2001) 

Ms.  Amy  Phinney 

Biomedical  Technician 

39 


MICROWAVE  BIOEFFECTS  BRANCH 
PRESENTATIONS  /  PUBLICATIONS  LIST 
(May  1999  -  May  2001) 

•  Akyel,  Y.;  Lu,  S-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Doyle,  J.  [1999]:  Dose-response  Characteristics  of 
Microwave-induced  Disturbance  on  foraging  patterns  in  rats.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  21st 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp.  24-25. 

•  Brewer,  P.A.;  Mery,  L.R.;  Phelix,  C.F.;  and  Seaman,  R.L.  [2001]:  Monoamine  oxidase 
inhibition  enhances  ultrastructural  changes  in  rat  striatal  neurons  after  single  systemic 
injection  of  3-nitropropionic  acid.  Abstract  submitted  to  the  3 1st  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Society  for  Neuroscience,  November  10-15,  2001. 

•  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Non-thermal  bioeffects  of  radio  frequency  radiation:  What  are  they? 
In:”Millennium  International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields 
Proceedings”,  Kostarakis,  P.,  and  Stavroulakis,  P.  (eds.),  pp.  342-346  (ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

•  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Contemporary  research  on  the  behavioral  effects  of  radio  frequency 
radiation.  In:  “Radio  Frequency  Radiation  Dosimetry,”  Klauenberg,  B.J.;  and  Miklavcic,  D. 
(eds.),  Netherlands,  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers,  pp.  403-407. 

•  Gajsek,  P.;  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  and  Klauenberg,  B.J.  [2001]:  Electromagnetic  field  standards  in 
central  and  eastern  european  countries:  current  state,  and  stipulations  for  international 
harmonization.  Health  Physics  (in  press) 

•  Kiel,  J.L.;  Seaman,  R.L.;  Holwitt,  E.A.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Hurt,  W.D.;  Mason,  P.A.;  Alls,  J.L.; 
and  Morales,  P.J.  [1999]:  Nitration  enhances  the  pulsed-microwave  absorption  by  a  tyrosine 
polymer.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp. 
131-132. 

•  Kiel,  J.L.;  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Parker,  J.E.;  Wright,  J.R.;  Alls,  J.L.;  and  Morales,  P.J. 
[1999]:  Pulsed  microwave  induced  light,  sound,  and  electrical  discharge  enhanced  by  a 
biopolymer.  Bioelectromagnetics  20:  216-223. 

•  Kiel,  J.L.;  Parker,  J.E.;  Morales,  P.J.;  Alls,  J.L.;  Mason,  P.A.;  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.; 
and  Holwitt,  E.A.  [2000]:  Pulsed  microwave  induced  bioeffects.  IEEE  Trans.  Plasma  Sci. 
28(1):  161-167. 

•  Kiel,  J.L.,  Rockwell,  B. A.,  Thomas,  R.J.,  Alls,  J.L.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Sutter,  R.E.,  and  Morales, 
P.J.  [2001]:  Laser  and  microwave  induced  breakdown  spectroscopy:  basis  for  a  new 
detection  technique  for  chemical  and  biological  agents.  Submitted  to  IEEE  International 
Conference  of  Plasma  Science  and  IEEE  International  Pulsed  Power  Conference,  June  17-22, 
2001. 


40 


•  Kiel,  J.L.;  Alls,  J.L.;  Sutter,  R.E.;  Mason,  P.A.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Morales,  P.J.  [2001]: 
Directed  killing  of  anthrax  spores  by  microwave  induced  cavitation  via  specific  binding  of 
organic  semi-conductor.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  Second  International  Symposium  on 
Nonthermal  Medical/Biological  Treatments  Using  Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Ionized 
Gases”,  May  21-23,  2001. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Mathur,  S.P.  [1999]:  A  potential  low  dose  2.45  GHz  CW-induced 
Hypotension  in  Rats.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society”,  pp.  122-123. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Lee,  J.C.  [1999]:  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic 
pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol.  Behav.  65(4/5):  753-761. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Lee,  J.C.  [1999]:  Erratum:  Ultra-wideband 
electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol.  Behav.  67(3):  463. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Stuck,  B.;  Zwick,  H.;  D’ Andrea,  J.A.;  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Merritt,  J.H.; 
Lutty,  G.;  McLeod,  D.  S.;  and  Johnson,  M.  [1999]:  Retinal  Effects  of  High  Peak  Power 
Microwaves  in  Rhesus  Monkeys.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment,  Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment,  U.S.  Air  Force  Research 
Laboratory,  Technical  Report,  USAMRD  WRAIR  9907  006  TX,  NHRC-DET  99-01,  AFRL- 
HE-BR-TR- 1999-0231. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [2000]:  Absence  of  effects  of  2.45  GHz  microwaves 
on  physical  endurance,  motivational  levels  and  cardiovascular  functions.  In:  “Millennium 
International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields  Proceedings”, 
Kostarakis,  P.;  and  Stavroulakis,  P.  (eds.),  pp.  491-496  (ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Stuck,  B.;  Zwick,  H.;  D’ Andrea,  J.A.;  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Merritt,  J.H.; 
Lutty,  G.;  McLeod,  D.  S.;  and  Johnson,  M.  [2000]:  Effects  of  high  peak  power  microwaves 
on  the  retina  of  the  rhesus  monkey.  Bioelectromagnetics  21 :43  9-454. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [2000]:  Effects  of  2.45  GHz  CW  microwave  on 
physical  endurance  and  motivational  levels  in  rats.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  22nd  Annual  Meeting 
of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  p.281. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.;  and  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Biological  effects  of  high  peak  power  radiofrequency 
pulses.  In:  “Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Volume  3,”  Lin,  J.C. 
(ed.),  New  York,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  pp.  207-264. 

•  Lu,  S.-T.  [2001]:  Potential  application  of  UWB  pulses  in  lowering  blood  pressure.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  the  2001  Asia-Pacific  Radio  Science  Conference”,  August  1-4,  2001. 


41 


•  Lu,  S.-T.  [2001]:  Research  on  biological  effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  at  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  2001  Asia-Pacific  Radio  Science 
Conference”,  August  1-4,  2001. 

•  Mery,  L.R.;  Phelix,  C.F.;  Wayner,  M.J.;  and  Seaman,  R.L.  [2000]:  Ultrastructure  changes  in 
rat  striatal  neurons  after  single  systemic  injection  of  3-nitropropionic  acid.  In:  “Abstracts  of 
30th  Annual  Meeting  of  Society  for  Neuroscience  Meeting,”  p.  1876. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Prol,  H.K.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [1999]:  Search  for  the  effect  of 
millimeter  waves  on  synaptic  processes  in  the  central  nervous  system.  In:  “Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,”  Bersani,  F.  ed.,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers, 
pp.  971-974. 

•  Pakhmov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Belt,  M.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Dose  dependencies  in 
bioeffects  of  extremely  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  In:  “Electromagnetic  Fields: 
Biological  Effects  and  Hygienic  Standardization,  (Proceedings  of  the  International  Meeting, 
may  18-22,  1998,  Moscow,  Russia)”  Repacholi,  M.H.;  Rubtsova,  N.B.;  and  Muc,  A.M.,  eds., 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  World  Health  Orgnaization,  pp.  325-334. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  In:  “Digest  of  Technical  Papers,  12th  IEEE  International  Pulsed  Power 
Conference,”  pp.  23-28. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  The  role  of  peak  and 
average  power  in  microwave  bioeffects  in  excitable  tissue  models.  In:  “Electromagnetic 
Fields  and  Human  Health,  Proceedings  of  the  Second  International  Conference  on  Problems 
of  Electromagnetic  Safety  and  Human  Health  (Sept  20-24,  1999,  Moscow,  Russia),  p.  330. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  First  International  Symposium  on  Nonthermal 
Medical/Biological  Treatments  Using  Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Ionized  Gases,”  p.21. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Search  for 
specific  physiological  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses.  In:  “Abstracts  of 
21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp.  200-201. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  [2000]:  High- 
resolution  microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  In:  “Radio  Frequency  Radiation 
Dosimetry,”  Klauenber,  B.J.,  and  Miklavcic,  D.  (ed.s.),  Netherlands,  Kluwer  Academic 
Publishers,  pp.  187-197. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Doyle,  J.;  Stuck,  B  E.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2000]: 
Comparative  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  and  a  brief  CW  irradiation 
on  pacemaker  function  in  isolated  frog  heart  slices.  Bioelectromagnetics  21  (4):  245-254. 


42 


•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2000]:  A  Comprehensive  review  of  the  research  on 
biological  effects  of  pulsed  radioffequency  radiation  in  Russia  and  the  former  Soviet  Union. 
In:  “Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Volume  3,”  Lin,  J.C.  (ed.),  New 
York,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  pp.  260-292. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.;  and  Doyle,  J.  [2000]:  Effect  of  pulsed  microwaves  on  the  population  spike  in 
rat  hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Millennium  International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of 
Electromagnetic  Fields  Proceedings”,  Kostarakis,  P.;  and  Starvroulakis,  P.  (ed.),  pp.  480-485 
(ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M  R.  [2000]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  IEEE  Trans.  Plasma  Sci.  21  (4):  34-40. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  and  Mathur,  S.P.  [2000]:  Combined  effect  of  pulsed  microwaves 
and  glutamate  superfusion  on  the  population  spike  in  rat  hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Abstracts 
of  the  22nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp. 262-263. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.,  Mathur,  S.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2001]:  Retaining  of  the  long¬ 
term  potentiation  in  hipocampal  slices  after  high  peak  power  microwave  exposure  and 
heating.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  Second  International  Symposium  on  Nonthermal 
Medical/Biological  Treatments  Using  Electromagnetic  Fields  and  Ionized  Gases,”  May  21- 
23,2001. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Doyle,  J.;  Mathur,  S.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2001]:  Effects  of  extremely  high 
power  microwave  pulses  on  the  population  spike  and  long-term  potentiation  in  rat 
hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  23rd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society,”  June  10-14,  2001. 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Gajsek,  P.;  Allen,  L.;  Stuck,  B  E.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2001]:  Comparison 
of  dose  dependence  for  bioeffects  of  continuous-wave  and  high-peak  power  microwave 
emissions  using  gel-suspended  cell  cultures.  Bioelectromagnetics  (pending). 

•  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.;  Gajsek,  P.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2001]:  Use  of  gel-suspended 
cell  cultures  for  analysis  of  dose  dependence  of  microwave  bioeffects.  Abstract  submitted  to 
the  5th  International  Congress  of  the  European  BioElectromagnetics  Association  (EBEA), 
September  6-8,  2001. 

•  Samn  S.;  and  Mathur,  S.  [1999]:  A  mathematical  model  of  gigahertz  transverse 
electromagnetic  cell,  I.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  U.S.A.F.  Research  Laboratory,  Technical 
Report  AFRL-HE-BR-TR- 1999-02 19. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  and  Wohlfeld,  B.J.  [1999]:  Activity  and  acoustic  startle  prepulse  inhibition  3-4 
hr  after  3-nitropropionic  acid  injection.  In:  “Abstracts  of  the  1999  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Experimental  Biology  Society.” 


43 


•  Seaman,  R.L  ;  Phelix,  C.F.;  Bruno,  J.G.;  Kalns,  J.E.;  Dick,  E.J.Jr.;  Wohlfeld,  B.J.;  and  Kiel, 
J.L.  [1999]:  Exploration  of  a  neurodegeneration  model  for  use  in  microwave  studies.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp.  209-210. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Belt,  M.L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  and  Mathur,  S.P  [1999]:  Hyperactivity  caused  by  a 
nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor  is  countered  by  ultra-wideband  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics. 
20:431-439. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Dick,  E.  J. Jr. ;  and  Gonzalez,  M.Y.  [2000]:  Effects  of  microwave 
exposure  and  3-nitropropionic  acid  on  rat  activity,  acoustic  startle,  and  brian  histology.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  22nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  p.  285-286. 

•  Seaman,  R.  [2000]:  Effects  of  acute  systemic  3-nitropropionic  acid  administration  on  rat 
activity  and  acoustic  startle.  Neuroscience  Letters  280:183-186. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Dick,  E.J.Jr.  [2001]:  Effects  of  pulsed  microwaves  and 
toxin-induced  hypoxia  on  rat  motor  activity,  acoustic  startle,  and  brain  histology. 
Bioelectromagnetics  (Pending). 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Phinney,  A  M.;  and  Harris,  N.R.  [2001]:  Interaction  between  a 
neurotoxin  and  pulsed  microwaves.  In:  Abstracts  of  23rd  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  June  10-14,  2001. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  and  Phelix,  C.F.  [2001]:  Changes  in  ultrastructure  of  rat  caudate-putamen 
neurons  with  a  neurotoxin  and  exposure  to  pulsed  microwaves.  Abstract  submitted  to  5th 
International  Congress  of  the  European  BioElectromagnetics  Association  (EBEA), 

September  6-8,  2001. 

•  Seaman,  R.L.;  and  Phelix,  C.F.  [2001]:  Acute  changes  in  rat  caudate-putamen  neuronal 
ultrastructure  due  to  3-nitropropionic  acid  and  microwave  exposure  are  not  reflected  in 
behavior.  Abstract  submitted  to  the  3 1st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Society  for  Neuroscience, 
November  10-15,  2001. 

•  Vijayalaxmi;  Seaman,  R.L;  Belt,  M.L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Prihode,  T.J.  [1999]: 
Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  Radiation.  Int.  J.  Radiat.  Biol.  75(1):  115-120. 

•  Vijayalaxmi;  and  Seaman.  R.L.  [1999]:  Micronuclei  in  the  peripheral  blood  and  bone 
marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation.  In:  “Abstracts  of 
the  21st  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  p.  214. 

•  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.;  Cox,  D.;  Henry,  P.;  Kosub,  K.;  Garay,  R.;  Hurt,  W.;  and 
D’ Andrea,  J.  [2000]:  Verifying  FD-TD  Predictions  with  Thermometry  Measurements.  In: 
“Abstracts  of  the  22nd  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,”  pp. 202-203. 


44 


•  Ziriax,  J.M.,  D’Andrea,  J.A.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Cox,  D.  [2001]:  Verifying 

electromagnetic  Dosimetry.  In:  “Abstracts  of  2001  Asia-Pacific  Radio  Science  Conference” 
August  1-4,  2001. 


45 


VOLUME  II 


Award  Number:  DAMD 1 7-94-C-4069 

TITLE:  Services  to  operate  and  Maintain  a  Microwave  Research  Laboratory 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  Yahya  Akyel,  Ph  D. 


Copies  of  Publications  (1  -  14) 

1.  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Contemporary  research  on  the  behavioral  effects  of  radio  frequency 
radiation.  In:  “Radio  Frequency  Radiation  Dosimetry,”  Klauenberg,  B.J.;  and  Miklavcic,  D. 
(eds.),  Netherlands,  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers,  pp.  403-407. 

2.  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Non-thermal  bioeffects  of  radio  frequency  radiation:  What  are  they? 
In:”Millennium  International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields 
Proceedings”,  Kostarakis,  P.,  and  Stavroulakis,  P.  (eds  ),  pp.  342-346  (ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

3.  Kiel,  J.L.;  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Parker,  J.E.;  Wright,  J.R.;  Alls,  J.L.;  and  Morales,  P.J. 
[1999]:  Pulsed  microwave  induced  light,  sound,  and  electrical  discharge  enhanced  by  a 
biopolymer.  Bioelectromagnetics  20:  216-223. 

4.  Kiel,  J.L.;  Parker,  J.E.;  Morales,  P.J.;  Alls,  J.L.;  Mason,  P.A.;  Seaman,  R.L.;  Mathur,  S.P.; 
and  Holwitt,  E.A.  [2000]:  Pulsed  microwave  induced  bioeffects.  IEEE  Trans.  Plasma  Sci. 
28(1):  161-167. 

5.  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Lee,  J.C.  [1999]:  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic 
pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol.  Behav.  65(4/5):  753-761. 

6.  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  and  Lee,  J.C.  [1999]:  Erratum:  Ultra- wideband 
electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol.  Behav.  67(3):  463. 

7.  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [2000]:  Absence  of  effects  of  2.45  GHz  microwaves 
on  physical  endurance,  motivational  levels  and  cardiovascular  functions.  In:  “Millennium 
International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields  Proceedings”, 
Kostarakis,  P.;  and  Stavroulakis,  P.  (eds  ),  pp.  491-496  (ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

8.  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Stuck,  B.;  Zwick,  H;  D’ Andrea,  J.A.;  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Merritt,  J.H.; 
Lutty,  G.;  McLeod,  D.  S.;  and  Johnson,  M.  [2000]:  Effects  of  high  peak  power  microwaves 
on  the  retina  of  the  rhesus  monkey.  Bioelectromagnetics  21 :439-454. 

9.  Lu,  S.-T.;  and  de  Lorge,  J.  [2000]:  Biological  effects  of  high  peak  power  radiofrequency 
pulses.  In:  “Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Volume  3,”  Lin,  J.C. 
(ed.),  New  York,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  pp.  207-264. 


10.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Prol,  H.K.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Akyel,  Y.  [1999]:  Search  for  the  effect  of 
millimeter  waves  on  synaptic  processes  in  the  central  nervous  system.  In:  “Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,”  Bersani,  F.  ed.,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers, 
pp.  971-974. 

11.  Pakhmov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Belt,  M.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Dose  dependencies  in 
bioeffects  of  extremely  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  In:  “Electromagnetic  Fields: 
Biological  Effects  and  Hygienic  Standardization,  (Proceedings  of  the  International  Meeting, 
may  18-22,  1998,  Moscow,  Russia)”  Repacholi,  M.H.;  Rubtsova,  N.B.;  and  Muc,  A.M.,  eds., 
Geneva,  Switzerland,  World  Health  Orgnaization,  pp.  325-334. 

12.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [1999]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  In:  “Digest  of  Technical  Papers,  12th  IEEE  International  Pulsed  Power 
Conference,”  pp.  23-28. 

13.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  [2000]:  High- 
resolution  microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  In:  “Radio  Frequency  Radiation 
Dosimetry,”  Klauenber,  B.J.,  and  Miklavcic,  D.  (ed.s.),  Netherlands,  Kluwer  Academic 
Publishers,  pp.  187-197. 

14.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Doyle,  J.;  Stuck,  B.E.;  Kiel,  J.L.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2000]: 
Comparative  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  and  a  brief  CW  irradiation 
on  pacemaker  function  in  isolated  frog  heart  slices.  Bioelectromagnetics  21  (4):  245-254. 


CONTEMPORARY  RESEARCH  ON  THE  BEHAVIORAL  EFFECTS  OF 
RADIO  FREQUENCY  RADIATION 


J.  O.  DE  LORGE 
McKessonHBOC  BioServices 
8308  Hawks  Rd,  Bldg.  1184 
Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235 


1.  Introduction 

The  most  recent  and  widely  followed  standards  for  safe  levels  of  human  exposure  to 
radio  frequency  (RF)  electromagnetic  fields,  the  IEEE  C95.1-1991  guide  [1]  relied  on 
behavioral  research  as  the  most  sensitive  biological  measure  of  potentially  harmful 
effects.  Research  on  the  behavioral  effects  of  RF  exposure  has  continued  to  be 
important  following  the  publication  of  that  guide  although  there  has  been  a  substantial 
decrease  in  the  number  of  facilities  and  published  articles  involved  in  RF  biology. 

The  present  chapter  will  examine  much  of  the  behavioral  work  published  since  1990 
and  attempt  to  draw  some  conclusions  as  to  its  contribution  to  an  understanding  of  the 
biological  effects  of  exposure  to  electromagnetic  fields  in  the  RF  range  of  the  spectrum. 
Many  of  these  recent  studies  can  be  categorized  into  two  groups.  The  first  group 
consists  of  research  on  the  effects  of  pulses  of  high-powered  energy.  The  second 
contains  research  with  more  conventional  sources  of  radiation  or  at  least  of  sources  used 
in  many  studies  conducted  in  the  previous  decade. 


2.  High  Power  Pulses 

One  of  the  first  high-peak -power  experiments  of  this  decade  is  a  study  by  Akyel  el  al. 
[2].  Pulses  at  a  peak  power  of  1  MW  and  a  transmitter  frequency  of  1.25  GHz  were 
used  to  illuminate  constrained  rats  for  10  min.  Specific  absorption  rates  (SARs)  of 
0.84,  2.5,  7.6,  and  23  W/kg  were  produced.  The  rats  had  been  trained  to  lever  press  and 
following  exposure  they  were  placed  back  into  a  performance  chamber  for  behavioral 
testing.  Dismption  of  performance  was  found  at  the  highest  SAR  (23  W/kg)  but  not  at 
the  lower  levels.  The  authors  concluded  that  the  observed  effects  were  based  on  a 
thermal  effect. 

A  second  study  at  a  similar  frequency,  1.3  GHz,  by  D'Andrea  and  his  colleagues  [3] 
was  published  the  following  year  in  a  technical  report.  Rhesus  monkeys  were  the 
subjects  and  performance  was  measured  during  irradiation  at  three  SAR  levels,  16,  26, 

403 

BJ.  Klauenberg  and  D.  Miklavcic  (eds.).  Radio  Frequency  Radiation  Dosimetry.  403-407. 

CO  2000  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers.  Printed  in  the  Netherlands. 


404 


and  35  W/kg.  Animals  were  illuminated  for  25  minutes  by  an  open-end  waveguide 
focused  on  the  rear  of  the  monkey's  head.  Behavioral  response  rates  on  a  vigilance  task 
were  reduced  by  the  26  and  35  W/kg  SARs  but  not  the  16  W/kg  level.  The  authors 
concluded,  amongst  other  things,  that  the  current  safety  standard  for  localized 
maximum  SAR  of  8  W/kg  in  any  one  gram  of  tissue  fails  to  provide  for  a  safety  factor 
of  10  and  should  be  re-examined. 

A  series  of  studies  with  rhesus  monkeys  was  conducted  by  John  D’Andrea  and 
colleagues  [4,  5].  Two  different  frequencies,  5.62  GHz  [4]  and  2.37  GHz  [5]  were 
used.  The  animals  were  trained  on  operantly  conditioned  tasks  and  exposed  to 
microwaves  while  performing  the  tasks.  Even  though  the  peak  powers  were  quite  high, 
the  pulses  were  of  short  duration,  e.g.,  50  ns  [4]  and  93  ns  [5],  The  peak  power 
densities  ranged  from  518  W/cm2  at  5.62  GHz  to  11.3  kW/cm2  at  2.37  GHz.  The 
exposures  at  the  lower  frequency  resulted  in  relatively  small  SARs  of  0.075  W/kg  or 
less  and  no  behavioral  effects  were  observed.  The  exposures  at  5.62  GHz  at  various 
energy  levels  produced  SARs  of  2,  4,  and  6  W/kg.  Only  the  4  and  6  W/kg  doses 
produced  behavioral  changes,  a  decrease  in  response  rate  and  an  increase  in  reaction 
time.  These  findings  agreed  with  much  of  the  behavioral  work  cited  in  the  IEEE  guide 
[1],  Two  types  of  pulses,  an  enhanced  pulse  (9  times  the  level  of  the  radar  pulse)  and 
the  standard  radar  pulse,  were  examined  in  the  higher  frequency  study  [4].  No  different 
behavioral  effects  occurred  as  a  consequence  of  these  two  different  pulse  strengths. 

A  unique  behavioral  response  of  pulsed  high  power  microwaves  was  observed  by 
Brown  et  al.  [6].  A  mouse  was  confined  to  a  plastic  tube  and  its  head  and  neck  were 
exposed  to  single  pulses  of  1.25  GHz  radiation  at  various  power  levels  and  number  of 
pulses.  It  was  observed  that  each  animal  would  emit  a  twitch  or  movement  of  the  body 
when  it  was  exposed  at  levels  ranging  from  0.0072  to  200  kW.  A  dose  dependency  was 
found  which  leveled  off  at  the  higher  doses  (1  kW/kg).  Again,  a  thermal  mechanism 
seemed  to  be  responsible  with  a  threshold  near  an  increment  of  1 .7.  "C  from  baseline 

Several  behavioral  investigations  have  been  conducted  with  a  TEMPO  vircator 
located  at  the  microwave  facilities  of  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research.  The 
device  generates  an  80  ns,  3000  MHz  pulse  with  700  MW  peak  transmitted  power.  In 
one  study  treadmill  performance  of  rats  was  studied  [7].  The  subjects  were  trained  to 
steady  rates  of  daily  running  and  then  exposed  in  25  min  sessions  to  1  pulse  every  8 
seconds.  Following  an  exposure  session  the  animals  were  placed  on  a  treadmill  and 
their  performance  assessed.  Exposures  produced  SARs  of  0.072  W/kg;  nevertheless,  a 
reduction  in  running  time  occurred.  Similarly,  another  experiment  with  rats  using  the 
TEMPO  [8]  reported  that  decision-making  was  disrupted  after  a  25  min  exposure 
session  (200  pulses).  Both  of  these  experiments  observed  behavioral  effects  at  power 
levels  substantially  below  those  indicated  as  a  safe  level  in  the  IEEE  guide  [1].  Such 
effects  could  be  specific  to  unique  properties  of  the  TEMPO,  thus  they  are  difficult  to 
replicate  with  other  sources. 

Another  group  of  devices  producing  high-power  pulses  covering  the  RF  area 
involves  ultra-wide  band  (UWB)  and  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  generators.  UWB 
generators  typically  produce  60  Hz,  1-10  ns  pulses  at  a  bandwidth  of  0.25-2.50  GHz, 
with  a  peak  E  field  strength  of  250  kV/m.  The  EMP  generators  contain  most  of  their 


405 


energy  in  the  20-100  MHz  region  at  E-field  strengths  of  100  kV/m.  Exposures  in  both 
instances  are  generally  of  short  duration,  but  the  EMP  pulse  is  typically  much  longer, 
e.g.,  900  ns. 

Results  of  behavioral  experiments  with  EMP  exposures  vary.  One  study  disclosed 
that  exposure  to  200  EMP  pulses  for  about  30  minutes  resulted  in  a  group  of  rats  that 
preferred  the  exposure  and  another  group  whose  performance  was  actually  enhanced 
[9].  However,  the  enhancement  was  not  a  statistically  significant  change  . 

Orientation  behavior  in  birds  3  to  6  hours  after  undergoing  EMP  exposure  was 
examined  by  Moore  and  Simons  [10].  Some  disruption  in  selection  of  migratory 
direction  was  found,  but  the  investigators  concluded  that  free-flying  migratory  birds 
should  not  be  strongly  influenced  by  EMP  pulses. 

Research  dealing  with  animals  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  has  been  conducted  on  rats 
[11]  and  monkeys  [12],  A  variety  of  both  cognitive  and  motivational  behaviors  was 
explored  in  rats  after  exposure  to  UWB  radiation  between  0.25  and  2.50  GHz  for  2 
minutes.  No  statistically  significant  differences  in  behavior  were  found  between  sham 
and  exposed  animals  [11].  The  monkey  experiments  [12]  were  designed  with  a 
narrower  bandwidth  (100  MHz  to  1.5  GHz)  and  continued  the  2  min  exposures  prior  to 
testing.  Still,  no  differences  were  found  in  a  very  complicated  cognitive  task  involving 
vestibular  canal  functions. 


3.  Conventional  Pulses 

In  the  current  decade  there  has  been  a  decrease  in  the  number  of  experiments  with 
animals  exposed  to  energy  from  microwave  sources.  Furthermore,  the  results  of  these 
few  experiments  have  not  been  consistent  and  seem  to  add  little  information  for  the 
documentation  of  potential  health  effects  of  RF  exposure.  Each  study  is  unique  in  both 
the  frequency  explored  and  the  behavior  examined.  For  example,  Lai  et  al.  [13] 
exposed  rats  for  45  minutes  to  pulsed  2450  MHz  microwaves  at  1  mW/cm2  (SAR  =  0.6 
W/kg)  in  cylindrical  waveguides.  Following  exposure  the  subjects  were  placed  in  a 
radial  arm  maze  and  tested  for  learning  and  memory.  Several  independent  variables 
were  employed,  and  in  the  main  treatments  of  sham  versus  microwave  exposure,  a 
deficit  in  learning  was  found  in  the  exposed  rats. 

In  another  study  with  a  2450  MHz  source  rats  were  also  exposed  at  a  power  density 
of  1  mW/cra2.  When  they  were  tested  in  a  shuttle-box  following  exposure  they  were 
similarly  found  to  have  a  performance  decrement  [14]. 

A  recent  report  deals  with  the  operantly  conditioned  behavior  of  the  offspring  of  RF 
exposed  rats  [15].  Dams  were  exposed  continuously  from  post-conception  days  1-20  to 
900  MHz  radiation  modulated  at  217  Hz  at  0.1  mW/cm2.  When  the  offspring  became 
adults  they  were  trained  on  an  operant  task  under  various  contingencies.  No  differences 
in  the  performance  of  the  offspring  of  exposed  versus  the  offspring  of  the  sham- 
exposed  mothers  were  observed. 

A  rather  unique  study  is  that  of  Gapeev  et  al.  [16],  They  examined  the  effects  of  a 
range  of  continuous  wave  radiation  centered  on  42.25  GHz  on  the  movement  of 


406 


protozoa.  Cells  of  Paramecium  caudatum  were  exposed  in  a  2  mm  saline  layer  located 
in  a  cuvette.  Cells  were  irradiated  for  12  minutes  at  power  densities  from  0.1  to  20 
mW/cm2.  A  motility  index  of  the  animal’s  activity  was  calculated.  The  carrier 
frequency  of  the  radiation  was  modulated  from  0.05  to  16  Hz.  Locomotor  activity 
increased  and  reached  a  maximum  at  0.0956  Hz  modulation  and  0.1  mW/cm2. 
Different  power  densities  produced  the  same  effect.  The  effect  decreased  when  the 
carrier  frequency  was  either  increased  or  decreased  on  either  side  of  42.25  GHz.  This 
experiment  illustrates  a  relatively  simple  preparation  for  investigating  RF  behavioral 
effects  and  should  be  attempted  by  others  even  though  isolating  the  effects  on  the 
organism  as  opposed  to  the  effects  on  the  organism  in  saline  will  present  some 
problems. 


4.  Conclusions 


Behavioral  research  on  the  effects  of  radiofrequency  radiation  has  decreased 
substantially  over  the  last  ten  years.  This  is  a  surprising  phenomenon  in  light  of  the  fact 
that  exposure  standards  in  place  in  most  countries  are  based  on  the  results  of  behavioral 
experiments.  Perusal  of  the  program  for  the  recent  annual  meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society  held  in  St.  Petersburg,  Florida,  reveals  that  only  three  RF 
behavioral  studies  were  presented.  Only  two  of  these  concentrated  on  UWB  effects.  It 
may  be  that  behavior  is  no  longer  perceived  as  a  sensitive  indicator  of  RF  health  effects. 
Certainly,  most  of  the  research  concerning  cellular  telephones  is  on  non-behavioral 
biological  effects. 

Behavior  is  a  final  common  expression  of  virtually  all  physiological  processes  with, 
perhaps,  the  exception  of  disease,  and  even  that  endpoint  is  often  initially  expressed  as  a 
behavioral  response.  If  low  level  RF  radiation  produces  adverse  health  effects, 
behavioral  changes  will  continue  to  be  the  first  to  be  observed. 


5.  References 

1.  IEEE  C95.1-1991  (1992)  Safety  Levels  With  Respect  To  Human  Exposure  to  Radio  Frequency 
Electromagnetic  Fields,  3  kHz  to  300  GHz ,  IEEE,  Piscataway,  NJ. 

2.  Akycl,  Y.,  Hunt,  E.L.,  Gambnll,  C,  and  Vargas,  C.  Jr.,  (1991)  Immediate  post-exposure  effects  of  high- 
peak-power  microwave  pulses  on  operant  behavior  of  Wisiar  rats,  Bioelectromagneltcs  12,  183-195. 

3.  D'Andrea  J.A.,  Cobb  B.L.,  and  Knepton  J.  (1 992)  Behavioral  effects  of  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses: 
Head  exposure  at  1.3  GHz.  Report  NAMRL-1372;  Pensacola,  FL:  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research 
Laboratory,  NAMRL-1372. 

4.  D’Andrea,  J.A.,  Thomas,  A.,  and  Hatcher,  D.J.  (1994)  Rhesus  monkey  behavior  during  exposure  to 
high-pcak-powcr  5.62-GIIz  microwave  pulses,  Bioelectromagnetics  15,  163-176. 

5.  D’Andrea.  J.A.  (1995)  Effects  of  microwave  radiation  exposure  on  behavioral  performance  in 
nonhuman  primates,  in  BJ.  Klauenberg,  M.  Grandolfo,  and  D.N.  Erwin  (eds.),  Radiofrequency 
Radiation  Standards.  Biological  Effects.  Dosimetry ,  Epidemiology,  and  Public  Health  Policy,  Plenum 
Press,  New  York,  pp.  271-  277. 


407 


6.  Brown,  D.O.,  Lu,  S*T.,  and  Bison,  E.C.  (1994)  Characteristics  of  microwave  evoked  body  movements  in 
mice,  Bioelectromagnetics  15,  143-161. 

7.  Akyel,  Y.,  Bell,  M.,  Raslear,  T.G.,  and  Hammer,  R.M.  (1993)  The  effects  of  high-peak  power  pulsed 
microwaves  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  rat,  in  M.  Blank  (ed.),  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in 
Biology  and  Medicine,  San  Francisco  Press,  San  Francisco,  pp.  668-670. 

8.  Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Bates,  F.,  Belt,  M.,  and  Lu,  S-T.  (1993)  Temporal  bisection  in  rats:  The  effects 
of  high-peak-power  pulsed  microwave  radiation,  Bioelectromagnetics  14,  459-478. 

9.  Akyel,  Y.  and  Raslear,  T.G.  (1993)  The  effects  of  acute  BMP  fields  on  the  behavior  of  rats,  in  J.  de 
Lorgc  and  W.  Mick  (eds.),  EM P  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel  Proceedings .  16-18  Mar. 
Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program,  Crystal  Plaza  5,  Rm.  866,  Washington,  DC  20362-5101 ,  pp.  45-57. 

10.  Moore,  F.R.  and  Simons,  T.  (1993)  Orientation  behavior  of  migratory  birds  in  response  to  Empress  II- 
simulated  BMP,  in  J.  de  Lorge  and  W.  Mick  (eds.),  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel 
Proceedings ,  16-18  Mar,  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program,  Crystal  Plaza  5,  Rm.  866,  Washington,  DC 

20362-5101,  pp.  97-112. 

1 1 .  Walters,  T.J.,  Mason,  P.A.,  Sherry,  C.J.,  Steffen,  C.,  and  Merritt,  J.H.  (1995)  No  detectable  bioeffects 
following  acute  exposure  to  high  peak  power  ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats,  Aviat . 
Space  and  Environ.  Med.  65,  562-567. 

12.  Sherry,  C.J.,  Blick,  D.W.,  Wallers,  T.J.,  Brown,  G.G.,  and  Murphy,  M.R.  (1995)  Lack  of  behavioral 
effects  in  non-human  primates  after  exposure  to  ultrawide  electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave 
frequency  range,  Radial.  Res.  143,  93-97. 

13.  Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  and  Guy,  A.W.  (1994)  Microwave  irradiation  affects  radial-arm  maze  performance 
in  the  rat,  Bioelectromagnetics  15,  95-104. 

14.  Varetski,  V.V.,  Rudnev,  M.I.,  Degtyar,  V.N.,  and  Rcdshod’ko,  T.L.  (1991)  Combined  influence  of 
gamma-  rays  and  superhigh-frequency  radiation  on  conditioned  reflex  behavior  in  the  rat, 
Radiohiologiia  31 ,  246-25 1 . 

15.  Bomhausen,  M.,  Kinkel,  D.,  Wu,  X.N.,  and  Scheingraber,  H.  (1 997)  Operant  behavior  tests  in  rats  after 
prenatal  exposure  to  high  frequency  electromagnetic  fields,  presented  at  the  Second  World  Congress  for 
Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  8-13  June,  Bologna,  Italy,  pp.  322-323. 

1 6.  Gapeev,  A.B.,  Chemcris,  N.K.,  Fescnko,  E.E.,  and  Khramov,  R.N.  (1994)  Resonance  effects  of  a  low 
intensity  modulated  EIIF  field.  Alteration  of  the  locomotor  activity  of  the  protozoa  paramecium 
caudatum,  Biofizika ,  39,  74-82. 


NON-THERM AL  BIOEFFECTS  OF  RADIO  FREQUENCY 
RADIATION:  WHAT  ARE  THEY? 


JOHN  DE  LORGE 

MCKESSON  BIOSERVICES 
U.S.  ARMY  MEDICAL  RESEARCH  DETACHMENT 
8308  HAWKS  ROAD,  BLDG  1184 
BROOKS  AIR  FORCE  BASE,  TEXAS  78235 
USA 

ABSTRACT 

Non-thermal  biological  effects  of  radiofrequency  radiation  (RFR)  are  difficult  to  investigate  for 
several  reasons  including  1)  absorbed  energy  is  hard  to  measure,  2)  biological  endpoints  are  not  well 
described  a  priori ,  3)  target  organs  have  not  been  identified,  4)  definitions  of  non-thermal  vary  from  one 
publication  to  another,  and  5)  consistem  research  results  are  lacking.  The  genera)  conventional  definition 
of  non-thermal  is  any  amount  of  RFR  energy  failing  to  produce  a  detectable  rise  in  an  organism’s 
temperature.  However,  this  definition  ignores  an  organism’s  ability  to  compensate  for  RFR  energy 
deposition.  The  present  paper  will  examine  several  definitions  of  non-thermal  RFR  levels  of  energy, 
provide  examples,  and  discuss  other  experimental  arrangements  for  demonstrating  thermal  versus  non- 
thermal  biological  effects. 


INTRODUCTION 

Numerous  recent  articles  in  the  popular  press  have  commented  on  the  biological  effects  of 
radiofrequency  radiation  (RFR)  and  the  quantity  of  RFR  emitters  now  present  in  our  environment.  In 
particular,  awareness  of  the  increasing  number  of  mobile  phones  has  elicited  interest  in  the  public  health 
consequences  of  cell  phone  emissions.  The  standard  reply  to  such  interest  has  been  that  cell  phone  RFR 
emissions  only  result  in  low-level  energy  deposition  in  the  user  and  therefore  present  no  health  hazard.  In 
response  to  this  has  been  a  follow-up  question,  “What  about  non-thermal  effects?” 

What  are  non-thermal  effects?  These  are  the  effects  of  RFR  exposure  presumed  to  be  caused  by 
something  other  than  heat  under  the  premise  that  thermal  effects  are  the  effects  produced  by  an  increase 
in  the  ceaseless  random  oscillation  and  vibration  of  molecules  resulting  in  increased  kinetic  energy. 
There  have  been  several  conceptualizations  of  how  low-intensity  RFR  energy  is  absorbed  and  manifested 
in  non-thermal  or  athermal  effects.  Adey  (1993)  presents  a  number  of  ideas  on  the  topic.  Discussion  of 
the  mechanisms  associated  with  such  concepts  will  not  be  included  in  the  present  review.  Instead,  the 
subject  matter  of  this  paper  will  focus  on  examples  in  the  scientific  literature  of  non-thermal/athermal 
studies  and  how  each  classifies  itself.  Non-thermal  and  athermal  will  be  treated  as  identical  phenomenon. 
Such  an  approach  may  lead  to  a  clarification  of  the  variety  of  definitions  in  contemporary  literature  and 
provide  an  incentive  for  a  universally  acceptable  technical  definition  of  non-thermal  RFR  effects. 

NON-THERMAL  DEFINITIONS 

A  technical  definition  of  a  non-thermal  effect  produced  by  exposure  to  RFR  should  be  based  on 
information  empirically  obtained.  However,  defining  characteristics  are  often  ignored  and  only 
infrequently  presented  a  priori.  Most  of  these  are  seldom  revealed  in  the  literature  dealing  with  the  topic. 
Only  after  reading  a  specific  research  article  does  one  become  aware  of  what  was  meant  by  “non- 
thermal”  in  that  instance.  These  “working  definitions”  are  unique,  varied,  and  consist  of  at  least  seven  or 
more  as  illustrated  in  Table  1.  The  first  definition  in  this  table  involves  the  situation  where  a 
thermometer  is  placed  in  a  specimen  and  temperature  is  measured.  If  there  is  no  measurable  change  in 
temperature  the  exposure  is  by  definition  non-thermal.  For  example  Van  Dorp  et  al.  (1998)  used  a 
fiberoptic  thermometer  to  measure  the  temperature  of  an  in  vitro  preparation  of  mouse  myeloma  and 
hybridoma  cells  exposed  to  2.45-GHz  microwaves.  No  effects  were  seen  as  long  as  a  physiologically 
normal  temperature  of  37  degrees  C  was  maintained.  On  the  other  hand,  D'Inzeo  et  al.  (1988)  did  find 


342 


NON-THERMAL  DEFINITIONS 


differentia!  effects  when  they  exposed  cultured  myotubes  from  chick  embryos  to  10.75  GHz  at  a  power 
density  of  50  pW/cm2  and  affected  the  ACh-activated  single-channel  openings  and  induced  current  in 
membrane  patches.  There  were  no  temperature  changes  observed  in  the  bath  temperature.  However,  how 
their  thermistor  only  had  a  resolution  of  0.1 -degree  C  for  these  in  vitro  preparations. 


TABLE  I 

Indices  and  References  of  Non-Thermal  Definitions 


Index 

Mode 

Reference 

H 

1! 

o 

CW  or  P 

Van  Dorp  et  al.  (1998) 

AT  <  Sham 

CW  orP 

Cleary  (1996) 

AT  <  0 

EHPP 

Raslear  et  al.  (1993) 

SAR  <  0.4  W/kg 

CW  or  P 

Kiug  et  al.  (1997) 

PD<  l0mW/cm2 

CW  orP 

Akoev  et  al.  (1995) 

RFR  AT  “  Conventional  AT 

CW  orP 

Zakharova  et  al.  (1993) 

P  AT  =  CW  AT 

P  vs  CW 

Adey  (1999) 

One  aspect  of  the  DTnzeo  et  al.  (1988)  article  is  that  temperature  increases  could  have  occurred 
up  to  0, 1  degree  C.  If  that  had  been  the  case  then  it  may  be  possible  that  the  positive  effect  was  thermal, 
particularly  if  there  were  studies  showing  similar  effects  of  such  small  temperature  increases.  The 
absence  of  studies  on  the  effects  of  small  temperature  increases  is  not  evidence  that  such  effects  will  or 
will  not  occur.  It  should  be  dearly  demonstrated  that  conventional  temperature  changes  do  not  result  in 
the  measured  effect,  even  when  one  ascertains  that  temperatures  have  not  varied. 

A  slight  modification  of  the  first  example  is  the  situation  wherein  an  RFR  exposed  preparation  is 
compared  with  a  sham  and  the  temperature  changes,  if  any,  are  identical  before,  during  and  after 
exposure.  Any  biological  effects  that  occur  in  the  exposed  preparation  are  referred  to  as  non-thermal. 
Cleary  (1996)  reviews  a  number  of  studies  under  this  condition  where  extensive  biological  effects  have 
been  observed  in  vitro.  Most  of  these  effects  were  obtained  under  thermostatically  regulated  isothermal 
conditions  (37*  ±  0.1°  C)  with  sample  temperatures  continuously  monitored. 

The  non-thermal  nature  of  these  initial  two  definitions  may  apply  only  to  in  vitro  experiments. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  living  animals  are  exposed  to  RFR  under  these  conditions,  AT  =  0  and  AT  < 
Sham,  it  is  possible  that  homeostatic  processes  will  allow  an  animal  to  compensate  for  the  additional 
energy  and  not  display  whole-body  temperature  differences.  The  compensation  process  itself  may  be 
responsible  for  any  observed  effects. 

Another  variation  often  erroneously  reported  as  a  non-thermal  effect  is  that  of  “microwave 
hearing.”  Contemporary  research  shows  this  acoustic  experience  to  be  a  result  of  a  thermoelastic 
expansion  and  propagation  of  an  acoustic  wave  induced  by  microwaves  (Lin  et  al.  1988).  However,  these 
relatively  high  peak  power  pulses  are  very  short  and  at  a  low  average  power  density  resulting  in 
insignificant  whole  body  temperature  changes  (<  0.01°  C).  Nevertheless,  the  microwave  auditory 
response  is  probably  the  most  sensitive  bioeffect  consistently  found  in  the  RFR  research  literature.  This 
acoustic  effect  is  more  than  likely  responsible  for  the  results  of  several  experiments  demonstrating 
differences  between  CW  and  pulsed  RFR  on  animal  behavior  at  low  average  powers.  It  may  be  possible 
to  control  for  potential  RFR  produced  acoustic  effects  by  having  a  group  of  animals  exposed  with  an 
acoustic  masking  noise  or  a  group  that  experiences  an  audible  sound  at  the  same  repetition  rate  as  that  of 
the  RFR  pulse. 

An  even  greater  high  power  pulse  than  that  producing  microwave  hearing  is  that  generated  by 
unique  military  devices,  e.g.,  TEMPO,  with  peak  power  in  excess  of  700  MW.  These  extremely  high 
power  pulses  (EHPP)  are  very  short,  80  ns,  and  are  presented  at  low  average  powers  resulting  in  SARs 


343 


DE  LORGE 


well  below  0.1  W/kg  (Raslear  et  al.  1993).  It  was  found  that  cognitive  function  in  rats  could  be  affected 
by  exposure  to  these  pulses.  Whole  body  temperatures  associated  with  EHPPs  are  presumed  to  be 
insignificant  and  hence,  thermal  effects  would  not  occur.  However,  when  temperature  measurements 
were  made  on  rat  cadavers  exposed  to  these  high  power  pulses  it  was  observed  that  changes  in  the  skin 
temperature  in  the  area  of  the  nose  were  as  great  as  0.4  degrees  C. 

Unless  it  has  been  empirically  demonstrated  that  small  temperature  increases  have  no  causal 
effect  on  the  dependent  variables  of  the  latter  two  examples,  it  is  inaccurate  to  say  that  an  effect  is  non- 
thermal  except,  perhaps,  in  those  cases  where  no  temperature  changes  occur.  In  fact,  even  if  no 
temperature  increase  is  seen  during  exposure  a  transient  increase  might  occur  within  a  post  exposure 
period  of  up  to  one  hour  following  irradiation  with  pulsed  RFR  at  low  average  power,  SAR  =  0.6  W/kg 
(Lai  et  al.  1984). 

Exposure  of  an  organism  to  RFR  will  introduce  energy  throughout  all  areas  illuminated  by  the 
radiation.  An  illuminated  side  of  a  subject  may  absorb  substantial  amounts  of  energy  while  the  shadowed 
side  may  absorb  none.  Absorption  of  this  energy  is  dependent  upon  characteristics  of  the  RFR,  the 
environment,  and  the  organism.  If  the  exposed  subject  is  of  the  appropriate  size  in  relation  to  the  RFR 
wavelength  it  may  absorb  energy  throughout.  Whenever  a  measure  of  absorption  is  used  such  as  the 
specific  absorption  rate,  SAR,  these  aspects  should  be  kept  in  mind. 

Many  studies  define  a  non-thermal  exposure  in  terms  of  how  much  energy  is  absorbed  as 
measured  or  estimated  by  SAR.  An  example  of  this  is  seen  in  the  work  of  Klug  et  al.  (1997)  who  exposed 
rat  embryos  to  SARs  of  0.2,  1.0,  and  5.0  W/kg  at  a  frequency  of  150  MHz.  The  embryos  were  grown  in 
culture  in  containers  specifically  aligned  in  either  the  magnetic  or  electric  field.  SARs  were  estimated 
based  on  transmitter  power  levels.  No  temperature  measurements  were  reported.  All  of  these  in  vitro 
SAR  values  were  treated  as  non-thermal  and  no  significant  effects  on  embryo  growth  or  differentiation 

were  found. 

Even  more  frequently  seen  in  the  literature  are  the  reports  of  non-thermal  effects  where  the  only 
criterion  for  non-thermal  is  the  power  density  level.  Abstracts  of  several  Russian  papers  fall  in  this 
category;  e.g.,  Koveshnikova  and  Antipenko  (1988)  reported  effects  at  microwatt  levels.  Even  higher 
levels  up  to  10  mW/cm7  have  been  referred  to  as  being  in  the  non-thermal  range.  Akoev  et  al.  (1995) 
conducted  studies  on  skates  with  power  densities  in  the  range  of  1-5  mW/cm2  at  frequencies  between  37- 
55  GHz.  The  ampullae  of  Lorenzini  were  shown  to  increase  their  firing  rate  at  low  intensities.  Inhibitory 
responses  were  found  when  the  highest  power  densities  were  used.  Although  no  temperature 
measurements  were  taken  the  effects  seen  above  5  mW/cm2  were  thought  to  be  thermal  while  the  lower 
levels  were  proposed  to  have  their  effect  by  generating  D.C.  potentials  in  the  vicinity  of  electroreceptor 
duct  openings. 

Another  approach  compares  the  effects  of  heating  with  RFR  to  heating  with  conventional 
heating  sources  (Phelan  et  al.  1994).  Different  effects  or  differences  in  the  effects  of  equivalent  thermal 
loads  are  interpreted  as  attributable  to  non-thermal  mechanisms.  There  are  problems  in  this  interpretation 

when  living  organisms  are  the  experimental  subject.  Increased  energy  absorption  will  increase  body 
temperature,  which  in  turn  will  initiate  thermoregulatory  mechanisms  to  reduce  body  temperature. 
Among  these  mechanisms  are  sweating  and  increased  peripheral  blood  flow  which  may  increase 
reflection  of  the  RFR  at  the  skin  surface.  All  of  this,  in  addition  to  the  possibility  of  energy  hot  spots  and 
uneven  energy  distribution,  should  produce  different  effects  of  RFR  heating  and  conventional  heating. 
There  is  no  need  to  resort  to  an  interpretation  of  non-thermal  mechanisms  in  such  comparisons.  In  vitro 
experiments  do  not  suffer  from  the  same  criticism  although  the  differential  microheating  of  tissues  with 
RFR  versus  conventional  sources  could  account  for  observed  differences  especially  when  one  considers 
that  the  instant  heating  rate  of  a  very  high  powered  pulse  is  orders  of  magnitude  faster  than 
conventionally  conducted  heat  (Zakharova  et  al.  1993;  Czerka  et  al.  1997). 

The  Final  definition  in  the  above  table  deals  with  studies  where  specific  bioeffects  were  observed 
with  amplitude  modulated  or  pulsed  RFR.  Yet  no  such  effects  were  found  when  CW  or  frequency 
modulation  at  the  same  SAR  was  used.  Adey  et  al.  (1999)  examined  the  effects  of  standard,  836  MHz, 
digital  phone  RFR  intensities  similar  to  those  experienced  by  hand-held  mobile  phone  users  on 
spontaneous  or  induced  brain  tumors  in  rats.  North  American  Digital  Cellular  pulsed  modulation  (50  Hz) 
was  used.  A  reduction  in  the  incidence  of  tumors  in  the  exposed  animals  was  found.  Later,  Adey  et  al. 
(2000)  exposed  rats  to  the  same  frequency  at  similar  power  levels  but  this  time  the  carrier  wave  was 
frequency  modulated.  No  effects  on  brain  tumors  were  found.  The  observation  that  effects  were  obtained 
with  pulsed  RFR  versus  no  effects  with  frequency  modulation  was  attributed  to  athermal  or  non-thermal 
mechanisms. 

This  brief  overview  of  non-thermal  literature  reveals  that  many  studies  fail  to  actually  measure 
tempcraluie  and  only  assume  that  theiuial  effects  were  absent.  Ollier  studies  use  thermostatically 


344 


NON-THERMAL  DEFINITIONS 


regulated  (in  vitro)  preparations  while  in  vivo  experiments  depend  upon  the  thermoregulatory  system  of 
an  animal  to  dissipate  heat  from  an  RFR  exposure.  In  both  instances  thermal  causation  of  bioeffects  may 
not  have  been  prevented  and  it  may  be  possible  for  phase  transition  thresholds  of  the  cell  membrane  or 
thresholds  for  other  biophysical  triggers  to  be  breached  by  very  small  temperature  increments.  Even 
where  temperatures  have  been  measured,  different  heating  sources  may  have  resulted  in  nonuniform 
microscopic  heating  of  cells,  tissues,  etc.  that  could  have  been  responsible  for  any  observed  differences. 

Although  there  may  be  several  others,  one  example  of  non-thermal  bioeffects  that  escapes  a 
thermal  explanation  is  where  different  effects  are  found  with  pulsed  or  amplitude  modulation  when 
compared  with  CW  or  frequency  modulation  at  similar  low  average  power  levels.  Experiments  with 
these  comparisons  should  be  replicated  in  several  laboratories  and  hopefully  testable  explanations  will  be 
forthcoming. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Contract  grant  sponsor:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command.  Contract  grant 
number:  D AMD  1 7-94-C-4069. 

The  views  expressed  in  this  article  arc  those  of  the  author  and  should  not  be  construed  as 
reflecting  the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  Department  of  the  Army,  the  United  States  Government,  or 
McKesson  BioServices. 

The  author  is  grateful  for  the  valuable  comments  on  this  manuscript  of  D.  Blick,  M. 
Bornhausen,  J.  D’Andrea,  S-T.  Lu,  S.  Mathur,  J.  Merritt,  A.  Pakhomov,  and  R.  Seaman  along  with  the 
assistance  of  L.  Allen. 


REFERENCES 

Adey,  W.R.,  Biological  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields.  J  Cell  BioChem  ,  51(4),  410-6,  1993. 

Adey,  W.R.,  Byus,  C.V.,  Cain,  C.D.,  Higgins,  R.J.,  Jones,  R.A.,  Kean,  C .J.,  Kuster,  N.,  MacMurray,  A., 
Stagg, 

R.B.,  Zimmerman, G.,  Phillips,  J.L.,  Haggren,  W.  Spontaneous  and  nitros urea- induced  primary 

tumors 

of  the  central  nervous  system  in  Fischer  344  rats  chronically  exposed  to  836  MHz  modulated 
microwaves.  Radiat  Res,  152(3),  293-302,  1999. 

Adey,  W.R.,  Byus,  C.V.,  Cain,  CD.,  Higgins,  R.  J„  Jones,  R.A.,  Kean,  C.  J.,  Kuster,  N.  MacMurray,  A., 
Stagg,  R.  B.,  Zimmerman,  G.,  Spontaneous  and  nitrosourea-induced  primary  tumors  of  the 
central  nervous  system  in  Fischer  344  rats  exposed  to  frequency-modulated  microwave  fields. 
Cancer  Res,  60(7),  1 857-63,  2000. 

Akoev,  G.  N.,  Avelev,  V.  D.,  Semenjkov,  P.  G.t  Reception  of  low-intensity  millimeter-wave 

electromagnetic  radiation  by  the  electroreceptors  in  skates.  Neuroscience,  66(1),  15-7, 

1995. 

Czerska,  F..  M.,  Casamentn,  J.,  Ning,  J.  T.,  Davis,  C!.,  Physical  Characteristics  and  Possible  Biological 
Effects  of  Microwaves  Applied  in  Wireless  Communication.  Workshop  held  in 
Rockville,  MD,  1997. 

Cleary,  S.  F.,  In  Vitro  Studies  of  the  Effects  of  Nonthermal  Radiofrequency  and  Microwave  Radiation. 

In:  Bernhardt,  J.  H.,  Matthes,  R.  Repacholi,  M.  H.  (eds).  Non-thermal  effects  of  RF 

electromagnetic  fields.  Proceedings  of  the  International  Seminar  of  the  Biological  effects  of 

nnn-lhermal  pulse  and  amplitude  modulated  RF  electromagnetic  fields  and  related  health 

hazards.  Muenchen- 

Neuherberg,.  119-130,  1996. 

DTnzeo,  G.,  Bcrnardi,  P.,  Eusebi,  F.,  Grassi,  F.,  Tamburello,  C.,  Zani,  B.  M.,  Microwave  Effects  on 

Acetylcholine-Induced  Channels  in  Cultured  Chick  Myotubes.  Bioelectromagnetics,  9, 
363-372,  1988. 


345 


DE  LORGE 


Klug,  S„  Hetscher,  M.f  Giles,  S.,  Kohlsmann,  S.,  Kramer,  K.,  The  lack  of  effects  of  nontherma!  RF 

electromagnetic  fields  on  the  development  of  rat  embryos  grown  in  culture.  Life  Sciences ,  61, 

1789- 

1802,  1997. 

Koveshnikova,  I.V.,  Antipenko,  E.N.,  Changes  in  body  weight  of  rats  during  irradiation  with  microwaves 
of 

nonthermal  intensity.  Radiobiologiia,  28(4),  561-3,  1988. 

Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  Chou,  C.K.,  Guy,  A.W.,  Microwave-induced  postexposure  hyperthermia:  involvement 
of 

endogenous  opioids  and  serotonin.  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech,  MTT-32,  822-887, 

1984. 

Lin,  J.C.,  Su,  J.-L.t  Wang,  Y.,  Microwave  induced  thermoelastic  pressure  wave  propagation  in  the  cat 
brain.  Bioelectromagnetics  9,  141,  1988. 

Phelan,  A.M.,  Neubauer,  C.  F.,  Timm,  R.,  Neirenberg,  L,  Lange,  D.  G.,  Athermal  alterations  in  the 
structure  of  the  canalicular  membrane  and  ATPase  activity  induced  by  thermal  levels  of 
microwave 

radiation.  Radiat  Res,  137(1),  52-8,  1994. 

Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Bates,  F.,  Lu,  S-T.,  Elson,  E.C.,  Akyel,  B.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  The  behavioral 

toxicology  of 

high-peak,  low-average  power,  pulsed  microwave  irradiation.  Technical  Report  #001-92, 
Department  of  Microwave  Research,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  Washington,  D.C. 
20307-5 100, 25  January  1993. 

Van  Dorp,  R.,  Marani,  E.,  Boon,  M.  E.,  Cell  replication  rates  and  processes  concerning  antibody 
production  in  vitro  are  not  influenced  by  2.45-GHz  microwaves  at  physiologically  normal 
temperatures.  Methods,  15(2),  151-9,  1998. 

Zakharova,  N.  M.,  Alekseev,  S.  L,  Zhadin,  M.  N.,  Effect  of  SHF-radiation  on  spontaneous  impulse 
activity  of  cerebral  cortex  slices  in  vitro.  Biofizika,  38(3),  520-3,  1993. 


346 


Bioelectromagnetics  20:216-223  (1999) 


Pulsed  Microwave  Induced  Light,  Sound, 
and  Electrical  Discharge  Enhanced 
by  a  Biopolymer 

Johnathan  L.  Kiel,1*  Ronald  L.  Seaman,2  Satnam  P.  Mathur,2 
Jill  E.  Parker,1  John  R.  Wright,3  John  L.  Alls,1  and  Pedro  J.  Morales1 

1 Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 
2 McKesson  BioServices  and  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment, 

Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

department  of  Physical  Sciences,  Southeastern  Oklahoma  State  University, 

Durant,  Oklahoma 

Intense  flashes  of  light  were  observed  in  sodium  bicarbonate  and  hydrogen  peroxide  solutions  when  they 
were  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation,  and  the  response  was  greatly  enhanced  by  a  microwave- 
absorbing,  biosynthesized  polymer,  diazoluminomelanin.  A  FPS-7B  radar  transmitter,  operating  at 
1.25  GHz  provided  pulses  of  5.73  ±  0.09  ps  in  duration  at  10.00  ±  0.03  pulses/s  with  2.07  ±  0.08  MW 
forward  power  (mean  ±  standard  deviation),  induced  the  effect  but  only  when  the  appropriate  chemical 
interaction  was  present.  This  phenomenon  involves  acoustic  wave  generation,  bubble  formation,  pulsed 
luminescence,  ionized  gas  ejection,  and  electrical  discharge.  The  use  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation  to 
generate  highly  focused  energy  deposition  opens  up  the  possibility  of  a  variety  of  biomedical  applications, 
including  targeting  killing  of  microbes  or  eukaryotic  cells.  The  full  range  of  microwave  intensities  and 
frequencies  that  induce  these  effects  has  yet  to  be  explored  and,  therefore,  the  health  and  safety 
implications  of  generating  the  phenomena  in  living  tissues  remain  an  open  question.  Bioelectromagnetics 
20:216-223,  1999.  Published  1999  Wiley-Liss,  Inc/* 

Key  words:  radio  frequency  radiation;  diazoluminomelanin;  free  radicals 


INTRODUCTION 

A  peroxidizing  mixture  of  diazoluminomelanin 
(DALM),  a  microwave  absorbing  polymer,  can  generate 
thermochemiluminescence  (TCL),  steady-state  lumines¬ 
cence  based  on  the  temperature,  when  exposed  to  micro- 
wave  radiation  [Kiel  et  al.,  1990;  Kiel  and  O’Brien, 
1991].  TCL  will  not  proceed  without  the  presence  of 
hydrogen  peroxide  and  a  source  of  carbon  dioxide  (so¬ 
dium  carbonate  or  bicarbonate  can  be  used  in  place  of  the 
gas).  The  polymer,  formed  in  bacteria,  makes  them  sen¬ 
sitive  to  a  profound  microwave  biological  effect  as  well. 
A  moderate  rate  of  energy  absorption  (100  mW/g)  of 
2450-MHz  radiation  has  previously  shown  a  large  mag¬ 
nitude  of  kill  (5  logs)  of  Bacillus  anthracis  (Anthrax 
bacteria),  when  the  bacteria  were  held  at  37  °C  during 
exposure  under  peroxidizing  conditions,  after  cultivation 
on  medium  inducing  DALM  biosynthesis  [Bruno  and 
Kiel,  1993].  In  1989,  we  [Kiel  and  Seaman,  unpublished 
data]  observed  flashes  of  light  in  peroxidizing  solutions 
of  the  water-soluble  TCL  polymer  DALM  with  applied 
microwave  pulses.  In  those  preliminary  experiments,  mi- 

Published  1999  Wiley-Liss,  Inc.  “^This  article  was  prepared 
by  a  group  consisting  of  both  United  States  government 
employees  and  non-United  States  government  employees, 
and  as  such  is  subject  to  17  U.S.C.  Sec.  105. 


crowave  energy  at  2450  MHz  was  delivered  as  40-p,s 
pulses  at  1-3  pulses/s.  Application  was  made  with 
3.6-mm  OD  open-ended  semirigid  coaxial  cable  con¬ 
nected  to  an  EPSCO  PG5KB/5238H  source,  in  contact 
either  with  sample  fluid  or  with  the  outside  of  its  cuvette; 
both  approaches  were  successful  in  generating  flashes  of 
light.  Here,  we  provide  evidence  for  a  pulsed-microwave 


Grant  sponsor:  United  States  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research 
and  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel;  Grant  number: 
DAMD 1 7-94-C-4069. 

The  views,  opinions,  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those 
of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of 
the  Army  or  Department  of  the  Air  Force  position,  policy,  or  decision 
unless  so  designated  by  other  documentation. 

♦Correspondence  to:  J.L.  Kiel,  AFRL/HEDB,  2503  Gillingham  Drive, 
Bldg.  175E,  Brooks  AFB,  TX,  78235-5102.  E-mail:  johnathan. 
kiel@aloer.brooks.af.mil 

Received  for  review  14  August  1997;  Final  revision  received  7  August 
1998 


Microwave  Induced  Light  Production 


217 


mechanism  for  light  production  and  focusing  of  energy 
deposition  that  is  enhanced  by  DALM. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 
Chemicals  and  Biosynthesis 

Luminol  (5-amino-2,3-dihydro- 1 ,4-phthalazinedi- 
one),  3-amino-L-tyrosine  dihydrochloride  (3AT),  sodium 
nitrite,  and  potassium  nitrate  were  obtained  from  Sigma 
(St.  Louis,  MO).  Diazoluminol  was  prepared  by  mixing 
0.17  g  of  luminol  and  0.65  g  of  NaN02  in  120  ml  of 
distilled  water  and  stirring  for  35  min.  The  solution  was 
filtered  twice.  In  the  case  of  luminol  and  bicarbonate 
solutions  used,  clear  supernatants  were  collected  off  sat¬ 
urated  aqueous  solutions  of  luminol  and  NaHC03. 

Biosynthetic  DALM  solutions  were  prepared  from 
Escherichia  coli  JM109,  pIC20RNR, ,  bacteria  (Amer¬ 
ican  Type  Culture  Collection  #  69905)  grown  on  medium 
containing  3-amino-L-tyrosine,  luminol,  and  potassium 
nitrate  in  a  tryptocase  soy  broth  base  (U.S.  Patent 
5,156,971)  for  5  days.  The  unfrozen  pigmented  superna¬ 
tant  was  removed  from  above  the  ice  of  frozen  cultures 
and  was  diluted  as  noted  below.  The  1:10  dilutions  of 
DALM  were  made  in  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  satu¬ 
rated  solutions,  except  that  when  determining  their  opti¬ 
cal  absorptions  at  350  nm,  deionized  water  was  used 
instead.  Optical  absorption  of  1:10  DALM  solution 
at  350  nm  wavelength  was  0.15.  Poly-diazotyrosine 
(pDAT)  was  synthesized  like  DALM,  as  previously  re¬ 
ported  (Kiel  and  O’Brien,  1991],  but  with  the  exclusion 
of  luminol,  and  was  dissolved  in  water  until  its  optical 
absorption  at  350  nm  matched  that  of  the  respective 
DALM  solutions.  These  proportions  were  preserved 
when  solutions  prepared  with  sodium  bicarbonate/lumi¬ 
nol  saturated  solutions  were  substituted  for  water. 

Reaction  Mixtures 

Premixed  reaction  mixtures  for  1:10  DALM  or 
pDAT  contained  1.8  ml  of  saturated  sodium  bicarbonate/ 
luminol  and  0.2  ml  of  DALM  or  pDAT  neat  solution, 
respectively,  to  which  was  added  1.2  ml  of  diazoluminol 
solution  and  additional  0.33  ml  of  saturated  sodium  bi¬ 
carbonate/luminol  solution,  with  or  without  0.495  ml  of 
3%  hydrogen  peroxide  (added  last).  Solutions  of  1:100 
DALM  or  pDAT  differed  from  the  1:10  solutions  in 
containing  1.2  ml  1:10  dilution  of  diazoluminol  solution 
and  0.2  ml  1:10  DALM  or  pDAT  in  sodium  bicarbonate/ 
luminol  saturated  solutions,  with  additional  0.66  ml  sat¬ 
urated  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution,  with  or 
without  0.66  ml  of  3%  hydrogen  peroxide.  Except  for  the 
3%  hydrogen  peroxide,  which  was  added  to  samples 
previously  exposed  to  microwave  radiation,  when  com¬ 
ponents  of  the  reaction  mixtures  were  deleted,  saturated 


sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution  was  substituted  for 
the  excluded  components.  This  substitution  was  not 
made  when  sodium  bicarbonate  solution,  deionized  wa¬ 
ter,  or  hydrogen  peroxide  or  any  of  these  used  in  com¬ 
bination  (Table  1)  were  exposed.  All  reactions  were 
begun  at  room  temperature  (23  °C)  but  were  bulk  heated 
with  forced  hot  air  from  23.3  °C  to  54.5  °C  for  DALM 
and  pDAT  samples  without  hydrogen  peroxide  and  from 
28.2  °C  to  54.4  °C  for  those  same  samples  with  hydrogen 
peroxide.  This  scanning  of  temperature  was  required 
because  we  did  not  know  what  the  optimal  temperature 
or  level  of  thermochemiluminescence  was  required  to 
observe  the  pulse  effects. 

Microwave  Exposure 

Samples  were  placed  in  15-ml  polystyrene  tubes 
without  tops.  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  a  single  tube  was 
held  by  a  polyvinyl  support  beam  attached  to  a  section  of 
WR-650  microwave  waveguide  with  a  flangeless  open¬ 
ing  of  16.5  X  8.3  cm.  The  long  dimension  of  the 
waveguide  opening  was  horizontal,  providing  a  vertical 
electrical  field.  When  placed  in  a  hole  in  the  beam,  a  tube 
was  vertical  with  its  center  7.6  cm  from  the  waveguide 
opening  and  was  centered  horizontally  with  respect  to  the 
opening.  Microwave  pulses  were  generated  by  a  FPS-7B 
radar  transmitter  operating  at  1.25  GHz.  The  transmitter 
provided  pulses  of  5.73  ±  0.09  p.s  in  duration  at  10.00  ± 
0.03  pulses/s  with  2.07  ±  0.08  MW  forward  power 
(mean  ±  standard  deviation).  During  exposures,  temper¬ 
ature  was  monitored  by  means  of  nonperturbing  Vitek 
101  Electrothermia  Monitor  and  Luxtron  probes  in  and 
near  the  bottom  of  the  sample.  Specific  absorption  rates 
(SAR)  determined  in  separate  exposures  of  duplicate 
samples  are  listed  in  Table  1.  These  values  were  calcu¬ 
lated  from  the  rate  of  rise  of  temperature  (°C/s)  in  re¬ 
spective  samples  measured  by  nonperturbing  fiberoptic 
Luxtron  MPM  probes:  SAR  =  c(dT/dt).  Specific  heat  c 
was  taken  to  be  that  of  water,  4180  J/kg/°C,  for  all 
samples.  Equivalent  peak  SAR  of  the  pulses  was  approx¬ 
imately  2  X  104  times  the  time-averaged  SARs  reported 
in  Table  1. 

Sound  and  Light  Recordings 

Sound  was  recorded  on  the  audio  track  of  videotape  by 
using  an  RCA  BK-6B  M-l  1017A  microphone  outside  of 
the  anechoic  chamber.  Sound  was  directed  to  the  micro¬ 
phone  through  a  plastic  tube  (1.9-cm  ID)  connected  to  a 
plastic  funnel  positioned  15  cm  above  the  sample  tube. 
The  acoustic  path  between  the  top  of  the  sample  tube  and 
the  microphone  was  4.63  m  long,  with  a  calculated 
propagation  delay  of  approximately  13.4  ms.  The  video 
images  for  analysis  were  recorded  with  an  ITT  model 
#F4577  low-light  sensitive  black/white  camera  at  a  nor¬ 
mal  video  frame  reiording  rate.  Images  to  spatially  re- 


08/14/01  07:03  FAX  301  619  2745 


MRMC  RM1 


^006 


solve  the  light  source  were  recorded  with  an  Optronics 
DEI-470  integrating  color  camera  at  various  frame  inte¬ 
gration  times.  The  arrangement  of  this  apparatus  is 


Fig.  1.  Side  view  of  sample  positioned  for  exposure.  The  15-ml 
polystyrene  tube  containing  the  sample  was  held  by  a  nonme- 
tallk;  support  beam  made  of  polyvinylchloride.  The  beam  was 
securely  fastened  to  the  WR-650  waveguide  by  brackets  made 
of  the  same  material.  The  inverted  plastic  funnel  directed  sound 
produced  in  the  sample  through  tubing  connected  to  a  micro¬ 
phone  outside  the  anechoic  chamber.  Not  shown  in  the  sketch 
are  secondary  support  braces  and  nonperturbing  temperature 
probe. 


shown  in  Figure  2.  The  exposure  was  performed  in  an 
anechoic  chamber  sealed  off  from  external  light  sources. 
The  cameras  were  placed  in  screen-wire  Faraday  cages 
with  holes  cut  in  the  cages  so  as  not  to  block  the  light 
path  to  the  lenses. 

For  analysis,  videotape  was  played  on  a  Panasonic 
TV/Recorder  AG-560  (27-cm  diagonal  screen)  with  con¬ 
trast  set  at  maximum  and  brightness  at  minimum.  The 
video  image  of  an  activated,  luminescing  solution  was 
approximately  3.5  cm  from  the  bottom  of  the  sample  tube 
to  the  fluid  meniscus  and  1.7  cm  wide. 

For  sensing  the  light  emissions,  a  sensing  element 
of  an  EXTECH  Light  Adapter  4010201  was  securely 
fastened  to  a  vertical  plate  having  a  variable  aperture. 
The  plate  was  held  in  place  in  front  of  the  monitor  screen 
by  stereotaxic  manipulators,  which  allowed  precise 
placement  of  the  aperture-sensor  combination.  The  signal 
horn  the  light  adapter  was  amplified  by  a  Krohn-Hite 
3322  Dual  Filter  (20  dB,  low  pass  max  flat,  5 1  kHz),  and 
then  by  a  Gould  Model  20-4615-58  Universal  Amplifier 
(ext.  mV,  1  V  F.S.,  DC-30  Hz)  and  displayed  on  a 
Tektronix  2430A  Digital  Oscilloscope  and/or  recorded 
on  a  Gould  TA2000  Chart  Recorder. 

The  audio  output  of  the  monitor  was  amplified  by  a 
Krohn-Hite  filter  (0  dB,  high-pass  RC,  900  Hz)  and  by  a 
Rockland  Model  1022F  Dual  Hi/Lo  filter  (20  dB,  high- 


Microwave  Induced  Light  Production 


219 


Fig.  2.  Top  view  of  the  experimental  apparatus  inside  the  ane- 
choic  chamber.  The  shielded  boxes  containing  cameras  were 
supported  from  the  floor  and  were  approximately  76  cm  from 
the  sample  tube.  Lines  of  sight  to  the  sample  are  shown  as 
dotted  lines.  Not  shown  are  cables  from  the  cameras,  tubing  for 
sound  transmission,  and  the  nonperturbing  temperature  probe, 
which  all  passed  through  the  cable  port  to  instrumentation 
outside  the  chamber.  Microwave  absorbing  material  lining  the 
interior  wall  of  the  chamber,  secondary  support  braces,  and 
funnel  for  sound  pick  up  are  also  not  shown. 


pass  RC,  1 1  Hz).  The  output  of  the  latter  was  connected 
to  the  second  Rockland  amplifier  (0  dB,  low  pass,  60  Hz) 
through  a  1N914B  signal  diode  to  provide  a  rectified 
signal.  The  amplified  signal  or  the  amplified  and  rectified 
signal  was  displayed  and/or  recorded  along  with  the  light 
signal. 

RESULTS 

We  first  attempted  to  reproduce  the  original  1989 
observation  by  formulating  DALM  solutions  with  max¬ 
imal  TCL.  One  such  solution  contained  sources  of  carbon 
dioxide  and  hydrogen  peroxide,  which  are  required  for 
DALM,  itself  a  complex  mixture  of  a  polymer  of  tyrosine 
and  covalently  and  noncovalently  linked  luminol  and 
diazoluminol,  to  luminesce.  Another  solution  was  made 
by  adding  a  polymer  formed  from  diazotyrosine  (pDAT), 
that  shows  similar  TCL  to  DALM.  When  exposed  to 
pulsed  (10/s)  1.25-GHz  microwave  radiation,  these  solu¬ 
tions  generated  flashes  that  were  clearly  distinguishable 
on  video  recordings  by  low-light  intensity  video  cameras. 

Figure  3  shows  sequential  video  frames  that  dem¬ 
onstrate  baseline  TCL  and  flashes  induced  by  microwave 
pulses.  As  in  the  original  observations  in  1989,  the 
flashes  appeared  in  bursts,  i.e.,  not  with  every  microwave 
pulse,  and  were  accompanied  by  audible  pops.  The  in¬ 
tensity  of  the  pops  correlated  with  the  intensity  of  the 
flashes,  as  clearly  shown  by  the  examples  of  processed 
sound  and  light  signals  in  Figure  4.  In  Figure  4D,  the  first 


of  each  pair  of  peaks  in  the  sound  signal  from  a  DALM 
solution  was  due  to  a  signal  induced  on  the  audio  channel 
by  operation  of  the  microwave  transmitter.  The  earlier 
peak  provided  a  convenient  reference  for  timing.  Note 
the  low  baseline  luminescence  (dashed  lines  in  Fig.  4) 
and  rapid  increases  in  luminescence  indicating  flashes. 
Ripples  on  the  light  signal  were  due  to  the  video  frame 
rate.  In  Figure  4B,  the  luminescence  was  higher  than  in 
A  (see  inserted  scale)  because  of  the  activation  by  hy¬ 
drogen  peroxide.  The  10  pulse/s  variations  in  lumines¬ 
cence  occurred  in  synchrony  with  the  microwave  pulses. 
In  Figure  4C,  by  using  only  luminol,  bicarbonate,  and 
hydrogen  peroxide,  the  luminescence  was  high  and  the 
flashing  was  persistent.  However,  not  all  the  flashes  were 
accompanied  by  a  loud  pop.  In  Figure  4D,  where  the 
tracing  time  scale  for  activated  1:100  DALM  solution 
was  expanded,  the  microwave  artifact  (brief,  coincident 
with  the  flashes  later  in  the  record)  and  pops  (longer, 
damped  fall  off  recordings),  due  to  the  sound  propaga¬ 
tion,  there  was  a  13.5  to  14  ms  delay.  The  small  waves 
seen  in  the  light  signal  were  attributable  to  the  video 
frame  rate.  Within  the  time  resolutions  of  the  recorded 
signals  and  analysis  procedures,  recorded  flashes  and 
pops  seem  to  be  occurring  at  the  same  time,  coincident  or 
nearly  coincident  with  each  microwave  pulse.  Figure  4 
also  illustrates  that  lower  intensity  pops  occurred  without 
flashes  before  and  sometimes  after  bursts  of  flashes,  that 
were,  in  turn,  accompanied  by  higher  intensity  pops. 

Integrated  imaging  (Fig.  3)  clearly  demonstrates 
that  flashes  originated  from  discrete  areas  in  the  menis¬ 
cus  of  the  sample.  Flashes  were  apparently  independent 
of  TCL  in  liquid  below  the  meniscus.  The  images 
strongly  suggest  discharges  in  gas  above  the  liquid.  In  all 
cases  in  which  flashes  were  frequent  and  intense,  bubbles 
were  observed  in  liquid  samples  during  and  after  micro- 
wave  exposure.  The  high-intensity  flash  among  the  series 
of  less  intense  flashes  of  ITT  camera  images  in  Figure  3 
was  attributable  to  inherent  differences  in  flash  intensity 
or  the  missing  of  the  peak  of  the  short-duration  flash 
between  video  frames. 

To  further  investigate  the  source  of  the  flashes,  we 
examined  the  components  of  DALM  solutions  separately 
and  in  combination  using  equal  sample  volumes  and  the 
same  incident  microwave  pulses  (Table  1).  Deionized 
water,  sodium  bicarbonate,  and  hydrogen  peroxide  solu¬ 
tions  all  failed  to  demonstrate  TCL  and  flashes,  despite 
extended  exposure  to  microwave  pulses.  Biosynthetic 
DALM  solutions  without  hydrogen  peroxide  activation 
displayed  bursts  of  flashes  with  greater  regularity,  but 
lower  intensity,  than  the  same  solutions  with  hydrogen 
peroxide  added.  When  DALM  was  excluded,  solutions 
containing  diazoluminol  and  luminol,  as  well  as  sodium 
bicarbonate  with  and  without  hydrogen  peroxide,  showed 
no  flashes,  although  the  peroxide-activated  solutions 


14/01  07:04  FAX  301  619  2745  MRMC-RM1 


220  Kiel  et  al. 


Fig.  3.  Two  series  of  video  frames  showing  repetitive  flashes 
with  microwave  exposures  in  samples  of  sodium  bicarbonate 
and  H,0,  solution  with  and  without  lumlnol  added.  A:  (luminol 
added  Images  from  an  ITT  model  #F4577  low-light  sensitive 
black/whlte  camera,  normal  video  frame  rate  recording;  each 


le  is  a  sequential  frame  representing  33  ms  °1,n^r®tt°n 
.  B:  (no  luminol)  Images  from  an  Optronics  DEI-470  into- 
ing  camera,  recording  at  various  frame  Integration  times  (15, 


8,  4,  or  1  s). 


showed  strong  background  luminescence.  When  the  di- 
azoluminol  was  excluded  from  the  luminol  and  bicarbon¬ 
ate  solutions,  flashes  occurred  sporadically  without  hy¬ 
drogen  peroxide,  but  more  intensely  in  the  peroxide- 
activated  solutions.  These  flashes  arose  from  discrete 
locations  on  the  menisci,  discharging  into  the  air  space 
above  the  tube  but  not  outside  the  tube.  Finally,  when 
exposed  to  microwave  pulses,  sodium  bicarbonate  and 
hydrogen  peroxide  solution  produced  bright  flashes  that 
were  sustained  for  several  seconds. 


In  all  cases  in  which  flashes  were  observed,  a  delay 
observed  after  initiation  of  microwave  pulses  until 
firing  of  the  first  flash.  The  delay  ranged  from  10  and 
j  for  hydrogen-peroxide-activated  DALM  and  lumi- 
solutions,  respectively,  to  5  min  for  nonactivated 
inol  solutions.  This  observation  and  the  presence  ot 
bubbles  in  all  cases  in  which  flashes  were  noted 
gest  that  formation  of  gas  bubbles  that  collected  in  the 
lisci  was  necessary  for  the  flash.  DALM  seemed  to 
Ilyze  the  formation  of  bubbles  in  nonactivated  solu- 


Fig.  4.  Processed  sound  (top  in  each  set)  and  light  (bottom  in 
each  set)  signals  from  videotape  records  from  an  ITT  low-light 
sensitive  camera.  The  scale  insets  are  the  chart  recorder  de¬ 
flections  in  volts  (6  and  1.5  V  for  sound  and  light  intensities, 
respectively,  for  A,  B,  and  C  and  0.5  V  for  D)  and  the  time  scale 
in  seconds  for  A,  B,  and  C  and  milliseconds  for  D.  A:  Sample 
rectified-sound  and  light  signals  from  diazoluminomelanin 
(DALM)  (1:10)  solution.  Aperture  open  full.  B:  Sample  rectified- 
sound  and  light  signals  from  DALM  (1:10)  solution  with  H202. 
Aperture  approximately  1-cm  diameter  to  reduce  baseline  lumi¬ 


tions  because  the  flashes  were  more  sustained  than  in 
luminol  solutions  alone. 

DISCUSSION 

An  intermediate  acoustic  mechanism  may  play  a 
role  in  the  phenomenon  observed  here  through  ther¬ 
moelastic  expansion  caused  by  rapid  temperature  rise 
due  to  the  microwave  pulse  [Foster  and  Finch,  1974; 
Borth  and  Cain,  1977;  Lin,  1980;  Chou  et  al.,  1982].  It 
should  be  noted  that  the  specific  absorption  per  micro- 
wave  pulse  in  our  experiments,  20-50  J/kg,  was  at  least 
three  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  for  microwave 
pulses  known  to  elicit  auditory  sensations  [Seaman  and 


nescence  signal.  C:  Sample  rectified-sound  and  light  signals 
from  an  aqueous  solution  containing  luminol,  NaHC03,  and 
H202.  Aperture  approximately  1  cm.  D:  Sample  sound  and  light 
signals  from  DALM  solution  (1:100)  with  H202  on  an  expanded 
time  scale  at  the  onset  of  a  flash  burst.  Aperture  full  open.  The 
amplified  or  rectified-amplified  audio  signal  was  recorded  at  1 
V/cm  for  A-C  and  0.25  V/cm  for  D.  In  D,  output  of  a  Rockland 
filter  (0  dB)  was  connected  directly  to  the  chart  recorder.  The 
light  signal  was  recorded  at  0.25  V/cm  for  A-D. 


Lebovitz,  1989].  However,  we  have  recently  generated 
the  acoustic  part  of  the  effects  enhanced  by  DALM  with 
6  kW  peak  power  pulses  (10  PPS;  1.5-ms  pulse  width)  of 
2.06  GHz  radiation.  This  level  is  3  X  10‘3  times  the  level 
described  in  this  paper  (unpublished  results). 

The  effects  reported  here  could  be  explained  by  the 
following  sequence:  (1)  the  products  of  the  chemical 
reactions  produce  enhanced  absorption  of  the  microwave 
energy;  (2)  the  pulse  form  of  the  radiation  and  the  spe¬ 
cific  molecular  absorption  stimulates  vibrations  that  be¬ 
come  sound;  (3)  the  container  resonates  at  certain  fre¬ 
quencies  of  the  sound;  (4)  the  resonance  amplifies  the 
sound;  (5)  the  sound  leads  to  cavitation,  bubble  forma¬ 
tion,  and  bubble  collapse  yielding  luminescence;  (6)  fi- 


MRMC-RMI 


08/14/01  07:05  FAX  301  619  2745 


■gC 


r\ 


222  Kiel  et  al- 


nally,  the  gas  is  ejected  as  a  plasma  (g* »  ^ 

rr-s 

£  S  hot,  ioniied  gas  that  then  electrically  discharge 

because  of  the  microwave  radiation’s  electric  field.  Th 

snectacular  “lightning  in  a  bottle”  effect  image  m  g 
spectacuiai  ugu«<  „  |„t  nf  discharge  above  the 

ure  3  is  the  consequence.  The  lack  oi  otscn  g 

tube  opening  and  the  absence  of  an  electrical  arc  to  the 
microwave  taveguide  also  support  this  conclusion  and 
3? ^t  other  sources  of  electrical  discharge.  Al^ 
building  of  sound  intensity  with  the  burst  of  flashe 
sueeests  a  build  up  of  hot  ionized  gas  before  the 
Se  The  sporadic  nature  of  the  flashes,  especially 
when  major  dSiarges  were  observed,  sugges^  a  poss^ 
ble  depletion  of  the  ionized  gas  that  mustagam  build  p 
for  subsequent  flashes.  The  popping  observed  has  also 
been  heard  in  classic  ultrasonic-induced  sonlummes 

'Z'  (St,  and »  Waved  «  tesul. 

Of  the  shock  wave  [Walton  and  Reynolds  ^  Gian 
1996;  Barber  et  al.,  1997].  The  poping  he«  « 

not  from  boiling,  because  the  ^nd  that  leads  * 
is  not  chaotic.  It  follows  the  pulse  rate  of  ^jmerowa 
radiation,  and  the  pops  show  evidence  of  abuild  up  of  the 
sound  pulses  coircsponding  to  the  microwave  radiation 

PUlSeThe  £of8fl2hes  and  the  lack  of  pulsed  sound 
generation  in  sodium  bicarbonate  and  hydrogen  peroxide 
solutions  alone  suggest  that  specific  gases  may 
SX  for te  effect  that  occurs  when  these  reactants  are 
involution  together.  Also,  the  high  nonphysiologic  level 
of  carbonate  used  here  was  not  sufficient  to  generate  the 
effect  Therefore,  it  was  not  merely  dependent  on  high 
torf  concentration.  The  carbonate  radical  has  been  previ¬ 
ously  reported  as  the  major  product  of  mix **r®s  °*  ** 
dium  bicarbonate  or  sodium  carbonate  an  y  S 
peroxide  [Michelson  and  Maral,  1983].  Otherpossibih- 
ties  are  superoxide,  hydroxyl,  and  fonnate 
also  suspect  thal  peroxycarbonate  may  be  f<*m i  -  : 

substances  may  be  released  in  hot  vapors  or  as  gases,  the 
absence  of  flashes  when  diazoluminol  was  present  m 
luminol,  bicarbonate,  and  hydrogen  peroxi  ^  g 

suggests  that  this  compound  is  quenching  the  reactive 
radical  or  ion  that  mediates  the  phenomenon,  fhe 
££*  is  ».  because  d— mli. - 

(Maddox  el  al.,  1998].  When  CALM  or  f®AT  « 
nresent  the  quenching  was  reversed.  This  reversal  sug 
P  etc  thnt  DALM  or  pDAT  can  assist  in  the  generation  of 

KS2XS— —  n,dii,t'on  “<1 

S  Sk  « likely  ,o  be  involved.  The  in.er.choh  of 


diazoluminol  with  fhe  radicals  was  i»““l;  ”i,"l,sltU 

killing  of  anthrax  MM,  ^J”Zh“Z  mq.iied 

not sufficienl  to  explain  the results^Bo 

the  same  kind  of  chenucal  MdM-1”,,.  of 

S°By  ilSlTtl’tomito  betag 

the  baccetia  onlets  they 

by  P»Wg  of  the 

microwave  radiation. 


CONCLUSIONS 

Pulsed  miemwave  radiation  interacting  with ^certain 

SSSTS 

^  ri_e  necessity  for  sound  generation  by  the 
microwave  pulse  rate,  (3)  the  )  tri  l  discharge  as  a 
trie  field  with  the  ejeeted  ptona  ^  P  w 

tion. 


acknowledgments 


Triservice  Radiofrequency  Radiation  Fa  ty  p 
ing  access  to  the  FPS  transmitter. 


references 


143. 


Microwave  Induced  Light  Production 


223 


Borth  DE,  Cain  CA.  1977.  Theoretical  analysis  of  acoustic  signal  gener¬ 
ation  in  materials  irradiated  with  microwave  energy.  IEEE  Trans 
Microwave  Theory  Tech  25:944-954. 

Bruno  JG,  Kiel  JL.  1993.  Effect  of  radio-frequency  radiation  (RFR)  and 
diazoluminomelanin  (DALM)  on  the  growth  potential  of  bacilli.  In: 
Blank  M,  editor.  Electricity  and  magnetism  in  biology  and  medi¬ 
cine.  San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press,  p  231-233. 

Chou  CK,  Guy  AW,  Galambos  R.  1982.  Auditory  perception  of  radio- 
frequency  electromagnetic  fields.  J  Acoust  Soc  Am  71:1321-1334. 

Foster  KR,  Finch  ED.  1974.  Microwave  hearing:  evidence  for  ther¬ 
moacoustic  auditory  stimulation  by  pulsed  microwaves.  Science 
185:258-258. 

Glanz  J.  1996.  The  spell  of  sonoluminescence.  Science  274:718-719. 

Kiel  JL,  O’Brien  GJ.  1991.  Diazoluminomelanin  and  a  method  for  prepar¬ 
ing  same.  U.S.  Patent  5,003,050. 

Kiel  JL,  Gabriel  C,  Simmons  DM,  Erwin  DN,  Grant  EH.  1990.  Diazolu¬ 
minomelanin:  a  conductive  luminescent  polymer  with  microwave 


and  radiowave  absorptive  properties,  in:  Pedersen  PC,  Onaral  B, 
editors.  Proceedings  of  the  twelfth  annual  international  conference 
of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  Society,  Vol.I2, 
No.  4,  Philadelphia:  IEEE,  p  1689-1690. 

Lin  JC.  1980.  The  microwave  auditory  phenomenon.  Proc  IEEE  68:67-73. 

Maddox  L,  Reeves  M,  Wood  K,  Roberts  K,  Sluder  J,  Wetzel  J,  Smith  T. 
Holwitt  E,  Alls  J,  Kiel  J,  Wright  JR.  1998.  Acoustic  wave  dosim¬ 
etry  based  on  diazotized  luminol  solutions.  Microchem  J  58:209- 
217. 

Michelson  AM,  Maral  J.  1983.  Carbonate  anions:  effects  on  the  oxidation 
of  luminol,  oxidative  hemolysis,  y-irradiation  and  the  reaction  of 
activated  oxygen  species  with  enzymes  containing  various  active 
centres.  Biochimie  65:95-104. 

Seaman  RL,  Lebovitz  RL.  1989.  Thresholds  of  cat  cochlear  nucleus  neu¬ 
rons  to  microwave  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics  10:147-160. 

Walton  AJ,  Reynolds  GT.  1984.  Sonoluminescence.  Adv  Phys  33:595- 
660. 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE,  VOL.  28.  NO.  I,  FEBRUARY  2000 


161 


Pulsed  Microwave  Induced  Bioeffects 

Johnathan  L.  Kiel,  Jill  E.  Parker,  Pedro  J.  Morales,  John  L.  Alls,  Patrick  A.  Mason, 
Ronald  L.  Seaman,  Senior  Member,  IEEE ,  Satnam  P.  Mathur,  Member,  IEEE ,  and  Eric  A.  Holwitt 


Invited  Paper 


Abstract — High -power  pulsed  microwave  radiation,  when 
applied  to  solutions  containing  dissolved  carbon  dioxide  (or 
bicarbonate),  hydrogen  peroxide,  and  the  soluble  organic 
semi-conductor  diazoluminomelanin,  generates  sound,  pulsed 
luminescence,  and  electrical  discharge.  Microbes  exposed  to 
these  phenomena  experienced  damage  comparable  to  short-time, 
high-temperature  insults,  even  though  the  average  and  measur¬ 
able  localized  temperatures  were  insufficient  to  cause  the  observed 
effects. 

Index  Terms — Anthrax,  bacillus,  high-power,  microwaves,  pulse. 


I.  Introduction 

PREVIOUSLY,  we  have  reported  the  sensitization  of 
anthrax  bacteria  (Bacillus  anthracis)  to  killing  (a  5-log 
reduction  in  viable  cells)  by  continuous-wave  2450-MHz 
radiation  [1].  This  effect  was  accomplished  by  growing  the 
bacteria  on  culture  medium  that  induces  the  synthesis  of  the 
organic  semi-conductor  diazoluminomelanin  (DALM)  and 
treating  them  with  sodium  bicarbonate  and  hydrogen  peroxide 
[1].  The  temperature  of  the  exposure  was  maintained  at  37  °C, 
well  below  the  thermal  kill  temperature  of  anthrax,  either  its 
vegetative  or  spore  forms  [see  Fig.  1(a)  and  (b)].  Furthermore, 
we  have  shown  that  HL-60,  a  human  leukemia  cell  line,  can  be 
induced  to  produce  DALM  and  show  enhanced  absorption  of 
continuous  microwave  radiation  [2].  Last,  we  have  conferred 
this  property  on  several  cell  lines — bacterial,  mouse,  and 
human — by  introduction  of  a  plant  nitrate  reductase  gene 
fragment  into  their  genomes  [3]-[5].  The  nitrate  reductase  gene 
is  responsible  for  the  biosynthesis  of  DALM  [6].  This  polymer 
demonstrates  thermochemiluminescence,  continuous  and 
pulsed,  when  peroxidizing  solutions  containing  bicarbonate, 
or  other  sources  of  carbon  dioxide,  are  exposed  to  microwave 
radiation,  continuous  or  pulsed,  respectively  [7].  Here  we 
examine  damage  to  anthrax  spores  with  high-power  pulsed  mi- 

Manuscript  received  May  7,  1999;  revised  October  28,  1999.  This  work  was 
supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research,  the  Air 
Force  Research  Laboratory  Munitions  Directorate,  the  Joint  Services  Technical 
Base  Program  in  Chemical  and  Biological  Defense,  and  the  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Research  and  Material  Command  under  Contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069. 

J.  L.  Kiel,  J.  E.  Parker,  and  P.  J.  Morales  are  with  the  Human  Effectiveness 
Directorate,  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235  USA. 

J.  L.  Alls  and  P.  A.  Mason  are  with  Veridian,  Inc.,  San  Antonio,  TX  78216 
USA. 

R.  L.  Seaman  and  S.  P.  Mathur  are  with  McKesson  BioServices  and  United 
States  Army  Medical  Research  Command  Detachment,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235 
USA. 

E.  A.  Holwitt  is  with  Conceptual  MindWorks,  Inc.,  San  Antonio,  TX 
78228-1316  USA, 

Publisher  Item  Identifier  S  0093-3813(00)01487-9. 


Temperature  (°C) 


Fig.  1.  Thermal  sensitivity  of  killing  and  growth  inhibition  of  Bacillus 
anthracis  (anthrax  bacteria)  dry  spores  assayed  on  blood  agar  and  4X3AT  agar. 
(A)  Colony-forming  units  surviving  on  blood  agar  after  exposure  to  60  °C 
(squares)  or  to  100  °C  (circles)  for  the  respective  times.  (B)  Colony-forming 
units  surviving  on  blood  (circles)  or  4X3AT  (squares)  agar  for  the  respective 
time  and  temperature. 


0093-38 1 3/00$  10.00  €>  2000  IEEE 


162 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE.  VOL.  28r  NO.  L  FEBRUARY  2000 


Fig.  2.  Single  captured  frames  from  integrating  charged  couple  device  (left)  and  nonintegrating  black  and  white  (inset  flash)  video  cameras  of  discharges  from 
DALM  solution  absorbing  1.25-GHz  radiation  (6-fts  pulsewidth,  10  pulses/s,  2-MW  peak  forward  power). 


crowave  radiation  in  peroxidizing  solutions  of  biosynthesized 
DALM  and  the  mechanism  thereof.  The  absorption  is  very 
small  for  microwave  frequencies  but  is  predicted  to  rise  rapidly 
in  the  infrared  and  visible  wavelengths.  However,  by  increasing 
the  number  of  redox  activated  molecules  that  are  susceptible 
to  microwave  absorption,  the  probability  of  enhanced  mi¬ 
crowave  absorption  is  increased.  This  enhancement  can  be 
accomplished  by  simultaneous  exposure  to  microwave  and 
shorter  wavelength  radiation  (into  the  visible  and  ultraviolet). 
The  thermally  activated  delayed  fluorescence  demonstrated 
by  DALM,  when  coated  onto  epoxy  polymer,  is  supportive  of 
this  mechanism  [9].  It  is  induced  by  simultaneous  exposure  to 
366-nm  wavelength  (UVA)  light  and  microwave  radiation.  The 
delayed  fluorescence  is  observed  by  a  reexposing  of  the  DALM 
film  to  pulsed  UVA  and  observing  the  afterglow.  The  intensity 
of  the  delayed  fluorescence  is  proportional  to  the  period  of 
exposure  or  energy  of  radio-frequency  exposure.  Heating  the 
film  and  exposing  it  to  UVA  simultaneously  can  also  generate 
the  effect,  but  a  higher  level  of  conventional  than  microwave 
heating  is  necessary  [9], 

II.  Experiments 

A.  Optimizing  Focal  Absorption  of  Pulsed  Microwave 
Radiation 

We  previously  reported  the  generation  of  light,  sound,  and 
electrical  discharges  in  DALM  solutions  by  exposure  to  pulsed 
microwave  radiation  [7].  A  variety  of  mixtures  were  used,  but 
the  process  was  not  optimized.  The  chemical  structure  of  DALM 
and  its  relationship  to  its  microwave  radiation  absorptive  prop¬ 
erties  is  an  object  of  intense  research  and  remains  unresolved  at 
this  time  [10].  In  order  to  determine  the  basis  for  variable  sus¬ 
ceptibility  of  DALM  preparations  to  the  generation  of  these  re¬ 
sponses,  organically  synthesized  DALM  was  prepared  and  was 


nitrated.  Because  nitrate  reduction,  under  aerobic  conditions,  is 
necessary  to  the  biosynthesis  of  DALM,  nitration  was  consid¬ 
ered  an  essential  process  for  optimizing  the  pulse  response. 

Nitration  was  achieved  by  mixing  a  solution  containing  1.38 
g  of  sodium  nitrite  in  20-mi  water  with  2.27  g  of  30%  hydrogen 
peroxide  plus  0.33  ml  of  concentrated  sulfuric  acid  in  20  ml  of 
water  at  ice  bath  temperatures.  As  soon  as  the  solution  turned 
yellow,  1 . 1 2  g  of  sodium  hydroxide  in  20  ml  of  water  was  added 
to  the  previous  mixture.  Lyophilized  synthetic  DALM  (2.5  g) 
was  dissolved  in  10  ml  of  the  peroxynitrite  solution  (99  mM) 
formed  as  described  above.  The  mixture  was  allowed  to  react 
overnight  at  room  temperature.  It  was  then  dialyzed  against  cold 
deionized  water  with  several  changes  and  freeze-dried.  Five  mil¬ 
liliters  of  the  nitro-DALM  solution  was  placed  in  a  15-ml  poly¬ 
styrene  conical  tube  and  was  activated  by  addition  of  saturated 
sodium  carbonate  and  luminol  solution  with  3%  hydrogen  per¬ 
oxide  added. 

As  previously  described  for  other  DALM  solutions,  the 
nitro-DALM  peroxidizing  solution  was  exposed  to  10  pulses/s 
(6-ps  pulse  duration  at  1/2  pulse  height)  of  1.25-GHz  radiation 
with  a  peak  incident  power  of  2-MW  forward  power  [7].  The 
sound  and  light  produced  were  recorded  with  a  RCA  BK-6B 
M-11017A  microphone  and  low-light  cameras  (ITT  model 
#F4577  black-and-white  camera  and  an  Optronics  DEI-470 
integrating  color  camera),  respectively.  The  nitro-DALM 
began  pulsing  with  sound  and  light  almost  immediately  and 
with  greater  intensity  than  that  of  the  original  DALM  (1:100 
dilution  of  crude  biosynthetic  extract).  Fig.  2  displays  captured 
frames  of  the  video  from  the  Optronics  and  ITT  cameras 
showing  single-pulse  results.  The  spark  discharge  extended 
from  a  point  in  the  meniscus  (the  point  is  not  at  the  same 
location  for  each  discharge)  into  the  gas  head  space  of  the  tube 
but  did  not  extend  above  the  open  mouth  of  the  tube.  Fig.  3 
shows  a  typical  temperature  profile  (measured  with  Vitek) 


KIEL  ei  ah  PULSED  MICROWAVE  INDUCED  BIOEFFECTS 


163 


Fig.  3.  Time/temperature  profile  of  a  pulsed  microwave  (1 .25  GHz,  6-//S  pulsewidth,  1 0  pulses/s,  2-MW  peak  power)  exposed  5-ml  sample  of  DALM.  The  top 
curve  is  the  air  temperature  above  the  meniscus,  the  middle  curve  is  the  temperature  of  the  meniscus,  and  the  bottom  curve  is  the  temperature  of  the  liquid  at  the 
bottom  of  the  tube  being  exposed. 


nonperturbing  high-resistance  thermal  probes)  of  such  an 
exposed  tube.  The  solution  in  the  bottom  of  the  tube  reached 
a  thermal  steady  state,  but  the  temperature  of  the  meniscus 
appeared  to  linearly  increase  over  the  time  of  the  exposure. 
The  air  immediately  above  the  meniscus  rapidly  became 
about  40  °C-50  °C  hotter  than  steady-state  temperature  of  the 
solution  and  then  fluctuated  wildly  with  the  discharges.  None 
of  these  temperatures  was  sufficient  to  kill  anthrax  spores  in 
the  time  frame  of  the  exposure  [Fig.  1(a)  and  (b)]. 

B.  Determining  Thermal  Sensitivity  of  Anthrax  Spores 

The  Bacillus  anthracis  (BA;  Sterne  strain)  spore  vaccine1  was 
centrifuged,  the  supernatant  decanted,  and  the  button  washed 
with  chilled  deionized  water.  Dilute  powdered  milk  solution  was 
made  with  chilled  deionized  water  to  a  concentration  of  26  mg 
of  milk  solids  in  1  ml  of  solution  and  filtered  through  a  0.2-/xm 
filter.  The  BA  button  was  resuspended  in  1  ml  of  the  sterile  milk 
solution.  Then,  50  p\  of  this  suspension  were  diluted  in  450  p\ 
of  physiological  phosphate  buffered  saline  (PBS)  and  used  as 
the  source  for  colony  forming  unit  (CFU)  assays.  The  solutions 
were  transferred  with  a  \-p\  calibrated  loop  to  blood  or  4X3 AT 
agar  plates  for  incubation  at  37  °C  for  18-24  h.  They  were  then 
counted  up  to  300  colonies  per  plate.  For  thermal  exposures,  sil¬ 
icone-coated  [BDH  Silicone  Products,  Repelcote  (VS)  solution, 
coated  according  to  manufacturer  directions]  5.75  in  Pasteur 
pipettes  were  used.  These  pipettes  were  washed  with  deionized 
water,  autoclaved,  and  oven  dried.  Each  pipette  was  charged  at 
the  tip  with  3  p\  of  well-mixed  skim  milk/BA  suspension.  They 
were  then  frozen.  The  frozen  samples  were  lyophilized  for  four 
to  five  days.  They  were  stored  under  vacuum  at  room  temper¬ 
ature  when  not  in  use.  The  lyophilized  spore  samples  were  ex¬ 
posed  to  various  temperatures  for  various  times  by  placing  them 

1  Thraxol,  Mobay  Corp.,  Animal  Health  Division,  Shawnee,  KS. 


in  the  heating  block  of  an  electrothermal2  melting-point  appa¬ 
ratus.  Each  set  of  exposures  included  a  control,  which  was  not 
heated.  The  tubes  were  assayed  for  CFU’s  by  recovering  the  ex¬ 
posed  material  in  450  p\  of  sterile  PBS  and  plating  to  the  blood 
or  4X3  AT  agar,  using  the  l-/il  loop  or  50  p\  of  the  suspension. 
The  plates  were  incubated  as  described  above.3  The  4X3 AT  agar 
was  custom  made  by  the  same  manufacturer  using  55  g  of  tryp- 
ticase  soy  agar  base,  6  g  of  potassium  nitrate,  50  mg  of  luminol, 
and  160  mg  of  three-amino-L-tyrosine  HCl  per  liter  of  sterile 
deionized  water. 

Fig.  4  shows  that  the  4X3AT  medium  displays  no  CFU’s 
at  about  225  °C  near  1  s  of  exposure  to  heat,  and  the  growth 
on  blood  agar  drops  to  zero  in  1-2  s  at  about  250  °C.  This 
slight  phase  shift  in  the  kill  curve  for  BA  on  the  two  media 
allows  for  pinpointing  the  apparent  temperature  to  which  the 
BA  was  exposed  during  the  pulsed  microwave  exposure.  Figs.  5 
and  6,  for  comparison,  show  the  surviving  CFU’s  for  Bacillus 
thuringiensis  var.  kurstaki4  and  Bacillus  globigii  var.  niger ,5  re¬ 
spectively,  exposed  under  the  same  conditions  in  the  melting- 
point  apparatus  and  cultured  as  the  BA  was. 

In  order  to  generate  a  preparation  of  single  spores  rather  than 
conglomerated  spores  for  BT  and  BG,  special  procedures  were 
developed.  One-half  gram  of  the  commercial  preparation  of  BT 
Javelin  was  placed  into  a  15-ml  centrifuge  tube,  6  ml  of  chilled 
deionized  water  was  added,  and  the  suspension  was  thoroughly 
vortexed.  It  was  then  sonicated  for  3-5  s.  Next,  6  ml  of  chilled 
ethyl  acetate  was  added  to  the  suspension  and  the  tube  was 
shaken  vigorously  for  1  min.  The  suspension  was  then  cen¬ 
trifuged  in  a  clinical  centrifuge  for  15  min.  The  suspended  plug 

2  Model  9300;  Electrothermal  Engineering  Limited,  Southend-on-Sea,  Essex, 
UK. 

3  The  blood  agar  was  commercially  obtained  from  Remel.  Lenexa,  KS. 

4  BT,  a  close  relative  of  anthrax  bacteria  that  kills  insects;  Javelin,  Sandoz 
Agro,  Inc.,  Des  Plaines,  IL. 

5BG;  provided  by  Dr.  R.  Liebert,  U.S.  Army  Dugway  Proving  Ground,  UT. 


164 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE.  VOL.  28,  NO.  I,  FEBRUARY  2000 


TEMPERATURE  <°C) 


100  150  200  250  300  350  400  450 


Temperature  (°C) 


Fig.  4.  Anthrax  bacterial  growth  on  4X3AT  (square)  and  blood  (circle)  agars 
following  1-s  exposures  of  dry  spores  to  various  temperatures.  The  single 
triangles  indicate  high-power,  pulsed  microwave  data  Fitted  to  the  thermal 
response  data  for  growth  on  blood  (triangle  pointing  up)  and  4X3AT  (triangle 
pointing  down)  agars,  respectively. 


150  200  250  300  350  400  450 


Temperature  (°C) 

Fig.  5.  Bacillus  thuringiensis  var.  kurstaki  growth  on  4X3AT  (squares) 
and  blood  (circles)  agars  following  1-s  exposures  of  dry  spores  to  various 
temperatures. 

was  loosened  with  a  sterile  stick  and  poured  off  the  spore  button 
with  the  supernatant.  The  button  was  washed  three  times  with 
chilled  deionized  water  and  centrifuged  each  time.  After  de¬ 
canting  the  final  wash,  one  calibrated  loop  (1  /xl)  of  the  spore 
button  was  placed  in  1  ml  of  the  sterile  skim  milk  solution.  The 
procedure  for  BG  was  modified  from  that  of  BT.  One  gram  of 
BG  powder  was  placed  in  a  15-ml  centrifuge  tube,  and  the  tube 
was  filled  with  deionized  water.  The  suspension  was  vortexed 
and  then  sonicated  for  5  s.  The  suspension  was  then  filtered  with 


Fig.  6.  Bacillus  globigii  var.  niger  growth  on  4X3AT  (circles)  and  blood 
(squares)  agars  following  1-s  exposures  of  dry  spores  to  various  temperatures. 

a  sterile  paper  filter  and  funnel  pulled  through  by  vacuum.  The 
filtrate  was  placed  in  another  sterile  15-ml  centrifuge  tube  and 
centrifuged  for  15  min  at  maximum  speed  in  a  45°  fixed  head 
in  a  clinical  centrifuge.  A  vertical  streak  of  spores  formed  along 
the  length  of  the  tube,  and  a  button  of  debris  was  deposited  in 
the  bottom.  The  supernatant  was  poured  off  and  the  button  was 
removed  with  a  pipette.  The  streak  was  washed  and  centrifuged 
three  times  with  chilled  deionized  water.  After  the  final  wash, 
the  supernatant  was  removed  and  a  1  -1  loopful  of  the  streak  was 
removed  and  resuspended  in  1  ml  of  sterile  deionized  water.  The 
samples  were  stored  at  2  °C—8  °C  until  used.  The  media  did  not 
show  differential  growth  for  BT  and  BG  like  that  seen  with  BA 
but  did  display  about  the  same  thermal  kill  profile  as  for  BA. 

C.  Pulsed  Microwave  Effects  on  Anthrax  Spore  Viability 

For  pulsed  microwave  exposure,  0.5  ml  of  BA  spore  suspen¬ 
sion  was  placed  into  0.2-^m-filter6  centrifuge  tubes.  The  spores 
were  then  centrifuged  onto  the  filter  (16000  g  for  15  min).  The 
tubes  were  refilled  with  1.5  ml  of  a  reaction  mixture  consisting 
of  0.9  ml  of  saturated  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution,  0.1 
ml  of  1 : 10  biosynthetic  DALM,  0.6  ml  of  1  : 10  diazoluminol, 
0.33  ml  of  saturated  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution,  and 
0.33  ml  of  3%  hydrogen  peroxide.  All  the  dilutions  were  made 
in  the  saturated  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution.  The  final 
dilution  of  the  DALM  was  1 : 1000.  A  detailed  description  of 
the  reaction  mixture  has  been  previously  published  [6],  [7].  The 
filter,  with  the  BA  spores,  was  inserted  into  the  tube  to  the  level 
just  below  the  meniscus  of  the  fluid.  The  exposures  were  as  de¬ 
scribed  above  for  the  nitro-DALM.  They  were  started  at  3  min 
and  22  s  after  placing  the  reaction  mixture  in  front  of  the  mi¬ 
crowave  wave  guide.  The  microwave  exposure  was  for  13  min 
and  28  s.  Therefore,  the  total  radiation  exposure  was  for  48  ms 
(a  duty  factor  of  0.00006).  The  temperature  of  the  sample  was 

6  Microfilterfuge,  Rainin  Instrument  Co.,  Inc.,  Woburn,  MA. 


KIEL  et  ai:  PULSED  MICROWAVE  INDUCED  BIOEFFECTS 


165 


80 


70  A 


BAC  4XC  BAE  4XE 
Condition 

Fig.  7.  Recoverable  colony  forming  units  of  anthrax  bacteria  following 
exposure  of  spores  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation  (1.25  GHz,  6  -s  pulsewidth, 
10  pulses/s,  2-MW  peak  power).  BAC  and  4XC  are  sham  exposed  spores 
recovered  onto  blood  and  4X3 AT  agars,  respectively.  BAE  and  4XE 
are  microwave  exposed  spores  recovered  onto  blood  and  4X3AT  agars, 
respectively. 

continuously  monitored  with  a  nonperturbing,  high-resistance 
temperature  probe  (Vitek).  The  temperature  began  at  25.3  °C 
and  reached  a  high  point,  at  the  end  of  the  exposure,  of  64  °C. 
During  the  exposure,  light  and  sound  pulses  were  produced  that 
correlated  with  the  microwave  pulses.  Spores  were  recovered 
from  the  filter  by  placing  it  in  a  50-ml  centrifuge  tube  containing 
5-ml  PBS  and  vortexing  extensively.  This  solution  was  titered 
ten-  to  1 -million-fold  for  colony  count  determination.  The  spore 
suspension  samples  were  transferred  to  4X3AT  or  blood  agar 
with  a  1  -fi\  calibrated  loop.  The  samples  (exposed  and  sham  ex¬ 
posed)  were  assayed  as  described  above. 

Fig.  7  displays  the  CFU  counts  for  sham  exposed  (to  reaction 
mixture  but  no  radiation)  and  exposed  samples.  The  respective 
survivability  points  for  the  pulsed  microwave  exposure,  when 
assayed  on  the  4X3 AT  agar  and  blood  agar  media  and  imposed 
on  the  heat-kill  curve  in  Fig.  4,  indicate  an  apparent  effect  com¬ 
parable  to  that  of  heating  for  1  s  at  about  200  °C.  This  effect 
greatly  exceeds  that  expected  for  the  64  °C  maximum  observed 
in  the  meniscus  during  the  experiment. 


Fig.  8.  Effect  of  the  presence  of  carbon  dioxide  on  the  recovery  of  anthrax 
colony  forming  units  on  4X3AT  (squares)  and  blood  (circles)  agars  after 
exposure  of  the  dry  spores  to  125  °C  for  various  lengths  of  time.  (A)  is  without 
carbon  dioxide  present  and  (B)  is  with  carbon  dioxide. 


D •  Biological  Mechanism  of  Pulsed  Microwave  Effect  on  days  and  passaged  to  new  medium  every  24  h,  the  stimulation 

Anthrax  Bacteria  0f  growth  by  qq2  js  jost  along  with  the  pXOl  plasmid  (data  not 

Fig.  8(a)  and  (b)  indicates  that  when  carbon  dioxide  is  added  shown).  Because  a  transactivating  factor  for  gene  expression, 

to  the  growth  conditions  (Marion  Scientific  CO2  gas  generator  sensitive  to  CO9  levels,  appears  to  reside  on  the  pXOl  plasmid 

placed  in  a  zip-lock  bag  with  the  culture  medium  plates  during  for  toxin  production  [16],  the  CO2  enhanced  growth  on  4X3AT 

incubation),  the  growth  of  BA  on  4X3 AT  plates  was  greatly  en-  medium  appears  to  be  controlled  by  this  plasmid.  The  plasmid 

hanced.  The  CFU’ s  rose  to  the  level  of  those  on  blood  agar,  and  resides  in  Sterne  strain  as  well  as  pathogenic  strains  of  BA.  Even 

the  blood  agar  showed  no  enhancement  in  growth  with  the  ad-  though  growth  on  the  4X3AT  agar  was  restricted  after  either  suf- 

dition  of  CO2.  Neither  Bacillus  globigii  van  niger  nor  Bacillus  ficient  thermal  or  microwave  exposure,  polymerase  chain  reac- 

thuringiensis  van  kurstaki  displayed  this  differential  growth  be-  tion  amplification  of  a  target  sequence  on  the  pXOl  plasmid, 

tween  4X3AT  and  blood  agars  (Figs.  5  and  6).  Furthermore,  however,  revealed  that  it  was  still  present  in  these  treated  bac- 

when  BA  is  grown  at  an  elevated  temperature  (42  °C)  for  ten  teria  (data  not  shown). 


166 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE,  VOL.  28.  NO.  I,  FEBRUARY  2000 


III.  Conclusion 

The  comparison  of  the  pulsed  microwave  effects  on  the 
viability  of  anthrax  spores  compared  to  standard  thermal  insult 
indicate  that  the  spores  perceive  much  higher  temperatures 
than  were  measured  during  the  exposures.  The  results  indicate 
thermal  damage  to  the  plasmid,  but  not  its  thermal  destruction, 
which  occurred  with  the  short-time,  high-temperature  (200 
°C-225  °C)  exposures  and  the  pulsed  microwave  exposures. 
These  results  strongly  suggest  that  the  plasmid  expression  was 
affected  and  that  the  same  thermal  mechanism  was  operational 
in  both  types  of  insult. 

The  physical  evidence,  other  than  direct  temperature  measure¬ 
ments,  also  supports  the  ultrashort-time,  very  high-temperature 
mechanism  for  pulsed  microwave  effects.  The  electrical  dis¬ 
charges  above  the  liquid  surface,  and  the  pulsed  light  and  sound 
that  correlated  with  the  microwave  pulses  support  this  mecha¬ 
nism.  Even  though  the  measured  temperatures  never  reached 
200  °C,  the  fact  that  the  gas  temperature  above  the  meniscus 
was  at  least  30  °C  hotter  than  the  meniscus  and  50  °C  hotter 
than  the  bulk  of  the  fluid  in  the  tubes  suggests  that  a  hot  gas  was 
produced  and  ejected  from  the  fluid.  This  gas  was  obviously 
not  in  thermodynamic  equilibrium  with  the  surrounding  fluid. 
Also,  if  the  temperature  of  the  bacterial  spores  did  approach  200 
°C,  as  indicated  by  the  assay  responses,  then  the  bacteria  must 
have  been  in  contact  with  a  hot  gas,  not  the  aqueous  solution 
that  could  not  have  exceeded  100  °C  and  remained  a  liquid. 
Therefore,  gas  must  have  been  trapped  or  generated  at  the  surface 
of  the  bacterial  spores  and  transferred  some  of  its  energy  to  the 
bacterial  spores.  The  physical  and  biological  evidence  presented 
here  suggests  that  a  sonoluminescent-like  mechanism  could  be  at 
work.  The  hot  plasma  involved  could  be  generated  by  the  intense 
thermal  gradient,  pulsed  microwave  induced  sound  (shock) 
wave,  cavitation,  and  collapse  of  gas.  The  chemical  reaction  on 
or  in  the  DALM  molecules  facilitated  this  process.  A  very  high, 
very  localized  temperature  effect  on  the  spores  is  compatible 
with  such  a  mechanism. 

At  this  time  it  is  not  known  how  the  redox  chemistry  of  DALM 
brings  about  the  process.  What  is  known  is  that  DALM  is  a  ni¬ 
tration  product  of  luminol  and  three-amino-L-tyrosine  and  that 
the  latter  is  an  analog  of  a  natural  amino  acid  tyrosine.  Tyrosine 
and  other  biomolecules  are  nitrated  in  animal  and  human  tissues 
[12]— [17].  Therefore,  nitrated  proteins,  lipids,  catecholamines, 
and  nucleic  acids  could  possibly  participate  in  an  energy  focusing 
reaction  comparable  to  the  one  involving  DALM. 

Acknowledgment 

The  views  opinions,  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  De¬ 
partment  of  the  Army  or  Department  of  the  Air  Force  position, 
policy,  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by  other  documentation. 

References 

[1]  J.  G.  Bruno  and  J.  L.  Kiel,  “Effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  (RFR) 
and  diazoluminomelanin  (DALM)  on  the  growth  potential  of  bacilli;’ 
in  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine ,  M.  Blank, 
Ed.  San  Francisco,  CA:  San  Francisco  Press,  1993,  pp.  231-233. 

[2]  - ,  “Synthesis  of  diazoluminomelanin  (DALM)  in  HL-60  cells  for 

possible  use  as  a  cellular-level  microwave  dosimeter,”  Bioelectromag¬ 
netics,  vol.  15,  pp.  315-328,  1994. 


[3]  J.  G.  Bruno,  J.  E.  Parker,  and  J.  L.  Kiel.  “Plant  nitrate  reductase  gene 
fragments  enhance  nitrite  production  in  activated  murine  macro  phage 
cell  lines,”  Biochem.  Biophys.  Res.  Cowman.,  vol.  201,  pp.  284—289, 
1994. 

[4]  J.  L  Kiel,  J.  L.  Alls,  E.  A.  Holwitt,  L.  J.  V.  Stribling,  and  J.  E.  Parker, 
“Thermochemiluminescence  as  a  technique  for  radio  frequency  radia¬ 
tion  dosimetry,”  Bioelectrochem.  Bioenerg .,  vol.  47,  pp.  253-257,  1998. 

[5]  J.  L.  Kiel,  J.  E.  Parker,  E.  A.  Holwitt,  and  H.  A.  Schwertner,  “Biosyn¬ 
thesis  of  Diazomelanin  and  Diazoluminomelanin  and  methods  thereof  ” 
US  Patent  5856  108,  Jan  5,  1999. 

[6]  J.  L.  Kiel,  J.  L.  Alls,  P.  A.  Mason,  and  D.  N.  Erwin,  “Luminescent 
radio  frequency  radiation  dosimetry,”  Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  20,  pp. 
46-51,  1999. 

[7]  J.  L.  Kiel,  R.  L.  Seaman,  S.  P.  Mathur,  J.  E.  Parker,  J.  R.  Wright.  J.  L. 
Alls,  and  P.  J.  Morales,  “Pulsed  microwave  induced  light,  sound,  and 
electrical  discharge  enhanced  by  a  biopolymer”  Bioelectromagnetics , 
vol.  20,  pp.  216-223,  1999. 

[8]  E.  A.  Holwitt.  J.  L.  Kiel,  and  D.  N.  Erwin,  “Microwave  sensitive  article,” 
U.S.  Patent  5  658  673,  Aug.  19,  1997. 

[9]  K.  B.  Wagner-Brown,  K.  F.  Ferris,  J.  L.  Kiel,  and  R.  A.  Albanese,  “Mor¬ 
phology  dependence  of  the  optical  properties  of  DALM  related  mate¬ 
rials,”  in  Proc.  Mat .  Res.  Soc.  Symp.,  vol.  488,  1998,  pp.  909-914. 

[10]  J.  M.  Bartkus  and  S.  H.  Leppla,  “Transcriptional  regulation  of  the  pro¬ 
tective  antigen  gene  of  Bacillus  anthracis ,”  Infect .  human.,  vol.  57,  pp. 
2295-2300,  1989. 

[11]  S.  V.  Lymar,  Q.  Jiang,  and  J.  K.  Hurst,  “Mechanism  of  carbon  dioxide- 
catalyzed  oxidation  of  tyrosine  by  peroxy nitrite.”  Biochem .,  vol.  35,  pp. 
7855-7861,  1996. 

[12]  J.  Khan,  D.  M,  Brennan,  N.  Bradley,  B.  Gao,  R.  Bruckdorfer.  and  M. 
Jacobs,  “3-Nitrotyrosine  in  the  proteins  of  human  plasma  determined 
by  an  ELISA  method,”  J.  Biochem .,  vol.  330,  pp.  795-801,  1998. 

[13]  L.  A.  MacMillan -Crow,  J.  P.  Crow,  and  J.  A.  Thompson,  “Peroxyni- 
trite-mediated  inactivation  of  manganese  superoxide  dismutase  involves 
nitration  and  oxidation  of  critical  tyrosine  residues,”  Biochem .,  vol.  37, 
pp.  1613-1622,  1998. 

[14]  J.  P.  Eiserich,  M.  Hristova,  C.  E.  Cross,  A.  D.  Jones,  B.  A.  Freeman,  B. 
Halliwell,  and  Van  Der  Vliet,  “Formation  of  nitric  oxide-derived  inflam¬ 
matory  oxidants  by  myeloperoxidase  in  neutrophils  ”  Nature ,  vol.  391, 
pp.  393-397,  Jan.  22,  1998. 

[15]  J.  Byun,  J.  P.  Henderson,  D.  M.  Mueller,  and  J.  W.  Heinecke, 
“8-Nitro-2'-deoxyguanosine,  a  specific  marker  of  oxidation  by  reactive 
nitrogen  species,  is  generated  by  the  myeloperoxidase -hydrogen 
peroxide-nitrite  system  of  activated  human  phagocytes,”  Biochem .,  vol. 
38,  pp.  2590-2600,  1999. 

[16]  C.  Daveu,  C.  Servy,  M.  Dendane,  P.  Marin,  and  C.  Ducrocq,  “Oxidation 
and  nitration  of  catecholamines  by  nitrogen  oxides  derived  from  nitric 
oxide,”  Nitric  Oxide  Biol.  Chem .,  vol.  1,  pp.  234-243,  1997. 

[17]  J.  Kalns,  J.  Parker,  J.  Bruno,  E.  Holwitt,  E.  Piepmeier,  and  J.  Kiel,  “Ni¬ 
trate  reductase  alters  3-nitrotyrosine  accumulation  and  cell  cycle  pro¬ 
gression  in  LPS  +  IFN(-stimu!ated  RAW  264.7  cells),”  Nitric  Oxide: 
Biol.  Chem.,  vol.  2,  pp.  366-374,  1998. 

Johnathan  L.  Kiel  was  bom  in  Houston,  TX,  on 
September  4,  1949.  He  received  the  D.V.M.  degree 
(summa  cum  laude)  from  the  School  of  Veterinary 
Medicine,  Texas  A&M  University,  College  Station, 
in  1974  and  the  interdisciplinary  Ph.D.  degree  in 
biochemistry  and  microbiology  from  the  Health 
Sciences  Center  School  of  Medicine,  Texas  Tech 
University,  Lubbock,  in  1981. 

He  is  Chief  of  the  Biomechanisms  and  Modeling 
Branch  of  the  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division  of 
the  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate  of  the  Air  Force 
Research  Laboratory,  where  he  works  in  the  areas  of  detection  of  biological 
agents  and  directed  energy  threats.  His  doctoral  dissertation  is  titled  “The  Cy¬ 
totoxic  Activity  of  Peroxidases  ”  He  is  an  author  of  69  scientific  publications, 
including  Type-B  Cytochrome:  Sensors  and  Switches  (Boca  Raton,  FL:  CRC 
Press,  1995),  and  95  scientific  presentations.  He  holds  16  patents,  and  has  three 
pending,  many  of  which  are  licensed  or  in  the  process  of  being  licensed. 

Dr.  Kiel  was  elected  to  the  American  College  of  Veterinary  Microbiologists 
in  1984.  He  became  a  Fellow  of  the  American  Association  for  the  Advance¬ 
ment  of  Science  in  1995  and  of  the  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  in  1998.  He 
received  the  U.S.A.F.  Basic  Research  Award  in  1994  for  his  work  in  radio-fre¬ 
quency  radiation  bioeffect  mechanisms.  His  inventions  won  him  the  1991  R&D 
100  Award  and  the  1992  Federal  Laboratory  Consortium  Award  for  Excellence 
in  Technology  Transfer.  His  scientific  team  was  named  a  Star  Team  by  the  Air 
Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research  in  1993.  He  was  named  an  Air  Force  Asso¬ 
ciation  Scientist  of  the  Year  in  1994. 


KIEL  et  at.:  PULSED  MICROWAVE  INDUCED  BIOEFFECTS 


167 


Jill  E.  Parker  was  born  in  Sussex,  U.K.,  and 
received  the  B.Sc.  (Hons.)  in  Biochemistry  from  the 
University  of  Sheffield  in  1963  and  the  Ph.D.  degree 
in  “Human  Biochemical  Genetics”  from  King’s 
College,  University  of  London,  in  1966. 

She  held  Postdoctoral  positions  at  the  Gallon 
Laboratory,  University  College,  London  University 
and  at  the  University  of  Texas  at  Austin  in  the 
Department  of  Zoology  and  Department  of  Microbi- 
r  ology.  Her  research  focused  on  obtaining  the  protein 

sequence  of  human  Transferrin  and  a  Flavodoxin 
from  Desulphovibrio  gigas.  In  the  Microbiology  Department,  she  ran  a 
centralized  tissue  culture  facility  to  produce  hybridomas  for  many  departments. 
In  1 982,  she  joined  Dr.  Barbara  Bowman’s  group  in  the  Department  of  Cellular 
and  Structural  Biology  at  the  University  of  Texas  health  Science  Center,  San 
Antonio,  and  determined,  by  nucleic  acid  sequencing,  the  sequence  of  human 
Haptoglobin.  In  1985,  she  transferred  to  the  Microbiology  Department  working 
with  Dr.  Wendell  Winters,  and  became  a  Fellow  under  a  United  States  Air 
Force  training  program.  Her  research  focused  on  the  bioeffects  of  exposure  to 
low  level  electromagnetic  fields  (ELF)  and  radiofrequency  radiation  (RFR). 
In  1987,  she  was  recruited  to  Civil  Service  at  Brooks  AFB  in  what  is  now 
the  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate.  Sheworks  with  Dr.  Jonathan  Kiel  in  the 
Biomechanisms  and  Modeling  Branch  as  a  molecular  biologist.  Her  current 
research  focuses  on  characterization  and  sequence  of  key  metabolic  genes 
from  Bacillus  anthracis  (B.  a.)  and  the  utilization  of  these  genes  in  the  rapid 
identification  of  B.  a.  from  its  near  relatives. 


Ronald  L.  Seaman  (S’68-M’75-SM’83)  was  bom 
in  Seaman,  Ohio.  He  received  the  B.S.  degree  in  elec¬ 
trical  engineering  from  the  University  of  Cincinnati, 
Cincinnati,  OH,  the  Ph.D.  in  biomedical  engineering 
from  Duke  University,  Durham,  NC,  and  the  M.S. 
degree  in  management  from  the  Georgia  Institute  of 
Technology,  Atlanta. 

He  was  an  Instructor  at  the  University  of  Texas 
Health  Science  Center  at  Dallas  before  joining  the 
Georgia  Tech  Research  Institute  in  1979.  From  1986 
to  1994,  he  was  an  Associate  Professor  of  Biomedical 
Engineering  at  Louisiana  Tech  University,  Ruston,  and  served  as  Coordinator  of 
Research  in  the  Center  for  Rehabilitation  Science  and  Biomedical  Engineering 
there.  Joining  McKesson  BioServices,  Brooks  AFB,  TX,  in  1994,  He  is  cur¬ 
rently  a  Senior  Biomedical  Research  Scientist  in  the  Microwave  Medical  Bio¬ 
effects  Branch  of  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment.  He  is  also  an 
Associate  Investigator  in  the  Center  for  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology, 
consisting  of  organizations  in  the  San  Antonio,  TX,  area.  His  research  interests 
are  currently  focused  on  the  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  biological  sys- , 
terns  at  organism,  system,  and  cell  levels. 

Dr.  Seaman  is  a  member  of  Eta  Kappa  Nu,  Tau  Beta  Pi,  the  American  As¬ 
sociation  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  the  Society  for  Neuroscience,  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  the  International  Society  for  Bioelectricity,  and 
the  New  York  Academy  of  Sciences. 


Pedro  J.  Morales  was  bom  in  Toa  Baja,  Puerto  Rico, 
in  1964.  He  enlisted  in  the  U.S.  Air  Force  in  1981, 
and  completed  his  training  as  a  Medical  Laboratory 
Technician  in  the  USAF  School  of  Health  Care  Sci¬ 
ences  in  1983. 

From  1983  to  1995,  he  has  worked  in  various 
clinical  laboratories.  From  1995  to  present,  he 
has  been  involved  in  basic  research  in  the  area 
of  molecular  biology  with  regards  to  electromag¬ 
netic  bioeffects  and  in  bioweapons  detection  and 
counter-proliferation  in  support  of  the  Air  Force 
Research  Lab  at  Brooks  AFB,  TX. 


John  L.  Alls  was  born  at  Gary  AFB,  Texas,  in  1954. 
He  attended  Southwest  Texas  State  University,  San 
Marcos.  He  received  the  associate  degree  in  Medical 
Technology  in  1985.  He  has  been  registered  by  the 
Board  of  the  American  Society  of  Clinical  Patholo¬ 
gists  since  1985. 

He  entered  the  U.S.  Air  Force  in  1979.  He  special¬ 
ized  in  clinical  microbiology  at  Carswell  AFB  and 
Wilford  Hall  Medical  Center  at  Lackland  AFB  for 
eight  years.  In  1988,  he  was  assigned  to  Brooks  AFB 
Radiation  Sciences  Division  to  do  basic  research  in 
radio  frequency  radiation  bioeffects. 


Patrick  A.  Mason  was  bom  in  San  Diego,  CA,  in 
1957.  He  received  the  B.A.  degree  in  biology  and  in 
psychology  from  the  University  of  California  at  San 
Diego  in  1980  and  the  Ph.D.  degree  in  physiological 
psychology  from  McGill  University,  Montreal,  P.Q., 
Canada,  in  1985. 

From  1984  to  1990,  he  conducted  research  in  the 
Department  of  Clinical  Pharmacology,  University 
of  Colorado  Health  Science  Center,  Denver.  He  has 
been  at  Brooks  AFB  since  1990,  where  he  has  con¬ 
ducted  research  on  the  bioeffects  of  electromagnetic 
field  exposure.  He  is  on  the  Program  Management  Committee  and  Editorial 
Board  for  the  International  EMF  Dosimetry  Project. 

Dr.  Mason  is  a  member  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  and  the  Society 
for  Neuroscience. 


Satnam  P.  Mathur  (M’88)  was  bom  in  Dholpur, 
India,  on  October  17,  1943.  He  received  the  diploma 
in  electronics  and  radio  engineering  (with  honors) 
from  BTE,  Bombay,  India,  in  1966,  the  M.A.Sc 
degree  in  electrical  engineering  from  the  University 
of  Windsor,  ON.,  Canada,  in  1969,  and  the  Ph.D. 
degree  in  electrical  engineering  from  Michigan  State 
University,  East  Lansing,  in  1974. 

From  1 966  to  1 967,  he  was  a  Scientific  Assistant  in 
the  Microwave  Division  at  the  Tata  Institute  of  Fun¬ 
damental  Research,  Bombay.  From  1974  to  1975,  he 
was  with  the  School  of  Radar  Studies,  Indian  Institute  of  Technology,  New 
Delhi,  India.  From  1 982  to  1 987,  he  was  an  Assistant  Professor  and  from  1 982  to 
1987  a  Professor  of  electrical  engineering  at  the  Delhi  College  of  Engineering, 
Delhi  University,  Delhi,  India.  From  1988  to  1989,  he  was  a  Research  Associate 
at  the  University  of  Utah,  Salt  Lake  City,  where  he  worked  on  FDTD  methods 
applied  to  microwave  energy  deposition  in  biological  systems.  Since  1989,  he 
has  been  with  McKesson  BioServices,  Brooks  AFB,  TX,  where  he  is  engaged 
in  microwave  bioeffect  research.  His  current  research  interests  are  microwave 
dosimetry  and  FDTD  modeling  of  UWB  exposure  systems.  He  is  an  author  of 
Electronic  Devices,  Applications,  and  Integrated  Circuits  (Delhi,  India:  Umesh, 
1980). 


Eric  A,  Holwitt  taught  chemistry  at  the  U.S.  Air 
Force  Academy  from  1980  to  1984.  While  at  the 
Armed  Forces  Radiobiology  Research  Institute, 
he  developed  methods  for  synthesizing  radiation 
products  of  DNA.  He  has  also  studied  the  interaction 
of  radioproductive  compounds  with  DNA.  Other 
projects  he  has  participated  in  are  developing  a 
biosynthetic  polymer  to  destroy  hydrazine  and 
demonstrating  the  radiosensitivity  of  an  Air  Force 
patented  material.  During  this  time,  he  served  as  a 
UN  weapons  inspector  with  UNSCOM  in  Iraq  and, 
for  the  last  three  years,  has  been  working  on  chemical  and  biological  defense 
issues  for  the  Air  Force.  He  has  co-authored  15  publications  and  has  two 
patents.  Besides  research,  he  popularizes  science  throughout  San  Antonio,  TX, 
performing  chemistry  magic  shows  for  schools  and  civic  groups. 


Physiology  &  Behavior,  Vol.  65,  Nos.  4/5,  pp.  753-761, 1999 
©  1999  Elsevier  Science  Inc. 
Printed  in  the  USA.  All  rights  reserved 
0031-9384/99  $-see  front  matter 

PII  S0031-9384(98)00214-5 


Ultrawide-Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  Induced 

Hypotension  in  Rats 


ELSEVIER 


SHIN-TSU  LU,1  SATNAM  P.  MATHUR,  YAHYA  AKYEL  AND  JONATHAN  C.  LEE 

McKesson  BioServices,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment ;  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch, 
8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX  78235 


Received  17  December  1997;  Accepted  17  July  1998 


LU,  S.-T.,  S.  P.  MATHUR,  Y.  AKYEL  AND  J.  C.  LEE.  Ultrawide-band  electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension 
in  rats .  PHYSIOL  BEHAV  65(4/5)  753-761, 1999.— The  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  electromagnetic  pulses  are  used  as  a  new 
modality  in  radar  technology.  Biological  effects  of  extremely  high  peak  E-field,  fast  rise  time,  ultrashort  pulse  width,  and  ul¬ 
trawide  band  have  not  been  investigated  heretofore  due  to  the  lack  of  animal  exposure  facilities.  A  new  biological  effects  data¬ 
base  is  needed  to  establish  personnel  protection  guidelines  for  these  new  type  of  radiofrequency  radiation.  Functional  indices 
of  the  cardiovascular  system  (heart  rate,  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures)  were  selected  to  represent  biological  end 
points  that  may  be  susceptible  to  the  UWB  radiation.  A  noninvasive  tail-cuff  photoelectric  sensor  sphygmomanometer  was 
used.  Male  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  were  subjected  to  sham  exposure,  0.5-kHz  (93  kV/m,  180  ps  rise  time,  1.00  ns  pulse  width, 
whole-body  averaged  specific  absorption  rate,  SAR  =  70  mW/kg)  or  a  1-kHz  (85  kV/m,  200  ps  rise  time,  1.03  ns  pulse  width, 
SAR  =  121  mW/kg)  UWB  fields  in  a  tapered  parallel  plate  GTEM  cell  for  6  min.  Cardiovascular  functions  were  evaluated 
from  45  min  to  4  weeks  after  exposures.  Significant  decrease  in  arterial  blood  pressures  (hypotension)  was  found.  In  contrast, 
heart  rate  was  not  altered  by  these  exposures.  The  UWB  radiation-induced  hypotension  was  a  robust,  consistent,  and  persis¬ 
tent  effect.  ©  1999  Elsevier  Science  Inc. 

Arterial  pressure  Heart  rate  Pulsed  radiofrequency  radiation  Ultrawide-band  radiation  Delayed  effects 


THE  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation 
is  a  new  modality  in  radar  technology.  The  potential  usages  of 
UWB  radar  are  not  limited  to  military  application  only.  At 
much  lower  power,  an  example  of  civilian  UWB  radar  appli¬ 
cation  is  in  automobile  safety.  Devices  designed  as  warning 
systems  for  backing  up  and  parking  are  planned,  and  expected 
to  be  available  in  the  next  few  years.  A  commonly  used  defini¬ 
tion  accepted  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Project 
Agency  is  “Ultrawide  band  radar  is  any  radar  whose  frac¬ 
tional  bandwidth  is  greater  than  0.25,  regardless  of  the  center 
frequency  or  the  signal  time-bandwidth  product”  (45).  The 
UWB  is  a  radiofrequency  signal  with  an  ultrashort  pulse 
width  (a  few  ns)  and  a  very  fast  rise  time  (<200  ps).  Because 
of  the  ultrashort  pulse  width,  the  peak  electric  field  of  a  UWB 
pulse  can  be  operated  in  excess  of  the  breakdown  voltage 
without  arcing.  In  fact,  systems  with  peak  electric  field  in  ex¬ 
cess  of  hundreds  of  k V/m  are  known  to  exist.  Another  charac¬ 
teristic  is  a  very  low  duty  cycle  of  these  UWB  devices  result¬ 
ing  from  an  ultrashort  pulse  width. 

Radiofrequency  personnel  protection  guidelines  usually 
are  promulgated  on  a  time-averaged  specific  absorption  rate 


or  power  density.  From  operational  characteristics  of  the 
UWB  devices  with  an  extremely  high  peak  electric  field  and 
very  low  duty  cycle,  the  energy  absorption  rate  per  pulse  in 
humans  can  be  extremely  high  (temporal  peak  SAR),  but  the 
average  specific  absorption  rate  (average  SAR)  can  be  very 
low  if  a  time-average  procedure  is  applied.  The  ratio  of  peak 
to  average  SARs  will  be  much  greater  than  those  of  narrow- 
band  RF  radiation  used  in  the  past  for  evaluation  of  the  bio¬ 
logical  effects  of  pulsed  RF  radiation.  Concerns  on  UWB  ra¬ 
diation  safety  issues  have  been  voiced  (1).  However,  the 
experimental  database  on  UWB  safety  issues  is  very  limited 
(41,48).  Therefore,  there  is  a  need  for  additional  toxicologi¬ 
cal  testing  to  address  the  safety  of  UWB  radiation. 

Interests  in  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  RF  radiation  can 
be  traced  back  to  as  early  as  the  1940s  (37),  and  it  has  contin¬ 
ued  until  today.  Specifically,  cardiovascular  effects  of  RF  ra¬ 
diation  include  human  studies  with  emphasis  on  changes  in 
regional  blood  flow  for  diathermy,  epidemiology,  and  case 
report,  studies  in  experimental  animals  such  as  cardiac  inju¬ 
ries  caused  by  intense  RF  exposure,  cardiovascular  adjust¬ 
ments  to  localized  “low-level”  RF  exposure,  changes  in  arte- 


lTo  whom  requests  for  reprints  should  be  addressed.  E-mail:  shin-tsu.lu@aloer.brooks.af.mil 


753 


754 


LU  ET  AL. 


rial  pressure,  and  heart  rate  by  moderate  RF  exposure.  The 
effect  of  RF  radiation  on  heart  rate  can  be  further  divided 
into  tachycardia,  bradycardia,  cardiac  pacing,  effects  on  iso¬ 
lated  cardiac  tissue  in  vitro  and  the  RF  interference  of  the  im¬ 
planted  cardiac  pacemaker.  This  database  forms  a  foundation 
for  a  comparative  analysis  between  narrow-band  RF  and 
UWB  radiations.  However,  the  majority  of  these  studies  are 
acute  experiments  employing  a  short-term  (acute)  exposure 
and  studying  cardiovascular  end  points  in  a  short  period  of 
time,  for  example,  during  or  immediately  after  RF  exposure, 
and  usually  under  anesthesia.  Three  studies  used  a  long-term 
(chronic)  RF  exposure,  but  cardiovascular  functions  were  not 
their  main  emphasis;  instead,  they  were  embedded  in  a  bat¬ 
tery  of  end  points  (8,10,46). 

Two  types  of  chronic  cardiovascular  effects  have  been  ob¬ 
served,  They  are  the  cardiovascular  effect  of  a  chronic  expo¬ 
sure  and  the  delayed  effect  of  an  acute  exposure.  The  chronic 
effect  is  represented  by  a  biphasic  (hypertension-mormoten- 
sion— ^hypotension)  or  a  monophasic  (hypotension)  arterial 
response  in  rats  chronically  exposed  to  RF  radiation  (37).  The 
delayed  effects  are  from  case  reports  (13,49)  indicating  the 
presence  of  delayed  hypertension  in  conjunction  with  anxiety 
attacks,  which  was  termed  “atypical  post-traumatic  syndrome,” 
months  after  an  accidental  exposure  to  RF  fields.  This  de¬ 
layed  vascular  response  has  never  been  confirmed  experimen¬ 
tally.  In  the  present  experiment,  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure 
in  awake  rats  were  evaluated  periodically  with  a  tail-cuff  pho¬ 
toelectric  sphygmomanometer  from  45  min  to  4  weeks  after 
acute  UWB  exposures. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 
General  Description  of  the  Experimental  Procedure 

Fifteen  male  Wistar-Kyoto  (WKY)  rats  aged  between  71 
and  89  days  were  used  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment. 
They  were  obtained  at  56  days  of  age  from  a  commercial 
source  (Charles  River,  Portage,  MI).  They  were  maintained  in 
the  vivarium  at  21-23°C  ambient  temperature,  100%  condi¬ 
tioned  fresh  air  for  more  than  10  exchanges  per  hour,  and  a  12 
L-12  D  (lights  on  0600-1800  h)  light  cycle.  Tap  water  and 
feed  (Purina  Rodent  Diet  5008,  Ralston  Purina  Co.,  St.  Louis, 
MO)  were  available  ad  lib.  After  a  10-day  quarantine  period, 
they  were  acclimated  to  a  test  holder  (IITC  Life  Science, 
Woodland  Hills,  CA,  model  81)  1  h  daily  for  3  days.  Preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline  of  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressures  (systolic, 
mean,  and  diastolic)  were  determined  1-2  days  after  the 
holder  acclimation.  Three  to  4  days  later,  they  were  individu¬ 
ally  subjected  to  sham  exposure,  low  UWB,  or  high  UWB  ex¬ 
posure  for  6  min  between  0900  and  1000  h  in  an  exposure 
holder  maintained  at  23-25°C.  On  the  exposure  day,  average 
body  weight  was  250  ±  4  g  (n  =  15,  SE).  Immediately  after  ex¬ 
posure,  the  rat  was  transferred  to  the  test  holder  for  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressure  measurements.  Postexposure  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressures  were  determined  at  45  min,  24  h,  72  h,  1, 
2,  3,  and  4  weeks  after  exposure.  Four  to  six  determinations 
were  obtained  at  each  time  point,  and  the  average  value  was 
used  to  represent  the  cardiovascular  endpoints  at  that  time 
point.  Fifteen  animals  were  divided  randomly  into  three 
groups  of  five  rats  each  for  sham  exposure,  “low”  UWB  and 
“high”  UWB  exposures.  Each  rat  was  assigned  randomly  to 
receive  one  of  the  three  treatments  in  five  experimental  cy¬ 
cles.  The  UWB-exposed  rats  were  always  accompanied  by  at 
least  one  sham-exposed  animal  such  that  the  time-related  ex¬ 
perimental  error  caused  by  different  experimental  cycles  or 
animal  shipments  could  be  minimized. 


Photoelectric  Sphygmomanometer 

An  indirect  tail-cuff  arterial  pressure  measurement  system 
without  external  preheating  in  awake  rats  was  first  introduced 
by  Yen  et  al.  (51).  Validation  of  pressure  markers  (systolic 
and  mean  arterial  pressures),  and  theoretical  analysis  of  this 
indirect  method  based  on  a  photoelectric  sensor  have  been 
performed  by  various  investigators  (4,36,50).  For  the  present 
experiment,  a  commercial  system  (IITC  Life  Sci.,  Woodland 
Hills,  CA)  was  used.  The  system  was  composed  of  a  pulse  am¬ 
plifier  (IITC  model  29),  tail-cuff  photoelectric  sensor  assem¬ 
bly  (IITC  model  B-60,  5/8”  cuff),  smaller  bore  tubing  (Tygon, 
1.6  mm  i.d.,  0.8-mm  wall  thickness  for  connecting  tail-cuff, 
pressure  amplifier,  pressurizing  bulb,  and  pressure  gauge)  and 
animal  holder  (IITC  model  81).  Outputs  of  the  pressure  trans¬ 
ducer  and  pulse  sensor  from  the  pulse  amplifier  were  split 
evenly.  One  set  of  outputs  was  monitored  continuously  with  a 
digital  oscilloscope  (Tektronix  2430  A,  Tektronix,  Inc.,  Wilson- 
ville,  OR).  The  other  set  of  outputs  was  converted  to  a  digital 
signal  and  recorded  using  a  strip  chart  program  (AYSTANT+, 
Asyst  Software  Technology,  Rochester,  NY)  by  a  computer 
(Hewlett-Packard  Vectra,  Hewlett  Packard,  Greenley,  CO) 
at  50  Hz  data  acquisition  rate.  The  recorded  data  was  im¬ 
ported  into  a  graphics  program  (SigmaPlot  4.1,  Jandel  Scien¬ 
tific  Softwares,  San  Rafael,  CA)  and  viewed  graphically  and 
digitally.  A  custom-made  microenvironment  chamber  was  fab¬ 
ricated  from  acrylic  tubes  (28  cm  long,  12  and  14  cm  i.d.,  3.2-mm 
wall  thickness).  Plastic  tubing  (Tygon,  6.4  mm  i.d.,  1.6-mm  wall 
thickness,  from  Cole  Palmer,  Vernon  Hills,  IL)  was  wrapped 
around  the  smaller  acrylic  tube  with  tubing  wall  touching  each 
other  to  form  a  coil  18  cm  in  length.  The  larger  acrylic  tube 
was  used  as  an  outer  wall.  Both  ends  of  the  Tygon  tubing  were 
connected  to  the  pump  inlet  and  outlet  port  of  a  precision  cir¬ 
culator  water  bath  (Neslab  RTE-110,  Neslab  Instruments, 
Portsmouth,  NH)  providing  an  microenvironment  within  the 
inner  acrylic  tube  between  26.5  and  27.5°C  to  prevent  sudden 
temperature  surges.  The  microenvironment  chamber  was  mon¬ 
itored  continuously  with  a  thermistor  temperature  probe  (Yel¬ 
low  Springs  405  air  temperature  probe,  Yellow  Springs  Instru¬ 
ment,  Yellow  Springs,  OH)  and  a  digital  thermistor  bridge 
(Cole  Palmer  08502-12,  Cole  Palmer,  Vernon  Hills,  IL).  The 
pressure  amplifier  output  was  set  at  1.00  volt  per  Torr  (mmHg). 
Light  intensity  and  photosensor  output  amplifier  were  ad¬ 
justed  to  provide  a  tail-pulse  signal  at  no  more  than  5  volts  at 
the  maximum  oscillation.  Pressure  amplifier  output  was  cali¬ 
brated  daily  against  a  certified  sphygomomanometer  before 
use.  The  same  tail-cuff-photoelectric  sensor  assembly  was  used 
throughout  the  entire  experiment. 

Cardiovascular  Parameter  Measurement 

Rats  were  transported  from  the  vivarium  to  the  laboratory 
in  the  morning.  They  were  allowed  to  sit  quietly  in  their  own 
cage  for  at  least  30  min  before  being  transferred  to  the  test 
holder.  The  rat  and  test  holder  were  then  inserted  into  the  mi¬ 
croenvironment  chamber.  Heating  in  the  microenvironment 
chamber  caused  by  animal  body  heat  was  offset  by  adjusting 
the  waterbath  temperature.  After  20  min  in  the  microenviron¬ 
ment  chamber,  the  rat  tail  was  passed  through  the  tail  cuff. 
The  tail-cuff/photoelectric  sensor  was  then  attached  to  the 
test  holder,  by  this  time,  characteristic  tail  pulses  could  be  de¬ 
tected  if  the  tail  cuff  was  inflated  to  40-60  Torr  (mmHg). 
When  the  presence  of  tail  pulses  was  ascertained,  tail  cuff  was 
quickly  inflated  to  200-220  Torr  until  tail  pulses  disappeared. 
The  cuff  was  then  deflated  immediately  afterwards  at  approx¬ 
imately  2  Torr  per  heart  beat  for  25.6  s.  Systolic  pressure  ( Ps ) 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


755 


TIME  (SECONDS) 

FIG.  1.  An  example  of  the  indirect  arterial  pressure  measurement  in 
the  rat. 


was  determined  during  the  deflation  cycle  as  the  corresponding 
cuff  pressure  at  the  reappearance  of  the  tail  pulse  while  mean 
pressure  ( Pm )  was  the  cuff  pressure  when  amplitude  of  the  tail 
pulse  reached  a  maximum.  Diastolic  pressure  {P^)  was  calculated 
by  Pd  =  ( Pm  X  3  -  PS)I2  (42).  Heart  rate  was  determined  from 
the  average  of  pulse-to-pulse  intervals  for  at  least  60  beats. 
An  example  of  this  deflation  cycle  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  arte¬ 
rial  pressure/heart  rate  measurement  was  repeated  for  four  to 
six  times  separated  by  a  5-min  interval  between  determinations 
to  avoid  the  collapse  of  the  tail  artery  during  measurement. 

UWB  Exposure 

The  UWB  exposure  system  was  originally  designed  and 
built  at  the  Sandia  National  Laboratories  (Albuquerque,  NM). 


The  UWB  pulses  were  generated  by  a  spark  gap  pulse  genera¬ 
tor  and  transmitted  into  a  GTEM  cell  (Gigahertz  Transverse 
Electromagnetic  cell,  a  flared  rectangular  coaxial  transmission 
line)  (Fig.  2).  The  rise  time  and  pulse  width  were  180  ps  and 
1.00  ns,  respectively,  when  the  system  was  operated  at  500  Hz, 
and  they  were  200  ps  and  1.03  ns  when  operated  at  1,000  Hz. 
The  pulsed  electric  field  was  measured  with  a  EG&G  (Welles¬ 
ley,  MA)  D-dot  sensor  (model  ACD-IR)  (33).  Outputs  of 
the  D-dot  sensors  were  measured  with  a  4.5-GHz  bandwidth 
Tektronix  SCD5000  transient  sampling  scope.  A  transfer 
function  was  used  for  data  compensation  of  the  pulsed  electric 
field.  The  transfer  function  was  based  on  deconvolution  tech¬ 
nique  of  a  standard  pulse  generated  by  a  Picosecond  Pulse 
Laboratories  4050  B  picosecond  step  generator  with  5100 
pulse  forming  network.  The  corrected  D-dot  values  were  con¬ 
verted  into  E  field  intensity  (2).  For  UWB  exposures,  the  rat 
was  placed  in  an  exposure  holder  fabricated  from  an  acrylic 
tube  (6.5-cm  i.d.,  3.2-mm  wall  thickness,  28  cm  long,  6.4  X  50-mm 
slots  separated  by  19  mm  for  ventilation)  and  polyethylene 
endcaps.  No  metallic  parts  was  used,  and  this  holder  was  used 
to  align  the  animal  position  to  UWB  fields.  The  long  axis  of 
the  tube,  i.e.,  the  major  axis  of  the  animal  was  placed  in  paral¬ 
lel  with  magnetic  vector  on  the  ground  plane  at  72.7  cm  from 
the  source  end  of  GTEM  cell.  The  animal  was  isolated  from 
the  ground  plane  by  placing  the  exposure  holder  4.2  cm  from  the 
ground  plane  on  an  acrylic  stand.  After  transferring  the  ani¬ 
mal  into  the  GTEM  cell,  a  5-min  equilibration  period  was 
given  before  exposure.  Three  exposure  protocols  were  used: 
sham  exposure,  low-UWB  and  high-UWB  exposures  for  6 
min.  During  the  sham  exposure,  all  UWB  exposure  conditions 
were  maintained  except  trigger  pulses  were  never  generated 
to  cause  discharge  across  the  spark  gap.  Table  1  lists  pertinent 
pulse  parameters  used.  Figure  3  shows  the  pulse  characteris¬ 
tics  operated  at  500  Hz  (low-UWB)  and  1,000  Hz  (high- 
UWB)  repetition  rate. 


FIG.  2.  The  UWB  exosure  system  for  rats. 


756 


TABLE  1 

CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  UWB  PULSES 


LU  ET  AL. 


Pulse  Parameters 

Sham 

Low  UWB* 

High  UWB*  . 

Risetime 

— 

180  ±  7  ps 

200  ±  5  ps 

Pulse  width 

— 

1.00  ±  0.004  ns 

1.03  ±  0.02  ns 

Peak  E  field  intensity 

0kV/m 

93.0  ±  5.0  kV/m 

84.6  ±  4.0  kV/m 

Pulse  repetition  rate 

0  Hz 

500  Hz 

1,000  Hz 

Average  power  density 

0  mW/cm2 

1.15  mW/cm2 

1.96  mW/cm2 

Total  radiant  exposure 

0  J/cm2 

0.41  J/cm2 

0.70  J/cm2 

Highest  frequencyt 

— 

2.78  GHz 

2.50  GHz 

Medium  frequencyt 

— 

0.50  GHz 

0.49  GHz 

Lowest  frequencyt 

— 

0.09  GHz 

0.10  GHz 

Fractional  bandwidtht 

— 

187% 

185% 

♦Mean  ±  SD,  obtained  in  five  exposures. 

■{■Estimated  according  to  Foster  (14).  Ultrawide  band  radar  is  a  radar  whose 
fractional  bandwidth  is  greater  than  25%,  regardless  of  the  center  frequency  or 
the  signal  time-bandwidth  product  (45).  The  fractional  bandwidth  of  these 
pulses  was  wider  than  the  minimum  required  to  qualify  as  UWB  radar. 


Data  Analysis 

The  present  experiment  utilized  a  factorial  design  with  re¬ 
peated  observations.  The  time  after  exposure  was  designated 
as  “blocks”  (r  =  7),  UWB  treatments  ( t  =  3)  as  treatments 
and  five  observations  (5  =  5)  were  included.  Therefore,  the 
present  experiment  was  a  7  X  3  X  5  experiment  which  con¬ 
tained  105  experimental  units.  For  each  experimental  unit,  the 
average  of  four  to  six  measurements  was  used.  To  limit  the  in-  / 
dividual  variation,  the  use  of  individual  control  was  incorpo¬ 
rated  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  experiment.  There¬ 
fore,  the  end  points  were  changes  from  the  preexposure 
baseline  in  each  individual  rat.  Postexposure  heart  rate  and 
blood  pressure  data  were  the  magnitude  of  change  from  the 
preexposure  baseline  of  the  same  rat  under  study.  An  analytic 
method  based  on  an  analysis  of  variance  with  multiway  classi¬ 
fication  and  multiple  observations  was  used.  The  sources  of 
variation  were  identified,  and  the  variance  and  degree  of  free¬ 
dom  (df)  were  computed.  These  various  variances  associated 
with  the  present  experiment  were  total  (experimental  units, 
df  =  rst  -  1  =  104),  time  after  exposure  (df  =  r  -  1  =  6), 
UWB  treatments  (df  =  t  -  1  =  2),  interaction  [df  =  (r  -  1) 

(*  “  1)  =  12]  and  error  [df  =  rt  (s  -  1)  =  84].  Dunnett’s  test 


FIG.  3.  The  UWB  pules  operated  at  500  and  1,000  Hz  repetition  rate. 


was  used  for  post  hoc  analysis  when  a  significant  UWB  treat¬ 
ment  effect  was  found.  Null  hypothesis  was  rejected  at  the 
0.05  level. 

RESULTS 

Body  Weight 

Body  weight  of  animals  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Data  are  body 
weight  before  exposure,  24  h,  72  h,  1  week,  2, 3,  and  4  weeks 
after  exposure.  Other  than  an  initial  insignificant  weight  loss 
in  sham  and  500  Hz  exposed  rats,  weight  gains  were  similar 
among  these  three  groups  of  animals. 

Preexposure  Baseline 

Figure  5  shows  the  preexposure  baseline.  Average  heart 
rate  ranged  between  332  and  351  beats  per  minutes  (bpm). 
The  ranges  in  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures  were 
146.1  to  147.7, 120.1  to  123.6,  and  107.2  to  112.1  Torr,  respec¬ 
tively.  Difference  among  groups  in  any  of  the  preexposure 
baseline  was  not  found. 

Heart  Rate 

Figure  6  shows  the  changes  in  heart  rate  from  the  preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline.  Heart  rate  usually  decreased  from  the  preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline  irrespective  of  UWB  treatments.  The  UWB 
treatments,  time  after  exposure  and  interaction  between 
UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure  were  not  signifi¬ 
cantly  different  in  this  study. 

Systolic  Pressure 

Systolic  pressure  of  the  sham-exposed  rats  had  a  tendency 
to  increase  (Fig.  7).  In  contrast,  the  systolic  pressure  was  con¬ 
sistently  lower  than  the  preexposure  baseline  in  rats  exposed 
to  500  or  1,000  Hz  UWB  fields.  UWB  treatments  were  the 
only  significant  factor  noted,  F(2,84)  =  16.62,  p  <  0.001.  Time 
after  exposure,  F(6,  84)  =  1.00,  NS,  and  interaction  between 
UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure,  F(12,84)  =  0.75, 
NS,  were  not  statistically  significant.  The  largest  changes  from 
the  respective  preexposure  baseline  were  +13.65  Torr  at  4 
weeks  after  sham  exposure,  -23.0  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  expo¬ 
sure  to  500  Hz  and  —22.8  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  exposure  to 
1,000  Hz  UWB.  Post  hoc  analysis  revealed  that  decreased  sys- 


UWB -INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


757 


FIG.  4.  Body  weight  of  WKY  rats  exposed  to  UWB.  Data  shown  are 
preexposure,  24  h,  72  h,  1  week,  2  weeks,  3  weeks,  and  4  weeks  after 
exposure. 

tolic  pressure  occurred  at  45  min,  24  h,  1, 2,  and  4  weeks  after 
exposure  but  not  at  72  h,  and  3  weeks  after  exposure  in  the 
500  Hz  exposed  rats.  In  the  1,000  Hz  exposed  rats,  significant 
decreases  in  systolic  pressure  occurred  at  45  min,  1, 2,  and  4 
weeks  after  exposure  but  not  at  24  h,  72  h,  and  3  weeks  after 
exposure.  In  comparison  to  the  systolic  pressure  in  sham- 
exposed  rats,  the  most  intense  systolic  hypotension  occurred 
at  2  weeks  after  exposure.  The  magnitude  of  systolic  pressure 
decrease  from  the  sham-exposed  group  was  34.9  Torr  in  the 
500  Hz  group,  and  34.7  Torr  in  the  1,000  Hz  group. 

Mean  Arterial  Pressure 

Changes  in  mean  arterial  pressure  were  similar  to  changes 
in  systolic  pressure  (Fig.  8).  Mean  arterial  pressure  had  a  ten¬ 
dency  to  increase  from  the  preexposure  baseline  in  sham- 
exposed  rats  while  decreased  mean  arterial  pressure  was 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  500  and  1,000  Hz  UWB.  Results  of 
the  factorial  analysis  of  variance  revealed  that  UWB  treat¬ 
ments,  F(2,84)  =  18.55,  p  <  0.001,  was  statistically  significant, 
but  the  times  after  exposure,  F(6,84)  =  0.57,  NS  was  not.  In¬ 
teraction  between  UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure 
was  statistically  insignificant,  F(  12,84)  =  0.37,  NS.  The  largest 


UWB  TREATMENT:  Fpj4)-  1.19;  N.S.  TIME:  F(w)=  0.95;  N.S.  INTERACTION:  F<12  W)=1.03;  N.S. 


FIG.  6.  Heart  rates  in  UWB-exposed  rats.  * 


changes  from  their  respective  baseline  were  +8.5  Torr  at  72  h 
after  sham  exposure,  -15.9  Torr  at  24  h  after  500  Hz,  and 
-16.9  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  1,000  Hz  UWB  exposure.  In  com¬ 
parison  to  sham-exposed  rats,  significant  lower  mean  arterial 
pressure  was  noted  in  500  Hz-exposed  rats  at  all  times  after 
exposure  except  at  3  weeks  after  exposure,  and  in  1,000  Hz- 
exposed  rats  at  all  time  except  at  24  h  and  3  weeks  after  expo¬ 
sure.  The  largest  magnitude  of  hypotension  was  20.6  Torr  in 
500  Hz  and  21.89  Torr  in  1,000  Hz-exposed  groups.  Both  of 
these  occurred  at  2  weeks  after  exposure. 

Diastolic  Pressure 

Although  systolic  and  mean  arterial  pressures  can  be  de¬ 
termined  with  a  photoelectric  sphygmomanometer  in  rats,  the 
diastolic  pressure  can  only  be  estimated  because  a  characteris¬ 
tic  pulse  marker  is  not  available  for  identifying  the  diastolic 
pressure  reliably  during  the  deflection  cycle.  It  is  known  that 
the  mean  arterial  pressure  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  diastolic 
pressure  and  1/3  of  the  pulse  pressure  (difference  between 
systolic  and  diastolic  pressures)  (42).  Therefore,  the  diastolic 
pressure  can  be  estimated  from  the  systolic  and  mean  arterial 
pressures.  Changes  in  diastolic  pressure  were  similar  to  systolic 
and  mean  arterial  pressure  (Fig.  9).  In  comparison  to  the  pre- 


UWB  TREATMENT;  16.62;  p<  0J)l  TIME;  F(M4)-  1.00;  N.S.  INTERACTION:  F(llm)-0.75;  N.S. 


TIME  AFTER  EXPOSURE 


FIG.  5.  Preexposure  cardiovascular  baseline. 


FIG.  7.  UWB-induced  systolic  hypotension  in  WKY  rats. 


758 


LU  ET  AL. 


FIG.  8.  UWB -induced  decreases  in  mean  arterial  pressure  in  WKY  rats. 


exposure  baseline,  change  in  sham-exposed  rats  was  primar¬ 
ily  an  increase  in  diastolic  pressure,  while  decreases  were 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  500  or  1,000  Hz  UWB.  The  largest 
change  from  baseline  was  +9.6  Torr  at  72  h  after  sham  expo¬ 
sure,  -16.6  Torr  at  45  min  after  exposure  to  500  Hz,  and 
-14.0  Torr  at  3  weeks  after  exposure  to  1,000  Hz  UWB. 
Again,  the  UWB  treatments  were  statistically  significant, 
F(2,84)  =  16.30,  p  <  0.001,  but  the  time  after  exposure, 
F(6,84)  =  0.46,  NS,  and  the  interaction  between  UWB  treat¬ 
ments  and  time  after  exposure,  F(12,84)  =  0.37,  NS  were  not. 
Diastolic  hypotension  was  found  in  four  of  the  six  sampling 
points,  i.e.,  at  45  min,  24  h,  72  h,  1,  and  3  weeks  but  not  at  two 
and  four  weeks  after  exposure,  in  rats  exposed  to  500  Hz 
UWB.  Rats  exposed  to  1,000  Hz  UWB  had  a  lower  diastolic 
pressure  than  sham-exposed  rats  in  five  of  the  six  postexpo¬ 
sure  sampling  points.  Diastolic  hypotension  was  not  noted  in 
rats  at  24  h  after  exposure  to  1,000  Hz  UWB.  In  comparison 
to  sham  exposure,  the  largest  magnitude  of  changes  in  dias¬ 
tolic  pressure  was  -22.5  Torr  at  1  week  after  500  Hz  and 
-16.7  Torr  at  4  weeks  after  1,000  Hz. 

DISCUSSION 

The  observation  of  a  delayed,  robust,  and  persistent  de¬ 
crease  in  arterial  pressures  (delayed  hypotension)  without 

UWB  TREATMENT:  F(2  84)-  16.30;  p<  0.01  TIME:  0.46;  N.S.  INTERACTION:  F{i2m)-0.37;  N.S. 


changes  in  the  heart  rate  in  rats  subjected  to  an  acute  UWB 
exposure  is  uncommon,  no  matter  what  the  cause  is.  The 
heart  rate  is  known  to  covary  with  blood  pressure,  or  to  be 
more  susceptible  than  the  blood  pressure  to  RF  perturbation 
(37).  As  indicated  in  the  introduction,  the  anticipated  UWB- 
induced  change  in  the  cardiovascular  function,  if  any,  was  hy¬ 
pothesized  to  be  hypertension  (increased  arterial  pressure)  as 
part  of  “atypical  post-traumatic  syndrome,”  which  included 
emotional  lability,  irritability,  headaches,  insomnia,  and  de¬ 
layed  hypertension.  In  addition,  the  cardiovascular  effect  of 
UWB  radiation  appears  to  be  different  from  the  effect  in¬ 
duced  by  conventional  RF  radiation.  Results  of  a  recent  series 
of  experiments  (15-18,23-30)  on  thermogenic  effects  of  RF 
radiation  on  cardiovascular  functions  also  supported  the  con¬ 
cept  that  susceptibilities  of  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressure 
to  thermogenic  RF  radiations  were  different. 

Jauchem  and  Frei  (15-18,23-30)  evaluated  the  cardiovas¬ 
cular  responses  of  rats  exposed  to  discrete  narrow-band  mi¬ 
crowave  radiation  at  1.2  (30),  1.2-1. 8/1 .2-1 .4  (26),  2.45  (17,23, 
27),  2.8  (16,24,28),  5.6  (17,29),  9.3  (15),  and  25  GHz  (18).  Ex¬ 
cept  in  one  experiment  (26),  these  investigators  utilized  ket¬ 
amine-anesthetized  rats  as  the  experimental  model.  Their  ex¬ 
perimental  design  involved  a  comparison  of  cardiovascular 
end  points,  mean  arterial  pressure,  and  heart  rate,  in  micro- 
wave  exposed  rats  when  their  rectal  temperature  reached  38.5 
and  39.5°C  during  the  course  of  microwave  exposure.  Occa¬ 
sionally,  the  cardiovascular  end  points  were  the  time  sequen¬ 
tial  data  in  a  lethal  exposure.  The  whole-body  average  SAR 
used  in  these  experiments  ranged  between  6  and  16.8  W/kg. 
Because  ketamine-anesthetized  rats  could  not  maintain  a  rec¬ 
tal  temperature  at  38.5  and  39.5°C,  sham-exposure  data  was 
not  presented  in  these  experiments.  Thermal  tachycardia  and 
thermal  hypertension  were  usually  concluded.  In  contrast,  the 
specific  aims  of  the  present  experiment  were  to  study  the  late 
cardiovascular  sequelae  of  UWB  exposure  in  unanesthetized 
rats  without  confounding  factors  such  as  postsurgical  compli¬ 
cations  and  anesthesia.  In  addition,  the  magnitude  of  response 
of  each  individual  rat  was  adjusted  with  its  own  preexposure 
baseline  in  the  present  experiment.  Furthermore,  the  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses  studied  in  the  present  experiment  were 
compared  to  the  end  points  obtained  from  sham-exposed  rats. 
Because  of  these  differences  in  experimental  approaches,  it  is 
difficult  to  compare  the  results  obtained  in  these  two  labora¬ 
tories.  Lacking  a  comparable  experiment  on  RF-induced  de¬ 
layed  cardiovascular  effects,  the  uniqueness  of  the  UWB- 
induced  delayed  hypotension  cannot  be  ascertained  at  the 
present  time. 

Arterial  pressure  is  determined  by  the  cardiac  output  and 
total  peripheral  resistance.  Based  on  hemodynamics  princi¬ 
ples,  the  cause  of  a  decrease  in  arterial  pressure  in  the  absence 
of  heart  rate  alteration  (therefore,  no  change  in  cardiac  out¬ 
put)  is  a  decrease  in  total  peripheral  resistance.  Rats  are  known 
to  possess  a  baroreceptor  reflex  mechanism,  which  serves  to 
maintain  a  constant  arterial  pressure  by  increasing  heart  rate 
(therefore,  cardiac  output)  if  arterial  pressure  decreases  or  by 
decreasing  the  heart  rate  if  arterial  pressure  increases  (31). 
The  absence  of  compensation  by  baroreceptor  reflexes  can  re¬ 
sult  from  baroreceptor  reset,  alterations  in  autonomic  out¬ 
flows  or  alterations  in  adrenergic  receptors.  The  exact  mecha¬ 
nism  of  the  UWB -delayed  hypotension  is  not  known. 

The  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Spontaneous  Hyper¬ 
tensive  Rats  has  recommended  the  use  of  an  indirect  blood 
(arterial)  pressure  measurement  method  for  determining  the 
arterial  pressure  in  rats  (22).  Indirect  arterial  pressure  mea¬ 
surement  requires  restraint.  Restraint  is  a  known  psychogenic/ 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


759 


emotional  stress.  It  is  known  to  cause  tachycardia  and  hyper¬ 
tension  through  sympathetic  arousal  in  animals  (3,5,38,40). 
The  WKY  rats  used  in  the  present  experiment  were  accli¬ 
mated  to  the  holder  to  prevent  novelty  stress.  Successful  accli¬ 
mation  to  novelty  stress  was  indicated  by  the  absence  of  reluc¬ 
tance  to  be  placed  in  holder,  absence  of  defecation  and  urination, 
and  the  reduction  in  number  of  restless  episodes  during  the  1-h 
period  in  the  holder.  A  recent  study  (5)  has  shown  that  the 
peak  tachycardia  response  to  restraint  was  not  affected  after 
10  acclimation  sessions.  Acclimation,  however,  did  accelerate 
the  return  of  the  tachycardia  to  baseline.  Interpretation  of  re¬ 
sults  in  the  present  study  should  include  the  possibility  that 
the  method  of  indirect  blood  pressure  measurement  is  a  “stress 
test”  rather  than  a  test  procedure  for  the  basal/resting  cardio¬ 
vascular  functions.  It  is  possible  that  demonstration  of  the  UWB- 
induced  hypotension  requires  additional  “stimuli”  associated 
with  the  indirect  blood  pressure  measurement  procedure. 

Genetic  predisposition  appears  to  be  an  important  factor 
in  animal’s  response  to  stress.  Sudakov  (44)  used  a  30-h  con¬ 
tinuous  restraint  to  differentiate  three  types  of  cardiovascular 
changes  to  restraint:  resistant,  adaptive,  and  sensitive.  More 
than  50%  of  Wistar  rats  that  did  not  exhibit  heart  rate  and  ar¬ 
terial  pressure  responses  to  the  prolonged  restraint  were  clas¬ 
sified  as  resistant.  Forty  to  65%  of  Wistar,  Vegh,  August,  and 
mixed  strains  that  exhibited  initial  hypertension  or  hypoten¬ 
sion  followed  by  a  return  almost  to  the  initial  level  at  the  end 
of  30-h  restraint,  were  classified  as  adaptive.  Approximately 
30%  of  August  and  Vegh  rats  were  classified  as  sensitive;  they 
perished  during  the  30-h  restraint  bearing  ECG  T-wave 
changes  and  myocardial  infarction.  Genetic  predisposition 
was  also  considered  to  be  an  important  factor  in  the  basal/ 
resting  cardiovascular  functions,  and  the  magnitude  of  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses  to  various  emotional  stresses  (3,6,32,35, 
44).  The  WKY  rats  appeared  to  be  adaptive  because  the  car¬ 
diovascular  indices  were  different  from  those  of  Wistar  rats, 
their  parent  strain,  which  is  classified  as  resistant. 

It  has  been  reported  that  responses  of  heart  rate  and  arte¬ 
rial  pressures  reached  a  plateau  and  remained  reasonably 
constant  after  10  min  in  the  restrainer  (3).  In  addition,  studies 
in  several  animal  species  including  rats  demonstrated  that  ar¬ 
terial  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  characterized  by  a  large 
spontaneous  variability  in  an  unanesthetized  state  (12).  To 
limit  the  spontaneous  variation  and  genetic  predisposition,  we 
have  instituted  strenuous  measurement  controls  such  as 
sources  of  animals,  strain  of  rats,  ambient  temperature  (26.5- 
27.5°C),  time  of  day  (0900-1200  h),  duration  in  the  test  holder 
(between  20  and  60  min),  and  interval  between  testing  (5 
min).  These  controls  were  used  to  maintain  a  consistent  level 
of  stimulus  during  indirect  arterial  pressure  measurement 
procedure.  In  addition,  the  average  value  of  multiple  mea¬ 
surements  was  used  to  represent  the  cardiovascular  functions 
at  each  datum  point  for  each  animal  to  minimize  sampling  errors. 

The  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressure  data  obtained  in  rats 
bearing  chronic  arterial  cannula  (direct  blood  pressure  mea¬ 
surement)  in  their  home  cages  were  accepted  as  stress-free 
measurements.  Representative  data  for  heart  rate  ranged  be¬ 
tween  279  ±  10  (mean  ±  SE,  n  =  5)  and  345  ±  9  («  =  6)  bpm 
and  mean  arterial  pressure  between  115  ±  3  (n  =  7)  and  122  ± 
4  (n  =  6)  Torr  in  male  adult  cannulated  WKY  rats  by  various 
investigators  (6,35,40).  The  ranges  of  the  preexposure  cardio¬ 
vascular  baseline  of  the  present  experiment  were  332  ±  9  (n  = 
5)  to  351  ±  8  (n  “  5)  bpm  for  heart  rate  and  120  ±  5  (n  =  5) 
to  124  ±  5  (n  =  5)  Torr  for  mean  arterial  pressure.  Therefore, 
these  baseline  values  in  the  present  study  compared  well  to 
other  reported  ranges  in  the  literature. 


A  decrease  in  blood  pressure  may  not  be  a  hypotension 
if  the  blood  pressure  is  within  the  normal  ranges  of  the  species 
under  study.  The  mean  arterial  pressures  of  the  UWB-induced 
hypotension  at  the  lowest  point  were  108  ±  7  (n  =  5,  500  Hz) 
and  107  ±  8  (n  =  5, 1,000  Hz)  which  qualify  these  values  in 
the  range  of  true  hypotension  instead  of  a  decrease  in  arterial 
pressure  in  WKY  rats.  On  the  other  hand,  the  range  of  stress- 
free  mean  arterial  pressure  of  Wistar  rats,  the  parent  strain  of 
WKY  rats,  was  between  97  ±  2  (n  =  6)  and  112  ±  3  (n  «  10) 
Torr  (36,47).  The  stress-free  mean  arterial  pressure  of  the 
Sprague-Dawley  rats  was  also  lower  than  that  of  WKY 
rats.  The  range  reported  were  85  ±  5  (n  =  4)  to  115  ±  3  (n  = 
12)  Torr  (3,12,20,43).  The  UWB-induced  changes  in  arterial 
pressure  in  the  present  experiment  was  a  mild  form  of  hy¬ 
potension  in  the  WKY  rats  and  should  be  asymptomatic  if 
the  mean  arterial  pressures  of  various  strains  of  rats  are  con¬ 
sidered. 


In  comparison  to  studies  using  narrow-band  RF,  the  aver¬ 
aged  exposure  intensity  of  the  present  UWB  exposure  is  rela¬ 
tively  low — 1.15  and  1.96  mW/cm2.  Conventional  dosimetry 
methods,  such  as  thermometry  and  calorimetry,  lack  of  sensi¬ 
tivity  to  determine  the  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  from 
exposure  to  these  low  intensities.  Equipment,  instrumentation 
and  techniques  for  measuring  the  internal  electric  field  are 
not  available.  To  estimate  the  whole-body  average  SAR,  the 
relative  power  spectrum  was  computed  from  the  padded  data 
file,  from  10  ns  to  100  ns  for  a  10  MHz  resolution  of  the  UWB 
pulse  by  Mathcad’s  Maximum  Entropy  Method  in  the  Numer¬ 
ical  Recipes  Function  Pack.  It  appeared  that  the  majority 
powirwaj,  below  200  MHz- (Fig.  10,  power  spectrum,  dashed  \ 
line).  The  relative  power  (RP)  spectrum  was  then  convolved  \ 
with  the  SAR  vs.  Frequency  curve  (11)  in  a  spheroidal  model  | 
of  a  medium  rat  for  H  polarization  (Fig.  10,  SAR,  dotted  line),  I 
also  at  10  MHz  intervals  from  10  MHz  to  10  GHz.  The  convo-  / 
luted  curve  (Fig.  10,  SAR  X  RP,  solid  line)  represented  the  J 
absorption  spectrum  of  a  rat  exposed  to  the  UWB  pulse  used  / 
in  the  present  experiment. (Ninety  %~of  the  spectrum  power  J 
(was  between  10  MHz  and  1.08  GHzfThe  maximum  value  of 
the  absorption  for  a  single  discrete" frequency  was  at  **TMHz,  ° 
which  indicated  that  SAR  was  less  than  ^mW/kg/mW/cm2  rfO 
according  to  the  value  presented  in  the  SAR  curve.  Integra¬ 
tion  of  the  convolved  curve  (SAR  X  RP)  and  normalized  by 
the  area  under  the  RP  curve  yielded  a  whole-body  SAR  at 
61.7  mW/kg/mW/cm2  for  the  high  UWB  pulse.  Analysis  of  the 
low  UWB  pulse  (500  Hz)  yielded  a  similar  result  in  relative 
power  spectrum,  absorption  spectrum,  and  whole-body  SAR 
(60.9  mW/kg/mW/cm2).  For  the  1,000  Hz  group,  total  absorp¬ 
tion  in  6  min  was,  therefore,  in  the  order  of  43.5  J/kg  or  less, 
which  is  incapable  of  inducing  any  significant  temperature  in¬ 
crease  in  the  animal.  The  mechanism  of  the  UWB-induced 


hypotension  is  not  known. 

A  widely  known  effect  specific  to  pulsed  microwave  radia¬ 
tion  with  high  peak  power  in  the  induced  auditory  sensation 
elicited  by  microwave  pulses.  This  effect  has  been  the  subject 
of  several  reviews  (7,34,39).  It  is  generally  accepted  that  the 
pulsed  microwave-induced  audible  sound  is  generated  from  a 
thermoelastic  expansion  of  cranial  tissue  and  launches  an 
acoustic  wave  that  is  detected  by  hair  cells  in  the  cochlea.  For 
pulsed  microwave  with  pulse  width  shorter  than  30  ps,  the  mi¬ 
crowave-induced  auditory  threshold  was  independent  of  tem¬ 
poral  peak  power  density  (or  temporal  peak  specific  absorp¬ 
tion)  and  it  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  energy  density  of  the 
microwave  pulse  or  specific  absorption  (SA)  per  pulse.  The 
auditory  threshold  SA  per  pulse  has  been  determined  in  hu¬ 
man  volunteers,  cat  (19)  and  rats  (9),  16, 10,  to  12  and  0.9  to 


760 


LU  ET  AL. 


Frequency  (MHz) 


FIG.  10.  Power  spectrum  and  absorption  spectrum  of  the  UWB  pulse. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


1.8  mJ/kg,  respectively.  The  temporal  peak  SAR  of  the  high  n  rt  protection  guidelines.  Further  research  on  effect  replication 
UWB  pulse  used  in  the  present  experiment  was^O^icW/kg  and  dose-response  characteristics  are  highly  recommended, 
(duty  cycle  «10~1 2 3 4 5 6).  Due  to  an  extremely  short  pulse  (pulse 
width  =  1.03  ns),  the  SA  per  pulse  from  the  high  UWB  pulses #*0 
was  around^fel-S-pJ/kg,  which  was  tJireS  orders  of  magnitude 

^  aU(?\t0ry  t^lre^0^  *n  rats*  Therefore,  This  WOrk  was  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 

the  UWB -induced  delayed  hypotension  was  not  a  sequela  of  Materiel  Command  under  the  contract  No.  DAMD17-94-C-4069  with 

an  audiogenic  effect.  £>  /  2. 1  McKesson  BioServices.  The  authors  acknowledge  the  contributions  of 

The  estimated  threshold  SAR  (&002  W/kg,  high  UWB  3  Jian-Zhong  Bao  for  providing  a  transfer  function  for  field  measure- 
pulse)  for  UWB-induced  hypotension  in  rats  was  times  ment>  Pamela  J.  Henry  for  technical  assistance,  D.  Duane  Cox  for  fab- 


less  than  0.4  W/kg,  the  basis  for  the  IEEE  C95.1-1991  safety 
standard  in  a  controlled  environment  (21).  The  threshold 
peak  electric  field  of  the  UWB  pulses  was  less  than  the  allow¬ 
able  peak  electric  field  (100  kV/m)  used  in  this  standard.  Hy¬ 
potension  is  known  to  possess  adverse  health  implications. 
The  UWB-induced  hypotension  is  a  recent  finding  that  has 
not  been  addressed  during  the  promulgation  of  personnel 


rication  of  the  microenvironment  chambers,  and  Bruce  E.  Stuck  for 
valuable  suggestions  during  the  preparation  of  the  manuscript.  In  con¬ 
ducting  this  research,  the  investigators  adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the 
Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals”  and  policies  of  the  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  and  U.S.  Air  Force  Armstrong  Labora¬ 
tory.  Disclaimer:  The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in 
this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an 
official  Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy,  and  decision. 


REFERENCES 


1.  Albanese,  R.;  Blaschak,  J.;  Median,  R.;  Penn,  J.:  Ultrashort  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  signals:  Biophysical  questions,  safety  issues,  and 
medical  opportunities.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  65:A116- 
A120;  1994. 

2.  Bao,  J.-Z.;  Lee,  J.  C.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Seaman,  R.  L.;  Akyel,  Y.:  Analy¬ 
sis  of  ultra-wide-band  pulses  in  a  GTEM  cell.  In:  Brandt,  H.  E., 
ed.  Intense  microwave  pulses  III,  Proc.  Spie  2557.  Danvers:  Inter¬ 
national  Society  for  Optical  Engineering;  1995:237-248. 

3.  Barron,  B.  A.;  Van  Loon,  G.  R.:  Role  of  sympathoadrenomedul- 
lary  system  in  cardiovascular  response  to  stress  in  rats.  J.  Autonomi. 
Ner.  Syst.  28:179-188;  1989. 

4.  Bunag,  R.  D.;  Butterfield,  J.  B.:  Tail-cuff  blood  pressure  mea¬ 
surement  without  external  preheating  in  awake  rats.  Hyperten¬ 
sion  4:898-903;  1982. 

5.  Chen,  X.;  Herbert,  J.:  Regional  changes  in  c -fos  expression  in  the 

basal  forebrain  and  brainstem  during  adaptation  to  repeated 
stress:  Correlations  with  cardiovascular,  hypothermic  and  endo¬ 
crine  responses.  Neuroscience  64:675-685;  1995. 


6.  Chiueh,  C.  C.;  Kopin,  I.  J.:  Hyperresponsivity  of  spontaneously 
hypertensive  rat  to  indirect  measurement  of  blood  pressure.  Am. 
J.  Physiol.  H690-H695;  1978. 

7.  Chou,  C.  K.;  Guy,  A.  W.;  Galambos,  R.:  Auditory  perception  of 
radio-frequency  electromagnetic  fields.  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  71:1321- 
1334;  1982. 

8.  Chou,  C.-K.;  Guy,  A.  W.;  Kunz,  L.  L.;  Johnson,  R.  B.;  Crowley, 
J.  J.;  Krupp,  J.  H.:  Long-term,  low-level  microwave  irradiation  of 
rats.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:469-496;  1992. 

9.  Chou,  C.-K.,  Yee,  K.-C.;  Guy,  A.  W.:  Auditory  response  in  rats 
exposed  to  2,450  MHz  electromagnetic  fields.  Bioelectromagnet¬ 
ics  6:323-326;  1985. 

10.  D’Andrea,  J.  A.;  Gandhi,  O.  P.;  Lords,  J.  L.;  Dumey,  C.  H.; 
Astle,  L.;  Stensaas,  L.  J.;  Schoenberg,  A.  A.:  Physiological  and 
behavioral  effects  of  prolonged  exposure  to  915-MHz  micro- 
waves.  J.  Microwave  Power  15:123-135;  1980. 

11.  Durney,  C.  H.;  Massoudi,  H.;  Iskander,  M.  F.:  Radiofrequency 
radiation  dosimetry  handbook,  4th  ed.  Brooks  AFB:  USAF 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


761 


School  of  Aerospace  Medicine  Aerospace  Medical  Division 
(USAFSAM-TR-85-73)  1985:617. 

12.  Ferrari,  A.  U.;  Dafffonchio,  A.;  Albergati,  F.;  Mancia,  G.:  Inverse 
relationship  between  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  variabilities 
in  rats.  Hypertension  10:533-537;  1987. 

13.  Foreman,  S.;  Holmes,  C.;  McManamon,  V.;  Wedding,  W.:  Psy¬ 
chological  symptoms  and  intermittent  hypertension  following 
acute  microwave  exposure.  J.  Occupat.  Med.  24:932-934;  1982. 

14.  Foster,  P.  R.:  Antennas  and  UWB  signals.  In:  Taylor,  J.  D.,  ed. 
Introduction  to  ultra-wideband  radar  systems.  Boca  Raton,  FL: 
CRC  Press;  1995:237-248. 

15.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Thermoregulatory  response  of  rats 
exposed  to  9.3-GHz  microwave:  A  comparison  of  E  and  H  orien¬ 
tation.  Physiol  Chem.  Phys.  Med.  NMR  24:1-10;  1992. 

16.  Frei,  M.;  Jauchem,  J.;  Heinmets,  F.:  Physiological  effects  of  2.8 
GHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  A  comparison  of  pulsed  and  con¬ 
tinuous-wave  radiation.  J.  Microwave  Power  23:85-93;  1988. 

17.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Price,  D.  R.;  Padilla,  J.  M.:  Field  ori¬ 
entation  effects  during  5.6-GHz  radiofrequency  irradiation  of 
rats.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  61:1125-1129;  1990. 

18.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Ryan,  K.  L.;  Berger,  R.  E.;  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Sustained 
35-GHz  radiofrequency  irradiation  induces  circulatory  failume. 
Shock  4:289-293;  1995. 

19.  Guy,  A.  W.;  Chou  C.  K.;  Lin,  J.  C.:  Microwave-induced  acoustic 
effects  in  mammalian  auditory  systems  and  physical  materials. 
Ann.  NY  Acad.  Sci.  247:194-218;  1975. 

20.  Houdi,  A.  A.;  Dowell,  R.  T.;  Diana,  J.  N.:  Cardiovascular 
responses  to  cigarette  smoke  exposure  in  restrained  conscious 
rats.  J.  Pharmacol.  Exp.  Ther.  275:646-653;  1995. 

21.  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers:  IEEE  C95.1 
Standard  for  safety  levels  with  respect  to  human  exposure  to 
radio  frequency  electromagnetic  fields,  3  kHz  to  300  GHz.  New 
York:  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers;  1992. 

22.  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources:  Committee  on  care  and  use  of 
spontaneously  hypertensive  (SHR)  rats.  Spontaneously  hyper¬ 
tensive  (SHR)  rats:  Guidelines  for  breeding  care  and  use,  vol  19. 
Washington,  DC:  ILAR  News;  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.-Natl.  Res.  Coun¬ 
cil,  1976:G1-G20. 

23.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Chang,  K.  S.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  Tolazoline  decreases 
survival  time  during  microwave-induced  lethal  heat  stress  in 
anesthetized  rats.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  211:236-243;  1996. 

24.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  Cardiovascular  changes  in  unanesthe¬ 
tized  and  ketamine-anesthetized  Sprague-Dawley  rats  exposed 
to  2.8-GHz  radiofrequency  radiation.  Lab.  Anim.  Sci.  41:70-75; 
1991. 

25.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frie,  M.  R.:  Cardiorespiratory  changes  during 
microwave-induced  lethal  heat  stress  and  0-adrenergic  blockage. 
J.  Appl.  Physiol.  77:434-440;  1994. 

26.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  High-peak  power  microwave  pulses: 
Effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  unanesthetized  rats. 
Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:992-997;  1995. 

27.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Chang,  K.  H.;  Berger,  R.  E.:  Micro¬ 
wave-induced  lethal  heat  stress:  Effect  of  phentolamine,  prazosin 
and  metoprodol.  Methods  Find.  Exp.  Clin.  Pharmacol.  17:241- 
248;  1995. 

28.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Heinmets,  F.:  Thermal  bradycardia 
during  radiofrequency  irradiation.  Physiol.  Chem.  Phys.  Med. 
NMR  15:429-434;  1983. 

29.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Heinmets,  F.:  Heart  rate  changes  due 
to  5.6  GHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  Relation  to  average  power 
density.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  177:383-387;  1984. 

30.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Padilla,  J.  M.:  Thermal  and  physio¬ 
logic  responses  in  1200-MHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  Differ¬ 
ence  between  exposure  in  E  and  H  orientation.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp. 
Biol.  Med.  194:358-363;  1990. 

31.  Kirchheim,  A.  R.:  Systemic  arterial  baroreceptor  reflexes.  Phys¬ 
iol.  Rev.  56:100-176;  1976. 

32.  Lawer,  J.  E.;  Barker,  G.  F.;  Hubbard,  J.  W.;  Schaub,  R.  G.:  Effect 
of  stress  on  blood  pressure  and  cardiac  pathology  in  rats  with  bor¬ 
derline  hypertension.  Hypertension  3:496-505;  1981. 


33.  Lee,  J.;  Bao,  J.-Z.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Seaman,  R.  L.:  An  ultra-wide-band 
exposure  system  for  studying  biological  effects.  In:  Abstract  book 
of  the  seventeenth  annual  meeting  of  the  bioelectromagnetics 
society.  Fredrick:  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  Fredrick;  1995:160. 

34.  Lin,  J.  C.:  Microwave  auditory  effects  and  applications.  Spring- 
field,  IL:  Charles  C.  Thomas;  1978. 

35.  Ludin,  S.;  Ricksten,  S.-E.;  Thoren,  P.:  Interaction  between  “men¬ 
tal  stress”  and  baroreceptor  reflexes  concerning  effects  on  heart 
rate,  mean  arterial  pressure  and  renal  sympathetic  activity  in  con¬ 
scious  spontaneously  hypertensive  rats.  Acta.  Physiol.  Scand. 
120:273-281;  1984. 

36.  Mauck,  G.  W.;  Smith,  C.  R.;  Geddes,  L.  A.;  Bourland,  J.  D.:  The 
meaning  of  the  point  of  maximum  oscillations  in  cuff  pressure  in 
the  indirect  measurement  of  blood  pressure— Part  II.  J.  Biomech. 
Eng.  102:28-33;  1980. 

37.  Michaelson,  S.  M.;  Lin,  J.  C.:  Cardiovascular  effects.  In:  Michael- 
son,  S.  M.;  Lin,  J.  C.,  eds.  Biological  effects  and  health  implica¬ 
tions  of  radiofrequency  radiation.  New  York:  Plenum  Press;  1987: 
451-488. 

38.  Nagasaka,  T.;  Hirata,  K.;  Shibata,  H.;  Sugano,  Y.:  Metabolic  and 
cardiovascular  changes  during  physical  restraint  in  rats.  Jpn.  J. 
Physiol.  30:799-803;  1980. 

39.  NCRP  Report  86:  Perception  of  RFEM  fields.  In:  Biological 
effects  and  exposure  criteria  for  radiofrequency  fields.  Bethesda, 
MD:  National  Research  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and 
Measurements;  1986:175-180. 

40.  Sakaguchi,  A.;  LeDoux,  J.  E.;  Reis,  D.  J.:  Sympathetic  nerves  and 
adrenal  medulla:  Contributions  to  cardiovascular-conditioned 
emotional  responses  in  spontaneous  hypertensive  rats.  Hyperten¬ 
sion  5:728-738;  1983. 

41.  Sherry,  C.  J.;  Blick,  D.  W.;  Walters,  T.  W.;  Brown,  G.  C.;  Murph, 
M.  R.:  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after 
exposure  to  ultrawideband  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the 
microwave  frequency  range.  Radiat.  Res.  143:93-97;  1995. 

42.  Sodeman,  W.  A.,  Jr.;  Sodeman,  W.  A.:  Systemic  arterial  pressure. 
In:  Pathological  physiology.  Philadelphia,  PA:  W.  B.  Saunders 
Co.;  1974:177-205. 

43.  Sparrow,  M.  G.;  Roggendorf,  H.;  Vogel,  W.  H.:  Effect  of  ethanol 
on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  nonstressed  and  stressed  rats. 
Life  Sci.  40:2551-2559;  1987. 

44.  Sudakov,  K.  V.:  Organization  of  cardiovascular  functions  under 
experimental  emotional  stress.  J.  Autonom.  Nerv.  Syst.  4:165- 
180;  1981. 

45.  Taylor,  J.  D.:  Ultra-wideband  radar  overview.  In:  Taylor,  J.  D., 
ed.  Introduction  to  ultra-wideband  radar  systems.  Boca  Raton, 
FL:  CRC  Press;  1995:1-10. 

46.  Toler,  J.;  Popovic,  V.;  Bonasera,  S.;  Popovic,  P.;  Honeycutt,  C.; 
Sgoutas,  D.:  Long-term  study  of  435  MHz  radio-frequency  radia¬ 
tion  on  blood-borne  end  points  in  cannulated  rats,  Part  II:  Meth¬ 
ods,  results  and  summary.  J.  Microwave  Power  23:105-136;  1988. 

47.  Van  Den  Berg,  D.  T.  W.  M.;  De  Jong,  W.;  De  Kloet,  E.  R :  Min- 
eralocorticoid  antagonist  inhibits  stress-induced  blood  pressure 
response  after  repeated  daily  warming.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  267:E921- 
E9926;  1994. 

48.  Walters,  T.  J.;  Mason,  P.  A.;  Sherry,  C.  J.;  Steffen,  C.;  Merritt, 
J.  H.:  No  detectable  bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high 
peak  power  ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats. 
Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:562-567;  1995. 

49.  Williams,  R.;  Webb,  T.:  Exposure  to  radiofrequency  radiation 
from  an  aircraft  radar  unit.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  51:1243- 
1244;  1980. 

50.  Yamakoshi,  K.-I.;  Kamiya,  A.:  Noninvasive  measurement  of  arte¬ 
rial  blood  pressure  and  elastic  properties  using  photoelectric 
plethysmography  technique.  Med.  Prog.  Technol.  12:123-143; 
1987. 

51.  Yen,  T.  T.;  Powell,  C.  E.;  Pearson,  D.  V.:  An  indirect  method  of 
measuring  the  blood  pressure  of  rats  without  heating.  In:  Sponta¬ 
neous  hypertension:  Its  pathogenesis  and  complications.  Bethesda, 
MD:  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  (DHEW  Publication  No.  77-1179); 
1977:486490. 


ELSEVIER 


ERRATUM 

Ultrawide-Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  Induced 

Hypotension  in  Rats 

SHIN-TSU  LU,  SATNAM  P.  MATHUR,  YAHYA  AKYEL  AND  JONATHAN  C.  LEE 


Published  in  Physiology  &  Behavior  65  (1999)  pages  753-761 

The  Publisher  regrets  that  the  publication  of  the  above  paper  was  printed  without  author's  corrections.  The  article  as  it  should 
have  been  published  is  shown  on  the  following  pages. 


Physiology  &  Behavior,  Volume  67,  Issue  No.  3,  September,  1999 


463 


Physiology  &  Behavior,  Vol.  65,  Nos.  4/5,  pp.  753-761, 1999 
©  1999  Elsevier  Science  Inc. 
Printed  in  the  USA.  AH  rights  reserved 
0031-9384/99  $-see  front  matter 

PII  S0031-9384(98)00214-5 


Ultrawide-Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  Induced 

Hypotension  in  Rats 


SHIN-TSU  LU,1  SATNAM  P.  MATHUR,  YAHYA  AKYEL  AND  JONATHAN  C  LEE 

McKesson  BioServices ,  US.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch, 
8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX  78235 


ELSEVIER 


Received  17  December  1997;  Accepted  17  July  1998 


LU,  S.-T..  S.  P.  MATHUR,  Y.  AKYEL  AND  J.  C.  LEE.  Ultrawide-band  electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension 
in  rats.  PHYSIOL  BEHAV  65(4/5)  753-761. 1999.— The  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  electromagnetic  pulses  are  used  as  a  new 
modality  in  radar  technology.  Biological  effects  of  extremely  high  peak  E-field,  fast  rise  time,  ultrashort  pulse  width,  and  ul¬ 
trawide  band  have  not  been  investigated  heretofore  due  to  the  lack  of  animal  exposure  facilities.  A  new  biological  effects  data¬ 
base  is  needed  to  establish  personnel  protection  guidelines  for  these  new  type  of  radiofrequency  radiation.  Functional  indices 
of  the  cardiovascular  system  (heart  rate,  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures)  were  selected  to  represent  biological  end 
points  that  may  be  susceptible  to  the  UWB  radiation.  A  noninvasive  tail-cuff  photoelectric  sensor  sphygmomanometer  was 
used.  Male  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  were  subjected  to  sham  exposure.  0.5-kHz  (93  kV/m,  180  ps  rise  time.  1.00  ns  pulse  width, 
whole-body  averaged  specific  absorption  rate,  SAR  =  70  mW/kg)  or  a  1-kHz  (85  kV/m,  200  ps  rise  lime,  1.03  ns  pulse  width. 
SAR  =  121  mW/kg)  UWB  fields  in  a  tapered  parallel  plate  GTEM  cell  for  6  min.  Cardiovascular  functions  were  evaluated 
from  45  min  to  4  weeks  after  exposures.  Significant  decrease  in  arterial  blood  pressures  (hypotension)  was  found.  In  contrast, 
heart  rate  was  not  altered  by  these  exposures.  The  UWB  radiation-induced  hypotension  was  a  robust,  consistent,  and  persis¬ 
tent  effect.  ©  1999  Elsevier  Science  Inc. 

Arterial  pressure  Heart  rate  Pulsed  radiofrequencv  radiation  Ultrawide-band  radiation  Delayed  effects 


THE  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation 
is  a  new  modality  in  radar  technology.  The  potential  usages  of 
UWB  radar  are  not  limited  to  military  application  only.  At 
much  lower  power,  an  example  of  civilian  UWB  radar  appli¬ 
cation  is  in  automobile  safety.  Devices  designed  as  warning 
systems  for  backing  up  and  parking  are  planned,  and  expected 
to  be  available  in  the  next  few  years.  A  commonly  used  defini¬ 
tion  accepted  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Project 
Agency  is  "Ultrawide  band  radar  is  any  radar  whose  frac¬ 
tional  bandwidth  is  greater  than  0.25,  regardless  of  the  center 
frequency  or  the  signal  time-bandwidth  product”  (45).  The 
UWB  is  a  radiofrequency  signal  with  an  ultrashort  pulse 
width  (a  few  ns)  and  a  very  fast  rise  time  (<200  ps).  Because 
of  the  ultrashort  pulse  width,  the  peak  electric  field  of  a  UWB 
pulse  can  be  operated  in  excess  of  the  breakdown  voltage 
without  arcing.  In  fact,  systems  with  peak  electric  field  in  ex¬ 
cess  of  hundreds  of  kV/m  are  known  to  exist.  Another  charac¬ 
teristic  is  a  very  low  duty  cycle  of  these  UWB  devices  result¬ 
ing  from  an  ultrashort  pulse  width. 

Radiofrequencv  personnel  protection  guidelines  usually 
are  promulgated  on  a  time-averaged  specific  absorption  rate 


or  power  density.  From  operational  characteristics  of  the 
UWB  devices  with  an  extremely  high  peak  electric  field  and 
very  low  duty  cycle,  the  energy  absorption  rate  per  pulse  in 
humans  can  be  extremely  high  (temporal  peak  SAR),  but  the 
average  specific  absorption  rate  (average  SAR)  can  be  very 
low  if  a  time-average  procedure  is  applied.  The  ratio  of  peak 
to  average  SARs  will  be  much  greater  than  those  of  narrow- 
band  RF  radiation  used  in  the  past  for  evaluation  of  the  bio¬ 
logical  effects  of  pulsed  RF  radiation.  Concerns  on  UWB  ra¬ 
diation  safety  issues  have  been  voiced  (l).  However,  the 
experimental  database  on  UWB  safety  issues  is  very  limited 
(41,48).  Therefore,  there  is  a  need  for  additional  toxicologi¬ 
cal  testing  to  address  the  safety  of  UWB  radiation. 

Interests  in  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  RF  radiation  can 
be  traced  back  to  as  early  as  the  1940s  (37),  and  it  has  contin¬ 
ued  until  today.  Specifically,  cardiovascular  effects  of  RF  ra¬ 
diation  include  human  studies  with  emphasis  on  changes  in 
regional  blood  flow  for  diathermy,  epidemiology,  and  case 
report,  studies  in  experimental  animals  such  as  cardiac  inju¬ 
ries  caused  by  intense  RF  exposure,  cardiovascular  adjust¬ 
ments  to  localized  "low-lever'  RF  exposure,  changes  in  arte- 


‘To  whom  requests  for  reprints  should  be  addressed.  E-mail:  shin-tsu.lu@aloer.brooks.af.mil 


753 


754 


LIJ  ET  AL. 


rial  pressure,  and  heart  rate  by  moderate  RF  exposure.  The 
effect  of  RF  radiation  on  heart  rate  can  be  further  divided 
into  tachycardia,  bradycardia*  cardiac  pacing,  effects  on  iso¬ 
lated  cardiac  tissue  in  vitro  and  the  RF  interference  of  the  im¬ 
planted  cardiac  pacemaker.  This  database  forms  a  foundation 
for  a  comparative  analysis  between  narrow-band  RF  and 
UWB  radiations.  However,  the  majority  of  these  studies  are 
acute  experiments  employing  a  short-term  (acute)  exposure 
and  studying  cardiovascular  end  points  in  a  short  period  of 
time,  for  example,  during  or  immediately  after  RF  exposure, 
and  usually  under  anesthesia.  Three  studies  used  a  long-term 
(chronic)  RF  exposure,  but  cardiovascular  functions  were  not 
their  main  emphasis:  instead,  they  were  embedded  in  a  bat¬ 
tery  of  end  points  (8.10,46). 

Two  types  of  chronic  cardiovascular  effects  have  been  ob¬ 
served.  They  are  the  cardiovascular  effect  of  a  chronic  expo¬ 
sure  and  the  delayed  effect  of  an  acute  exposure.  The  chronic 
effect  is  represented  by  a  biphasic  (hypertension->normoten- 
sion-»hypotension)  or  a  monophasic  (hypotension)  arterial 
response  in  rats  chronically  exposed  to  RF  radiation  (37).  The 
delayed  effects  are  from  case  reports  (13,49)  indicating  the 
presence  of  delayed  hypertension  in  conjunction  with  anxiety 
attacks,  which  was  termed  “atypical  post-traumatic  syndrome,” 
months  after  an  accidental  exposure  to  RF  fields.  This  de¬ 
layed  vascular  response  has  never  been  confirmed  experimen¬ 
tally.  In  the  present  experiment,  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure 
in  awake  rats  were  evaluated  periodically  with  a  tail-cuff  pho¬ 
toelectric  sphygmomanometer  from  45  min  to  4  weeks  after 
acute  UWB  exposures. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 
General  Description  of  the  Experimental  Procedure 

Fifteen  male  Wistar-Kyoto  (WKY)  rats  aged  between  71 
and  89  days  were  used  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment. 
They  were  obtained  at  56  days  of  age  from  a  commercial 
source  (Charles  River,  Portage,  MI).  They  were  maintained  in 
the  vivarium  at  21-23°C  ambient  temperature,  100%  condi¬ 
tioned  fresh  air  for  more  than  10  exchanges  per  hour,  and  a  12 
L-12  D  (lights  on  0600-1800  h)  light  cycle.  Tap  water  and 
feed  (Purina  Rodent  Diet  5008,  Ralston  Purina  Co.,  St.  Louis, 
MO)  were  available  ad  lib.  After  a  10-day  quarantine  period, 
they  were  acclimated  to  a  test  holder  (IITC  Life  Science, 
Woodland  Hills.  CA.  model  81)  1  h  daily  for  3  days.  Preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline  of  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressures  (systolic, 
mean,  and  diastolic)  were  determined  1-2  days  after  the 
holder  acclimation.  Three  to  4  days  later,  they  were  individu¬ 
ally  subjected  to  sham  exposure,  low  UWB,  or  high  UWB  ex¬ 
posure  for  6  min  between  0900  and  1000  h  in  an  exposure 
holder  maintained  at  23-25°C.  On  the  exposure  day,  average 
body  weight  was  250  ±  4  g  (n  =  15,  SE).  Immediately  after  ex¬ 
posure,  the  rat  was  transferred  to  the  test  holder  for  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressure  measurements.  Postexposure  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressures  were  determined  at  45  min,  24  h,  72  h,  1, 
2,  3,  and  4  weeks  after  exposure.  Four  to  six  determinations 
were  obtained  at  each  time  point,  and  the  average  value  was 
used  to  represent  the  cardiovascular  endpoints  at  that  time 
point  Fifteen  animals  were  divided  randomly  into  three 
groups  of  five  rats  each  for  sham  exposure,  “low”  UWB  and 
“high”  UWB  exposures.  Each  rat  was  assigned  randomly  to 
receive  one  of  the  three  treatments  in  five  experimental  cy¬ 
cles.  The  UWB-exposed  rats  were  always  accompanied  by  at 
least  one  sham-exposed  animal  such  that  the  time-related  ex¬ 
perimental  error  caused  by  different  experimental  cycles  or 
animal  shipments  could  be  minimized. 


Ph otoelectric  Sphygnwn tonometer 

An  indirect  tail-cuff  arterial  pressure  measurement  system 
without  external  preheating  in  awake  rats  was  first  introduced 
by  Yen  et  al.  (51).  Validation  of  pressure  markers  (systolic 
and  mean  arterial  pressures),  and  theoretical  analysis  of  this 
indirect  method  based  on  a  photoelectric  sensor  have  been 
performed  by  various  investigators  (4.36.50).  For  the  present 
experiment,  a  commercial  system  (IITC  Life  Sci.,  Woodland 
Hills,  CA)  was  used.  The  system  was  composed  of  a  pulse  am¬ 
plifier  (IITC  model  29),  tail-cuff  photoelectric  sensor  assem¬ 
bly  (IITC  model  B-60, 5/8"  cuff),  smaller  bore  tubing  (Tygon, 
1.6  mm  i.d.,  0.8-mm  wall  thickness  for  connecting  tail-cuff, 
pressure  amplifier,  pressurizing  bulb,  and  pressure  gauge)  and 
animal  holder  (IITC  model  81 ).  Outputs  of  the  pressure  trans¬ 
ducer  and  pulse  sensor  from  the  pulse  amplifier  were  split 
evenly.  One  set  of  outputs  was  monitored  continuously  with  a 
digital  oscilloscope  (Tektronix  2430  A,  Tektronix,  Inc.,  Wilson- 
ville.  OR).  The  other  set  of  outputs  was  converted  to  a  digital 
signal  and  recorded  using  a  strip  chart  program  (AYSTANT+, 
Asyst  Software  Technology,  Rochester,  NY)  by  a  computer 
(Hewlett-Packard  Vectra,  Hewlett  Packard,  Greenley,  CO) 
at  50  Hz  data  acquisition  rate.  The  recorded  data  was  im¬ 
ported  into  a  graphics  program  (SigmaPlot  4.1.  Jandel  Scien¬ 
tific  Softwares,  San  Rafael,  CA)  and  viewed  graphically  and 
digitally.  A  custom-made  microenvironment  chamber  was  fab¬ 
ricated  from  acrylic  tubes  (28  cm  long,  12  and  14  cm  i.d.,  3.2-mm 
wall  thickness).  Plastic  tubing  (Tygon,  6.4  mm  i.d..  1.6-mm  wall 
thickness,  from  Cole  Palmer,  Vernon  Hills,  IL)  was  wrapped 
around  the  smaller  acrylic  tube  with  tubing  wall  touching  each 
other  to  form  a  coil  18  cm  in  length.  The  larger  acrylic  tube 
was  used  as  an  outer  wall.  Both  ends  of  the  Tygon  tubing  were 
connected  to  the  pump  inlet  and  outlet  port  of  a  precision  cir¬ 
culator  water  bath  (Neslab  RTE-110,  Neslab  Instruments, 
Portsmouth,  NH)  providing  an  microenvironment  within  the 
inner  acrylic  tube  between  26.5  and  27.5 °C  to  prevent  sudden 
temperature  surges.  The  microenvironment  chamber  was  mon¬ 
itored  continuously  with  a  thermistor  temperature  probe  (Yel¬ 
low  Springs  405  air  temperature  probe,  Y ellow  Springs  Instru¬ 
ment,  Yellow  Springs,  OH)  and  a  digital  thermistor  bridge 
(Cole  Palmer  08502-12,  Cole  Palmer,  Vernon  Hills.  IL).  The 
pressure  amplifier  output  was  set  at  1.00  volt  per  Torr  (mmHg). 
Light  intensity  and  photosensor  output  amplifier  were  ad¬ 
justed  to  provide  a  tail-pulse  signal  at  no  more  than  5  volts  at 
the  maximum  oscillation.  Pressure  amplifier  output  was  cali¬ 
brated  daily  against  a  certified  sphygomomanometer  before 
use.  The  same  tail-cuff-photoelectric  sensor  assembly  was  used 
throughout  the  entire  experiment. 

Cardiovascular  Parameter  Measurement 

Rats  were  transported  from  the  vivarium  to  the  laboratory 
in  the  morning.  They  were  allowed  to  sit  quietly  in  their  own 
cage  for  at  least  30  min  before  being  transferred  to  the  test 
holder.  The  rat  and  test  holder  were  then  inserted  into  the  mi¬ 
croenvironment  chamber.  Heating  in  the  microenvironment 
chamber  caused  by  animal  body  heat  was  offset  by  adjusting 
the  waterbath  temperature.  After  20  min  in  the  microenviron¬ 
ment  chamber,  the  rat  tail  was  passed  through  the  tail  cuff. 
The  tail-cuff/photoelectric  sensor  was  then  attached  to  the 
test  holder,  by  this  time,  characteristic  tail  pulses  could  be  de¬ 
tected  if  the  tail  cuff  was  inflated  to  40-60  Torr  (mmHg). 
When  the  presence  of  tail  pulses  was  ascertained,  tail  cuff  was 
quickly  inflated  to  200-220  Torr  until  tail  pulses  disappeared. 
The  cuff  was  then  deflated  immediately  afterwards  at  approx¬ 
imately  2  Torr  per  heart  beat  for  25.6  s.  Systolic  pressure  ( P ,) 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


755 


-T| — — ■ - - - - - - - r 


TIME  (SECONDS) 


FIG.  I.  An  example  of  the  indirect  arterial  pressure  measurement  in 
the  rat. 

was  determined  during  the  deflation  cycle  as  the  corresponding 
cuff  pressure  at  the  reappearance  of  the  tail  pulse  while  mean 
pressure  ( Pm )  was  the  cuff  pressure  when  amplitude  of  the  tail 
pulse  reached  a  maximum.  Diastolic  pressure  (P,,)  was  calculated 
by  Pd  =  (P,„  X  3  -  PS)I2  (42).  Heart  rate  was  determined  from 
the  average  of  pulse-to-pulse  intervals  for  at  least  60  beats. 
An  example  of  this  deflation  cycle  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  arte¬ 
rial  pressure/heart  rate  measurement  was  repeated  for  four  to 
six  times  separated  by  a  5-min  interval  between  determinations 
to  avoid  the  collapse  of  the  tail  artery  during  measurement. 

UWB  Exposure 

The  UWB  exposure  system  was  originally  designed  and 
built  at  the  Sandia  National  Laboratories  (Albuquerque,  NM). 


The  UWB  pulses  were  generated  by  a  spark  gap  pulse  genera¬ 
tor  and  transmitted  into  a  GTEM  cell  (Gigahertz  Transverse 
Electromagnetic  cell,  a  flared  rectangular  coaxial  transmission 
line)  (Fig.  2).  The  rise  time  and  pulse  width  were  180  ps  and 
1.00  ns.  respectively,  when  the  system  was  operated  at  500  Hz, 
and  they  were  200  ps  and  1.03  ns  when  operated  at  1,000  Hz. 
The  pulsed  electric  field  was  measured  with  a  EG&G  (Welles¬ 
ley.  MA)  D-dot  sensor  (model  ACD-1R)  (33).  Outputs  of 
the  D-dot  sensors  were  measured  with  a  4.5-GHz  bandwidth 
Tektronix  SCD5000  transient  sampling  scope.  A  transfer 
function  was  used  for  data  compensation  of  the  pulsed  electric 
field.  The  transfer  function  was  based  on  deconvolution  tech¬ 
nique  of  a  standard  pulse  generated  by  a  Picosecond  Pulse 
Laboratories  4050  B  picosecond  step  generator  with  5100 
pulse  forming  network.  The  corrected  D-dot  values  were  con¬ 
verted  into  E  field  intensity  (2).  For  UWB  exposures,  the  rat 
was  placed  in  an  exposure  holder  fabricated  from  an  acrylic 
tube  (6.5-cm  i.d.,  32-mm  wall  thickness,  28  cm  long,  6.4  X  50-mm 
slots  separated  by  19  mm  for  ventilation)  and  polyethylene 
endcaps.  No  metallic  parts  was  used,  and  this  holder  was  used 
to  align  the  animal  position  to  UWB  fields.  The  long  axis  of 
the  tube.  i.e.,  the  major  axis  of  the  animal  was  placed  in  paral¬ 
lel  with  magnetic  vector  on  the  ground  plane  at  72.7  cm  from 
the  source  end  of  GTEM  cell.  The  animal  was  isolated  from 
the  ground  plane  by  placing  the  exposure  holder  4.2  cm  from  the 
ground  plane  on  an  acrylic  stand.  After  transferring  the  ani¬ 
mal  into  the  GTEM  cell,  a  5-min  equilibration  period  was 
given  before  exposure.  Three  exposure  protocols  were  used: 
sham  exposure,  low-UWB  and  high-UWB  exposures  for  6 
min.  During  the  sham  exposure,  all  UWB  exposure  conditions 
were  maintained  except  trigger  pulses  were  never  generated 
to  cause  discharge  across  the  spark  gap.  Table  1  lists  pertinent 
pulse  parameters  used.  Figure  3  shows  the  pulse  characteris¬ 
tics  operated  at  500  Hz  (low-UWB)  and  1,000  Hz  (high- 
UWB)  repetition  rate. 


FIG.  2.  The  UWB  exosure  system  for  rats. 


756 


TABLE  1 

CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  UWB  PULSES 


LU  ET  AL. 


Pulse  Parameters 

Sham 

Low  UWB* 

High  UWB* 

Riselime 

_ 

& 

r*» 

+  1 

§ 

2(H)  ±  5  ps 

Pulse  width 

— 

1.00  ±  0.004  ns 

1.03  ±  0.02  ns 

Peak  E  field  intensity 

OkV/m 

93.0  i  5.0  kV/m 

84.6  ±  4.0  kV/m 

Pulse  repetition  rate 

0  Hz 

5(H)  Hz 

1,000  Hz 

Average  power  density 

0  mW/cm2 

1.15  mW/cm- 

1.96  mW/cm2 

Total  radiant  exposure 

0  J/cm2 

0.41  J/cm2 

0.70  J/cm2 

Highest  frequency t 

— 

2.78  GHz 

2.50  GHz 

Medium  frequency! 

— 

0.50  GHz 

0.49  GHz 

Lowest  frequency! 

— 

0.09  GHz 

0.10  GHz 

Fractional  bandwidth! 

— 

187% 

185% 

*Mean  ±  SD,  obtained  in  five  exposures. 

f  Estimated  according  to  Foster  (14),  Ultrawide  band  radar  is  a  radar  whose 
fractional  bandwidth  is  greater  than  25%,  regardless  of  the  center  frequency  or 
the  signal  time-bandwidth  product  (45).  The  fractional  bandwidth  of  these 
pulses  was  wider  than  the  minimum  required  to  qualify  as  UWB  radar. 


Data  Analysis 

The  present  experiment  utilized  a  factorial  design  with  re¬ 
peated  observations.  The  time  after  exposure  was  designated 
as  “blocks"  (r  =  7),  UWB  treatments  ( t  =  3)  as  treatments 
and  five  observations  (s  =  5)  were  included.  Therefore,  the 
present  experiment  was  a  7  X  3  X  5  experiment  which  con¬ 
tained  105  experimental  units.  For  each  experimental  unit,  the 
average  of  four  to  six  measurements  was  used.  To  limit  the  in¬ 
dividual  variation,  the  use  of  individual  control  was  incorpo¬ 
rated  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  experiment.  There¬ 
fore,  the  end  points  were  changes  from  the  preexposure 
baseline  in  each  individual  rat.  Postexposure  heart  rate  and 
blood  pressure  data  were  the  magnitude  of  change  from  the 
preexposure  baseline  of  the  same  rat  under  study.  An  analytic 
method  based  on  an  analysis  of  variance  with  multiway  classi¬ 
fication  and  multiple  observations  was  used.  The  sources  of 
variation  were  identified,  and  the  variance  and  degree  of  free¬ 
dom  (df)  were  computed.  These  various  variances  associated 
with  the  present  experiment  were  total  (experimental  units, 
df  =  rst  -  1  =  104),  time  after  exposure  (df  =  r  -  1  =  6), 
UWB  treatments  (df  =  t  -  1  =  2),  interaction  [df  ==  (r  —  1) 
(/-!)=  12]  and  error  [df  «  rt  (s  -  1)  =  84].  Dunnett’s  test 


FIG.  3.  The  UWB  pules  operated  at  500  and  1,000  Hz  repetition  rate. 


was  used  for  post  hoc  analysis  when  a  significant  UWB  treat- 
ment  effect  was  found.  Null  hypothesis  was  rejected  at  the 
0.05  level. 

RESULTS 

Body  Weight 

Body  weight  of  animals  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Data  are  body 
weight  before  exposure,  24  h,  72  h,  1  week,  2. 3.  and  4  weeks 
after  exposure.  Other  than  an  initial  insignificant  weight  loss 
in  sham  and  500  Hz  exposed  rats,  weight  gains  were  similar 
among  these  three  groups  of  animals. 

Preexposure  Baseline 

Figure  5  shows  the  preexposure  baseline.  Average  heart 
rate  ranged  between  332  and  351  beats  per  minutes  (bpm). 
The  ranges  in  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures  were 
146.1  to  147.7, 120.1  to  123.6,  and  107.2  to  112.1  Torr.  respec¬ 
tively.  Significant  difference  among  groups  in  any  of  the  pre¬ 
exposure  baseline  was  not  found. 

Heart  Rate 

Figure  6  shows  the  changes  in  heart  rate  from  the  preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline.  Heart  rate  usually  decreased  from  the  preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline  irrespective  of  UWB  treatments.  The  UWB 
treatments,  time  after  exposure  and  interaction  between 
UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure  were  not  signifi¬ 
cantly  different  in  this  study. 

Systolic  Pressure 

Systolic  pressure  of  the  sham-exposed  rats  had  a  tendency 
to  increase  (Fig.  7).  In  contrast,  the  systolic  pressure  was  con¬ 
sistently  lower  than  the  preexposure  baseline  in  rats  exposed 
to  500  or  1,000  Hz  UWB  fields.  UWB  treatments  were  the 
only  significant  factor  noted,  F(2,84)  =  16.62, p  <  0.001.  Time 
after  exposure,  F( 6,  84)  =  1.00,  NS,  and  interaction  between 
UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure,  F(  12.84)  =  0.75, 
NS,  were  not  statistically  significant.  The  largest  changes  from 
the  respective  preexposure  baseline  were  +13.65  Torr  at  4 
weeks  after  sham  exposure,  -23.0  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  expo¬ 
sure  to  500  Hz  and  -22.8  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  exposure  to 
1,000  Hz  UWB.  Post  hoc  analysis  revealed  that  decreased  sys- 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


757 


FIG.  4.  Body  weight  of  WKY  rats  exposed  to  UWB.  Data  shown  are 
preexposure,  24  h,  72  h,  1  week,  2  weeks,  3  weeks,  and  4  weeks  after 
exposure. 

tolic  pressure  occurred  at  45  min,  24  h.  1. 2,  and  4  weeks  after 
exposure  but  not  at  72  h,  and  3  weeks  after  exposure  in  the 
500  Hz  exposed  rats.  In  the  1,000  Hz  exposed  rats,  significant 
decreases  in  systolic  pressure  occurred  at  45  min,  1,  2,  and  4 
weeks  after  exposure  but  not  at  24  h,  72  h.  and  3  weeks  after 
exposure.  In  comparison  to  the  systolic  pressure  in  sham- 
exposed  rats,  the  most  intense  systolic  hypotension  occurred 
at  2  weeks  after  exposure.  The  magnitude  of  systolic  pressure 
decrease  from  the  sham-exposed  group  was  34.9  Torr  in  the 
500  Hz  group,  and  34.7  Torr  in  the  1,000  Hz  group. 

Mean  Arterial  Pressure 

Changes  in  mean  arterial  pressure  were  similar  to  changes 
in  systolic  pressure  (Fig.  8).  Mean  arterial  pressure  had  a  ten¬ 
dency  to  increase  from  the  preexposure  baseline  in  sham- 
exposed  rats  while  decreased  mean  arterial  pressure  was 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  500  and  1,000  Hz  UWB.  Results  of 
the  factorial  analysis  of  variance  revealed  that  UWB  treat¬ 
ments,  F( 2,84)  =  18.55,  p  <  0.001,  was  statistically  significant, 
but  the  times  after  exposure,  F(6,84)  -  0.57,  NS  was  not.  In¬ 
teraction  between  UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure 
was  statistically  insignificant,  F(  12,84)  =  0.37,  NS.  The  largest 


SHAM  0.5  K  1.0  K  SHAM  0.5  K  1.0  K 


FIG.  5.  Preexposure  cardiovascular  baseline. 


UW8  TREATMENT:  F(JJg4)=  1,19;  N.S.  TIME:  F{6JM)=  0.95:  N.S.  INTERACTION:  F(,JJ|4)=1.03;  N.S. 


FIG.  6.  Heart  rates  in  UWB-exposed  rats. 


changes  from  their  respective  baseline  were  +8.5  Torr  at  72  h 
after  sham  exposure,  -15.9  Torr  at  24  h  after  500  Hz,  and 
- 16.9  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  1 ,000  Hz  UWB  exposure.  In  com¬ 
parison  to  sham-exposed  rats,  significant  lower  mean  arterial 
pressure  was  noted  in  500  Hz-exposed  rats  at  all  times  after 
exposure  except  at  3  weeks  after  exposure,  and  in  1,000  Hz- 
exposed  rats  at  all  time  except  at  24  h  and  3  weeks  after  expo¬ 
sure.  The  largest  magnitude  of  hypotension  was  20.6  Torr  in 
500  Hz  and  21.89  Torr  in  1,000  Hz-exposed  groups.  Both  of 
these  occurred  at  2  weeks  after  exposure. 

Diastolic  Pressure 

Although  systolic  and  mean  arterial  pressures  can  be  de¬ 
termined  with  a  photoelectric  sphygmomanometer  in  rats,  the 
diastolic  pressure  can  only  be  estimated  because  a  characteris¬ 
tic  pulse  marker  is  not  available  for  identifying  the  diastolic 
pressure  reliably  during  the  deflection  cycle.  It  is  known  that 
the  mean  arterial  pressure  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  diastolic 
pressure  and  1/3  of  the  pulse  pressure  (difference  between 
systolic  and  diastolic  pressures)  (42).  Therefore,  the  diastolic 
pressure  edn  be  estimated  from  the  systolic  and  mean  arterial 
pressures.  Changes  in  diastolic  pressure  were  similar  to  systolic 
and  mean  arterial  pressure  (Fig.  9).  In  comparison  to  the  pre- 


UW8  TREAT4CNT:  F(M4)-  16.62.  p<  0.01  TIME:  r(|J4)-  1.00:  N.S.  INTERACTION:  F{1,J()-0.7S:  N.S. 


FIG.  7.  UWB-induced  systolic  hypotension  in  WKY  rats. 


758 


LU  ET  AL. 


FIG.  «S.  UWB-induced  decreases  in  mean  arterial  pressure  in  WKY  rats. 


exposure  baseline,  change  in  sham-exposed  rals  was  primar¬ 
ily  an  increase  in  diastolic  pressure,  while  decreases  were 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  5(X)  or  1  ,(XX)  Hz  UWB.  The  largest 
change  from  baseline  was  +9.6  Torr  at  72  h  after  sham  expo¬ 
sure.  -“16.6  Torr  at  45  min  after  exposure  to  500  Hz,  and 
-14.0  Torr  at  3  weeks  after  exposure  to  1,000  Hz  UWB. 
Again,  the  UWB  treatments  were  statistically  significant, 
F(2.84)  =  16.30,  p  <  0.001,  but  the  time  after  exposure, 
F( 6.84)  =  0.46.  NS,  and  the  interaction  between  UWB  treat¬ 
ments  and  time  after  exposure,  F(  12,84)  =  037,  NS  were  not. 
Diastolic  hypotension  was  found  in  four  of  the  six  sampling 
points.  i.e.,  at  45  min,  24  h.  72  h.  1 ,  and  3  weeks  but  not  at  two 
and  four  weeks  after  exposure,  in  rats  exposed  to  500  Hz 
UWB.  Rats  exposed  to  1,000  Hz  UWB  had  a  lower  diastolic 
pressure  than  sham-exposed  rats  in  five  of  the  six  postexpo¬ 
sure  sampling  points.  Diastolic  hypotension  was  not  noted  in 
rats  at  24  h  after  exposure  to  1,000  Hz  UWB.  In  comparison 
to  sham  exposure,  the  largest  magnitude  of  changes  in  dias¬ 
tolic  pressure  was  -22.5  Torr  at  1  week  after  500  Hz  and 
- 16.7  Torr  at  4  weeks  after  1.000  Hz. 

DISCUSSION 

The  observation  of  a  delayed,  robust,  and  persistent  de¬ 
crease  in  arterial  pressures  (delayed  hypotension)  without 


FIG.  9.  UWB-induced  diastolic  hypotension  in  WKY  rats. 


changes  in  the  heart  rate  in  rats  subjected  to  an  acute  UWB 
exposure  is  uncommon,  no  matter  what  the  cause  is.  The 
heart  rate  is  known  to  covary  with  blood  pressure,  or  to  be 
more  susceptible  than  the  blood  pressure  to  RF  perturbation 
(37).  As  indicated  in  the  introduction,  the  anticipated  UWB- 
induced  change  in  the  cardiovascular  function,  if  any,  was  hy¬ 
pothesized  to  be  hypertension  (increased  arterial  pressure)  as 
part  of  “atypical  post-traumatic  syndrome,"  which  included 
emotional  lability,  irritability,  headaches,  insomnia,  and  de¬ 
layed  hypertension.  In  addition,  the  cardiovascular  effect  of 
UWB  radiation  appears  to  be  different  from  the  effect  in¬ 
duced  by  conventional  RF  radiation.  Results  of  a  recent  series 
of  experiments  (15-18,23-30)  on  thermogenic  effects  of  RF 
radiation  on  cardiovascular  functions  also  supported  the  con¬ 
cept  that  susceptibilities  of  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressure 
to  thermogenic  RF  radiations  were  different. 

Jauchem  and  Frei  (15-18,23-30)  evaluated  the  cardiovas¬ 
cular  responses  of  rats  exposed  to  discrete  narrow-band  mi¬ 
crowave  radiation  at  1.2  (30).  1.2- 1.8/1 .2- 1.4  (26),  2.45  (17,23, 
27),  2.8  (16,24.28),  5.6  (17,29).  9.3  (15).  and  25  GHz  (18).  Ex¬ 
cept  in  one  experiment  (26).  these  investigators  utilized  ket¬ 
amine-anesthetized  rats  as  the  experimental  model.  Their  ex¬ 
perimental  design  involved  a  comparison  of  cardiovascular 
end  points,  mean  arterial  pressure,  and  heart  rate,  in  micro- 
wave  exposed  rats  when  their  rectal  temperature  reached  38.5 
and  393°C  during  the  course  of  microwave  exposure.  Occa¬ 
sionally,  the  cardiovascular  end  points  were  the  time  sequen¬ 
tial  data  in  a  lethal  exposure.  The  whole-body  average  SAR 
used  in  these  experiments  ranged  between  6  and  16.8  W/kg. 
Because  ketamine-anesthetized  rats  could  not  maintain  a  rec¬ 
tal  temperature  at  38.5  and  39.5°C.  sham-exposure  data  was 
not  presented  in  these  experiments.  Thermal  tachycardia  and 
thermal  hypertension  were  usually  concluded.  In  contrast,  the 
specific  aims  of  the  present  experiment  were  to  study  the  late 
cardiovascular  sequelae  of  UWB  exposure  in  unanesthetized 
rats  without  confounding  factors  such  as  postsurgical  compli¬ 
cations  and  anesthesia.  In  addition,  the  magnitude  of  response 
of  each  individual  rat  was  adjusted  with  its  own  preexposure 
baseline  in  the  present  experiment.  Furthermore,  the  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses  studied  in  the  present  experiment  were 
compared  to  the  end  points  obtained  from  sham-exposed  rats. 
Because  of  these  differences  in  experimental  approaches,  it  is 
difficult  to  compare  the  results  obtained  in  these  two  labora¬ 
tories.  Lacking  a  comparable  experiment  on  RF-induced  de¬ 
layed  cardiovascular  effects,  the  uniqueness  of  the  UWB- 
induced  delayed  hypotension  cannot  be  ascertained  at  the 
present  time. 

Arterial  pressure  is  determined  by  the  cardiac  output  and 
total  peripheral  resistance.  Based  on  hemodynamics  princi¬ 
ples,  the  cause  of  a  decrease  in  arterial  pressure  in  the  absence 
of  heart  rate  alteration  (therefore,  no  change  in  cardiac  out¬ 
put)  is  a  decrease  in  total  peripheral  resistance.  Rats  are  known 
to  possess  a  baroreceptor  reflex  mechanism,  which  serves  to 
maintain  a  constant  arterial  pressure  by  increasing  heart  rate 
(therefore,  cardiac  output)  if  arterial  pressure  decreases  or  by 
decreasing  the  heart  rate  if  arterial  pressure  increases  (31). 
The  absence  of  compensation  by  baroreceptor  reflexes  can  re¬ 
sult  from  baroreceptor  reset,  alterations  in  autonomic  out¬ 
flows  or  alterations  in  adrenergic  receptors.  The  exact  mecha¬ 
nism  of  the  UWB-delayed  hypotension  is  not  known. 

The  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Spontaneous  Hyper¬ 
tensive  Rats  has  recommended  the  use  of  an  indirect  blood 
(arterial)  pressure  measurement  method  for  determining  the 
arterial  pressure  in  rats  (22).  Indirect  arterial  pressure  mea¬ 
surement  requires  restraint.  Restraint  is  a  known  psychogenic/ 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


759 


emotional  stress.  It  is  known  to  cause  tachycardia  and  hyper¬ 
tension  through  sympathetic  arousal  in  animals  (3,5,38,40). 
The  WKY  rats  used  in  the  present  experiment  were  accli¬ 
mated  to  the  holder  to  prevent  novelty  stress.  Successful  accli¬ 
mation  to  novelty  stress  was  indicated  by  the  absence  of  reluc¬ 
tance  to  be  placed  in  holder,  absence  of  defecation  and  urination, 
and  the  reduction  in  number  of  restless  episodes  during  the  1-h 
period  in  the  holder.  A  recent  study  (5)  has  shown  that  the 
peak  tachycardia  response  to  restraint  was  not  affected  after 
10  acclimation  sessions.  Acclimation,  however,  did  accelerate 
the  return  of  the  tachycardia  to  baseline.  Interpretation  of  re¬ 
sults  in  the  present  study  should  include  the  possibility  that 
the  method  of  indirect  blood  pressure  measurement  is  a  “stress 
test”  rather  than  a  test  procedure  for  the  basal/resting  cardio¬ 
vascular  functions.  It  is  possible  that  demonstration  of  the  UWB- 
induced  hypotension  requires  additional  “stimuli”  associated 
with  the  indirect  blood  pressure  measurement  procedure. 

Genetic  predisposition  appears  to  be  an  important  factor 
in  animal's  response  to  stress.  Sudakov  (44)  used  a  30-h  con¬ 
tinuous  restraint  to  differentiate  three  types  of  cardiovascular 
changes  to  restraint:  resistant,  adaptive,  and  sensitive.  More 
than  50%  of  Wistar  rats  that  did  not  exhibit  heart  rate  and  ar¬ 
terial  pressure  responses  to  the  prolonged  restraint  were  clas¬ 
sified  as  resistant.  Forty  to  65%  of  Wistar.  Vegh,  August,  and 
mixed  strains  that  exhibited  initial  hypertension  or  hypoten¬ 
sion  followed  by  a  return  almost  to  the  initial  level  at  the  end 
of  30-h  restraint,  were  classified  as  adaptive.  Approximately 
30%  of  August  and  Vegh  rats  were  classified  as  sensitive;  they 
perished  during  the  30-h  restraint  bearing  ECG  T-wave 
changes  and  myocardial  infarction.  Genetic  predisposition 
was  also  considered  to  be  an  important  factor  in  the  basal/ 
resting  cardiovascular  functions,  and  the  magnitude  of  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses  to  various  emotional  stresses  (3,63235, 
44).  The  WKY  rats  appeared  to  be  adaptive  because  the  car¬ 
diovascular  indices  were  different  from  those  of  Wistar  rats, 
their  parent  strain,  which  is  classified  as  resistant. 

It  has  been  reported  that  responses  of  heart  rate  and  arte¬ 
rial  pressures  reached  a  plateau  and  remained  reasonably 
constant  after  10  min  in  the  restrainer  (3).  In  addition,  studies 
in  several  animal  species  including  rats  demonstrated  that  ar¬ 
terial  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  characterized  by  a  large 
spontaneous  variability  in  an  unanesthetized  state  (12).  To 
limit  the  spontaneous  variation  and  genetic  predisposition,  we 
have  instituted  strenuous  measurement  controls  such  as 
sources  of  animals,  strain  of  rats,  ambient  temperature  (263- 
27.5°C),  time  of  day  (0900-1200  h).  duration  in  the  test  holder 
(between  20  and  60  min),  and  interval  between  testing  (5 
min).  These  controls  were  used  to  maintain  a  consistent  level 
of  stimulus  during  indirect  arterial  pressure  measurement 
procedure.  In  addition,  the  average  value  of  multiple  mea¬ 
surements  was  used  to  represent  the  cardiovascular  functions 
at  each  datum  point  for  each  animal  to  minimize  sampling  errors. 

The  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressure  data  obtained  in  rats 
bearing  chronic  arterial  cannula  (direct  blood  pressure  mea¬ 
surement)  in  their  home  cages  were  accepted  as  stress-free 
measurements.  Representative  data  for  heart  rate  ranged  be¬ 
tween  279  ±  10  (mean  ±  SE,  n  =  5)  and  345  ±  9  (/i  =  6)  bpm 
and  mean  arterial  pressure  between  1 15  ±  3  (n  -  7)  and  122  ± 
4  (n  -  6)  Torr  in  male  adult  cannulated  WKY  rats  by  various 
investigators  (6,35,40).  The  ranges  of  the  preexposure  cardio¬ 
vascular  baseline  of  the  present  experiment  were  332  ±  9  (n  = 
5)  to  351  ±  8  (n  =  5)  bpm  for  heart  rate  and  120  ±  5  (n  =  5) 
to  124  ±  5  (n  =  5)  Torr  for  mean  arterial  pressure.  Therefore, 
these  baseline  values  in  the  present  study  compared  well  to 
other  reported  ranges  in  the  literature. 


A  decrease  in  blood  pressure  may  not  be  a  hypotension 
if  the  blood  pressure  is  within  the  normal  ranges  of  the  species 
under  study.  The  mean  arterial  pressures  of  the  UWB-induced 
hypotension  at  the  lowest  point  were  108  ±  7  (n  -  5, 500  Hz) 
and  107  ±  8  (n  -  5, 1,000  Hz)  which  qualify  these  values  in 
the  range  of  true  hypotension  instead  of  a  decrease  in  arterial 
pressure  in  WKY  rats.  On  the  other  hand,  the  range  of  stress- 
free  mean  arterial  pressure  of  Wistar  rats,  the  parent  strain  of 
WKY  rats,  was  between  97  ±  2  (n  =  6)  and  112  ±  3  (n  =  10) 
Torr  (36,47).  The  stress-free  mean  arterial  pressure  of  the 
Sprague-Dawley  rats  was  also  lower  than  that  of  WKY 
rats.  The  range  reported  were  85  ±  5  (n  =  4)  to  115  ±  3  (n  = 
12)  Torr  (3,12.20,43).  The  UWB-induced  changes  in  arterial 
pressure  in  the  present  experiment  was  a  mild  form  of  hy¬ 
potension  in  the  WKY  rats  and  should  be  asymptomatic  if 
the  mean  arterial  pressures  of  various  strains  of  rats  are  con¬ 
sidered. 

In  comparison  to  studies  using  narrow-band  RF.  the  aver¬ 
aged  exposure  intensity  of  the  present  UWB  exposure  is  rela¬ 
tively  low— 1.15  and  1.96  mW/cm2.  Conventional  dosimetry 
methods,  such  as  thermometry  and  calorimetry,  lack  of  sensi¬ 
tivity  to  determine  the  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  from 
exposure  to  these  low  intensities.  Equipment,  instrumentation 
and  techniques  for  measuring  the  internal  electric  field  are 
not  available.  To  estimate  the  whole-body  average  SAR.  the 
relative  power  spectrum  was  computed  from  the  padded  data 
file,  from  10  ns  to  100  ns  for  a  10  MHz  resolution  of  the  UWB 
pulse  by  Mathcad's  Maximum  Entropy  Method  in  the  Numer¬ 
ical  Recipes  Function  Pack.  It  appeared  that  ninety  %  of  the 
spectrum  power  was  between  10  MHz  and  1.08  GHz  (Fig.  10. 
power  spectrum,  dashed  line).  The  relative  power  (RP)  spec¬ 
trum  was  then  convolved  with  the  SAR  vs.  Frequency  curve 
(11)  in  a  spheroidal  model  of  a  medium  rat  for  H  polarization 
(Fig.  10,  SAR,  dotted  line),  also  at  10  MHz  intervals  from  10 
MHz  to  10  GHz.  The  convoluted  curve  (Fig.  10.  SAR  x  RP, 
solid  line)  represented  the  absorption  spectrum  of  a  rat  ex¬ 
posed  to  the  UWB  pulse  used  in  the  present  experiment.  The 
maximum  value  of  the  absorption  for  a  single  discrete  fre¬ 
quency  was  at  800  MHz,  which  indicated  that  SAR  was  less 
than  170  mW/kg/mW/cm2  according  to  the  value  presented  in 
the  SAR  curve.  Integration  of  the  convolved  curve  (SAR  x 
RP)  and  normalized  by  the  area  under  the  RP  curve  yielded  a 
whole-body  SAR  at  61.7  mW/kg/mW/cm2  for  the  high  UWB 
pulse.  Analysis  of  the  low  UWB  pulse  (500  Hz)  yielded  a  sim¬ 
ilar  result  in  relative  power  spectrum,  absorption  spectrum, 
and  whole-body  SAR  (60.9  mW/kg/mW/cm2).  For  the  1.000 
Hz  group,  total  absorption  in  6  min  was.  therefore,  in  the  or¬ 
der  of  43.5  J/kg  or  less,  which  is  incapable  of  inducing  any  sig¬ 
nificant  temperature  increase  in  the  animal.  The  mechanism 
of  the  UWB-induced  hypotension  is  not  known. 

A  widely  known  effect  specific  to  pulsed  microwave  radia¬ 
tion  with  high  peak  power  is  the  induced  auditory  sensation 
elicited  by  microwave  pulses.  This  effect  has  been  the  subject 
of  several  reviews  (7,34,39).  It  is  generally  accepted  that  the 
pulsed  microwave-induced  audible  sound  is  generated  from  a 
thermoelastic  expansion  of  cranial  tissue  and  launches  an 
acoustic  wave  that  is  detected  by  hair  cells  in  the  cochlea.  For 
pulsed  microwave  with  pulse  width  shorter  than  30  ps.  the  mi¬ 
crowave-induced  auditory  threshold  was  independent  of  tem¬ 
poral  peak  power  density  (or  temporal  peak  specific  absorp¬ 
tion)  and  it  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  energy  density  of  the 
microwave  pulse  or  specific  absorption  (SA)  per  pulse.  The 
auditory  threshold  SA  per  pulse  has  been  determined  in  hu¬ 
man  volunteers,  cat  (19)  and  rats  (9),  16.  10,  to  12  and  0.9  to 
1.8  mJ/kg,  respectively.  The  temporal  peak  SAR  of  the  high 


760 


LU  ET  AL. 


UWB  pulse  used  in  the  present  experiment  was  117  kW/kg 
(duty  cycle  ^lO-6).  Due  to  an  extremely  short  pulse  (pulse 
width  =  1.03  ns),  the  SA  per  pulse  from  the  high  UWB  pulses 
was  around  0.12  mJ/kg,  which  was  one  order  of  magnitude 
lower  than  the  known  auditory  threshold  in  rats.  Therefore, 
the  UWB-induced  delayed  hypotension  was  not  a  sequela  of 
an  audiogenic  effect. 

The  estimated  threshold  SAR  (0.121  W/kg,  high  UWB 
pulse)  for  UWB-induced  hypotension  in  rats  was  3  times  less 
than  0.4  W/kg,  the  basis  for  the  IEEE  C95.1-1991  safety  stan¬ 
dard  in  a  controlled  environment  (21).  The  threshold  peak 
electric  field  of  the  UWB  pulses  was  less  than  the  allowable 
peak  electric  field  (100  kV/m)  used  in  this  standard.  Hypoten¬ 
sion  is  known  to  possess  adverse  health  implications.  The 
UWB-induced  hypotension  is  a  recent  finding  that  has  not 
been  addressed  during  the  promulgation  of  personnel  protec¬ 


tion  guidelines.  Further  research  on  effect  replication  and 
dose-response  characteristics  are  highly  recommended. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  under  the  contract  No.  DAMD17-94-C-4069  with 
McKesson  BioServices.  The  authors  acknowledge  the  contributions  of 
Jian-Zhong  Bao  for  providing  a  transfer  function  for  field  measure¬ 
ment  Pamela  J.  Henry  for  technical  assistance,  D.  Duane  Cox  for  fab¬ 
rication  of  the  microenvironment  chambers,  and  Bruce  E.  Stuck  for 
valuable  suggestions  during  the  preparation  of  the  manuscript.  In  con¬ 
ducting  this  research,  the  investigators  adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the 
Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals”  and  policies  of  the  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  and  U.S.  Air  Force  Armstrong  Labora¬ 
tory.  Disclaimer:  The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in 
this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an 
official  Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy,  and  decision. 


REFERENCES 


1.  Albanese.  R.;  Blaschak,  J.:  Median,  R.;  Penn,  J.:  Ultrashort  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  signals:  Biophysical  questions,  safety  issues,  and 
medical  opportunities.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  65:A116- 
A120: 1994. 

2.  Bao,  J.-Z.:  Lee,  J.  C.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Seaman,  R.  L.;  Akyel,  Y.:  Analy¬ 
sis  of  ultra-wide-band  pulses  in  a  GTEM  cell.  In:  Brandt,  H.  E., 
ed.  Intense  microwave  pulses  III,  Proc.  Spie  2557.  Danvers:  Inter¬ 
national  Society  for  Optical  Engineering;  1995:237-248. 

3.  Barron,  B.  A.;  Van  Loon,  G.  R.:  Role  of  sympathoadrenomedul- 
lary  system  in  cardiovascular  response  to  stress  in  rats.  J.  Autonomi. 
Ner.  Syst.  28:179-188;  1989. 

4.  Bunag,  R.  D.;  Butterfield,  J.  B.:  Tail-cuff  blood  pressure  mea¬ 
surement  without  external  preheating  in  awake  rats.  Hyperten¬ 
sion  4:898-903;  1982. 

5.  Chen,  X.;  Herbert,  J.:  Regional  changes  in  c -fos  expression  in  the 
basal  forebrain  and  brainstem  during  adaptation  to  repeated 
stress:  Correlations  with  cardiovascular,  hypothermic  and  endo¬ 
crine  responses.  Neuroscience  64:675-685;  1995. 


6.  Chiueh,  C  C.;  Kopin.  I.  J.:  Hyperresponsivity  of  spontaneously 
hypertensive  rat  to  indirect  measurement  of  blood  pressure.  Am. 
J.  Physiol.  H690-H695: 1978. 

7.  Chou,  C.  K.;  Guy.  A.  W.:  Galambos,  R.:  Auditory  perception  of 
radio-frequency  electromagnetic  fields.  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  71:1321— 
1334:1982. 

8.  Chou,  C.-K.;  Guy.  A.  W.;  Kunz,  L.  L.;  Johnson,  R.  B.;  Crowley. 
J.  J.;  Krupp,  J.  H.:  Long-term,  low-level  microwave  irradiation  of 
rats.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:469-496;  1992. 

9.  Chou,  C.-K.,  Yee.  K.-C.;  Guy,  A.  W.:  Auditory  response  in  rats 
exposed  to  2,450  MHz  electromagnetic  fields.  Bioelectromagnet¬ 
ics  6323-326;  1985. 

10.  D’ Andrea,  J.  A.:  Gandhi,  O.  P.;  Lords,  J.  L.;  Durney,  C.  H.; 
Astle,  L.;  Stensaas.  L.  J.;  Schoenberg,  A.  A.:  Physiological  and 
behavioral  effects  of  prolonged  exposure  to  915-MHz  micro- 
waves.  J.  Microwave  Power  15:123-135;  1980. 

11.  Dumey,  C.  H.;  Massoudi,  H.;  Iskander,  M.  F.:  Radiofrequency 
radiation  dosimetry  handbook,  4th  ed.  Brooks  AFB:  USAF 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


761 


School  of  Aerospace  Medicine  Aerospace  Medical  Division 
(USAFSAM-TR-85-73)  1985:617. 

12.  Ferrari,  A.  U.;  Dafffonchio,  A.;  Albergati,  F.;  Mancia.  G.:  Inverse 
relationship  between  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  variabilities 
in  rats.  Hypertension  10:533-537;  1987. 

13.  Foreman,  S.;  Holmes.  G;  McManamon,  V.;  Wedding,  W.:  Psy¬ 
chological  symptoms  and  intermittent  hypertension  following 
acute  microwave  exposure.  J.  Occupat.  Med.  24:932-934: 1982. 

14.  Foster,  P.  R.:  Antennas  and  UWB  signals.  In:  Taylor.  J.  D.,  ed. 
Introduction  to  ultra-wideband  radar  systems.  Boca  Raton.  FL: 
CRC  Press;  1995:237-248. 

15.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Jauchem.  J.  R.:  Thermoregulatory  response  of  rats 
exposed  to  9.3-GHz  microwave:  A  comparison  of  E  and  H  orien¬ 
tation.  Physiol  Chem.  Phys.  Med.  NMR  24:1-10: 1992. 

16.  Frei,  M.;  Jauchem.  J.:  Heinmets,  F.:  Physiological  effects  of  2.8 
GHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  A  comparison  of  pulsed  and  con¬ 
tinuous-wave  radiation.  J.  Microwave  Power  23:85-93;  1988. 

17.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Jauchem.  J.  R.;  Price,  D.  R.:  Padilla.  J.  M.:  Reid  ori¬ 
entation  effects  during  5.6-GHz  radiofrequency  irradiation  of 
rats.  Aviat,  Space  Environ.  Med.  61:1125-1129: 1990. 

18.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Ryan.  K.  L.:  Berger,  R.  E.:  Jauchem.  J.  R.:  Sustained 
35-GHz  radiofrequency  irradiation  induces  circulatory  failume. 
Shock  4:289-293: 1995.' 

19.  Guy,  A.  W.;  Chou  C.  K.;  Lin,  J.  C.:  Microwave-induced  acoustic 
effects  in  mammalian  auditory  systems  and  physical  materials. 
Ann.  NY  Acad.  Sci.  247:194-218;  1975. 

20.  Houdi,  A.  A.;  Dowell,  R.  T.;  Diana.  J.  N.:  Cardiovascular 
responses  to  cigarette  smoke  exposure  in  restrained  conscious 
rats.  J.  Pharmacol.  Exp.  Ther.  275:646-653: 1995. 

21.  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers:  IEEE  C95.1 
Standard  for  safety  levels  with  respect  to  human  exposure  to 
radio  frequency  electromagnetic  Helds.  3  kHz  to  300  GHz.  New 
York:  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers:  1992. 

22.  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources:  Committee  on  care  and  use  of 
spontaneously  hypertensive  (SHR)  rats.  Spontaneously  hyper¬ 
tensive  (SHR)  rats:  Guidelines  for  breeding  care  and  use.  vol  19. 
Washington.  DC:  ILAR  News:  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.-Natl.  Res.  Coun¬ 
cil,  1976:G1-G20. 

23.  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Chang.  K.  S.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  Tolazoline  decreases 
survival  time  during  microwave- induced  lethal  heat  stress  in 
anesthetized  rats.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  211:236-243: 19%. 

24.  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Frei.  M.  R.:  Cardiovascular  changes  in  unanesthe¬ 
tized  and  ketamine-anesthetized  Sprague-Dawley  rats  exposed 
to  2.8-GHz  radiofrequency  radiation.  Lab.  Anim.  Sci.  41:70-75; 
1991. 

25.  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Frie.  M.  R.:  Cardiorespiratory  changes  during 
microwave-induced  lethal  heat  stress  and  p-adrcnergic  blockade. 
J.  Appl.  Physiol.  77:434-140;  1994. 

26.  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Frei.  M.  R.:  High-peak  power  microwave  pulses: 
Effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  unanesthetized  rats. 
Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:992-997: 1995. 

27.  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Frei.  M.  R.;  Chang,  K.  H.:  Berger,  R.  E.:  Micro¬ 
wave-induced  lethal  heat  stress:  Effect  of  phentolamine,  prazosin 
and  metoprodol.  Methods  Find.  Exp.  Clin.  Pharmacol.  17:241- 
248: 1995. 

28.  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Frei.  M.  R.:  Heinmets.  F.:  Thermal  bradycardia 
during  radiofrequenev  irradiation.  Physiol.  Chem.  Phys.  Med. 
NMR  15:429-434: 1983. 

29.  Jauchem.  J.  R.;  Frei.  M.  R.:  Heinmets,  F.:  Heart  rate  changes  due 
to  5.6  GHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  Relation  to  average  power 
density.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  177:383-387;  1984. 

30.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei.  M.  R.:  Padilla.  J.  M.:  Thermal  and  physio¬ 
logic  responses  in  1200-MHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  Differ¬ 
ence  between  exposure  in  E  and  H  orientation.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp. 
Biol.  Med.  194:358-363: 1990. 

31.  Kirchheim,  A.  R.:  Svstemic  arterial  baroreccptor  reflexes.  Phvs- 
iol.  Rev.  56:100-176: 1976. 

32.  Lawer,  J.  E.:  Barker.  G.  F.:  Hubbard.  J.  W.;  Schaub.  R.  G.:  Effect 
of  stress  on  blood  pressure  and  cardiac  pathology  in  rats  with  bor¬ 
derline  hypertension.  Hypertension  3:496-505: 1981. 


33.  Lee,  J.;  Bao,  J.-Z.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Seaman,  R.  L.:  An  ultra-wide-band 
exposure  system  for  studying  biological  effects.  In:  Abstract  book 
of  the  seventeenth  annual  meeting  of  the  bioelectromagnetics 
society.  Fredrick:  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  Fredrick;  1995:160. 

34.  Lin,  J.  C:  Microwave  auditory  effects  and  applications.  Spring- 
field,  IL:  Charles  C.  Thomas;  1978. 

35.  Ludin,  S.;  Ricksten,  S.-E.;  Thoren,  P.:  Interaction  between  “men¬ 
tal  stress”  and  baroreceptor  reflexes  concerning  effects  on  heart 
rate,  mean  arterial  pressure  and  renal  sympathetic  activity  in  con¬ 
scious  spontaneously  hypertensive  rats.  Acta.  Physiol.  Scand. 
120:273-281;  1984. 

36.  Mauck,  G.  W.;  Smith,  C.  R.;  Geddes,  L.  A.;  Bourland,  J.  D.:  The 
meaning  of  the  point  of  maximum  oscillations  in  cuff  pressure  in 
the  indirect  measurement  of  blood  pressure— Part  II.  J.  Biomech. 
Eng.  102:28-33;  1980. 

37.  Michaelson,  S.  M.;  Lin,  J.  C.:  Cardiovascular  effects.  In:  Michael- 
son,  S.  M.;  Lin,  J.  C.,  eds.  Biological  effects  and  health  implica¬ 
tions  of  radiofrequency  radiation.  New  York:  Plenum  Press;  1987: 
451-488. 

38.  Nagasaka,  T.;  Hirata,  K.;  Shibata,  H.;  Sugano,  Y.:  Metabolic  and 
cardiovascular  changes  during  physical  restraint  in  rats.  Jpn.  J. 
Physiol.  30:799-803;  1980. 

39.  NCRP  Report  86:  Perception  of  RFEM  fields.  In:  Biological 
effects  and  exposure  criteria  for  radiofrequency  fields.  Bethesda, 
MD:  National  Research  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and 
Measurements;  1986:175-180. 

40.  Sakaguchi,  A.;  LeDoux.  J.  E.:  Reis,  D.  J.:  Sympathetic  nerves  and 
adrenal  medulla:  Contributions  to  cardiovascular-conditioned 
emotional  responses  in  spontaneous  hypertensive  rats.  Hyperten¬ 
sion  5:728-738;  1983. 

41.  Sherry,  C.  J.;  Blick,  D.  W.;  Walters,  T.  W.;  Brown.  G.  C.:  Murph, 
M.  R.:  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after 
exposure  to  ultrawideband  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the 
microwave  frequency  range.  Radiat.  Res.  143:93-97: 1995. 

42.  Sodeman,  W.  A.,  Jr.;  Sodeman.  W.  A.:  Systemic  arterial  pressure. 
In:  Pathological  physiology.  Philadelphia.  PA:  W.  B.  Saunders 
Co.:  1974:177-205. 

43.  Sparrow,  M.  G.;  Roggendorf,  H.;  Vogel.  W.  H.:  Effect  of  ethanol 
on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  nonstressed  and  stressed  rats. 
Life  Sci.  40:2551-2559;  1987. 

44.  Sudakov,  K.  V.:  Organization  of  cardiovascular  functions  under 
experimental  emotional  stress.  J.  Autonom.  Nerv.  Syst.  4:165- 
180:1981. 

45.  Taylor.  J.  D.:  Ultra-wideband  radar  overview.  In:  Taylor.  J.  D., 
ed.  Introduction  to  ultra-wideband  radar  systems.  Boca  Raton. 
FL:  CRC  Press:  1995:1-10. 

46.  Toler.  Popovic,  V.:  Bonasera,  S.:  Popovic.  P.:  Honeycutt.  G; 
Sgoutas,  D.:  Long-term  study  of  435  MHz  radio-frequency  radia¬ 
tion  on  blood-borne  end  points  in  cannulated  rats.  Part  II:  Meth¬ 
ods,  results  and  summary.  J.  Microwave  Power  23:105-136: 1988. 

47.  Van  Den  Berg,  D.  T.  W.  M.:  De  Jong,  W.;  De  Kloet.  E.  R.:  Min- 
eralocorticoid  antagonist  inhibits  stress-induced  blood  pressure 
response  after  repeated  daily  warming.  Am.  J.  Phvsiol.  267:E921- 
E9926: 1994. 

48.  Walters,  T.  J.;  Mason,  P.  A.;  Sherry,  C.  J.:  Steffen.  C.:  Merritt, 
J.  H.:  No  detectable  bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high 
peak  power  ultra-wide  hand  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats. 
Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:562-567;  1995. 

49.  Williams,  R.:  Webb.  T.:  Exposure  to  radiofrequency  radiation 
from  an  aircraft  radar  unit.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  51:1243- 
1244;  1980. 

50.  Yamakoshi,  K.-I.:  Kamiya.  A.:  Noninvasive  measurement  of  arte¬ 
rial  blood  pressure  and  elastic  properties  using  photoelectric 
plethysmography  technique.  Med.  Prog.  Technol.  12:123-143; 
1987. 

51.  Yen.  T.  T.;  Powell,  C.  E.;  Pearson,  D.  V.:  An  indirect  method  of 
measuring  the  blood  pressure  of  rats  without  heating.  In:  Sponta¬ 
neous  hypertension:  Its  pathogenesis  and  complications.  Bethesda. 
MD:  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  (DHEW  Publication  No.  77-1 179); 
1977:486-490. 


ABSENCE  OF  EFFECTS  OF  2.45  GHz  MICROWAVES  ON 
PHYSICAL  ENDURANCE,  MOTIVATIONAL  LEVELS 
AND  CARDIOVASCULAR  FUNCTIONS 

SHIN-TSU  LU 
SATNAM  P.  MATHUR 
YAHYA  AKYEL 

MCKESSON  BIOSERVICES 
U.S.  ARMY  MEDICAL  RESEARCH  DETACHMENT 
8308  HAWKS  ROAD,  BUILDING  1168 
BROOKS  AIR  FORCE  BASE,  TEXAS  78235 
U.S. A. 


ABSTRACT 

A  highly  motivated  and  physically  demanding  task  was  used  to  evaluate  the  effect  of  2.45  GHz  CW 
microwave  radiation  on  the  characteristics  of  physical  performance.  Male  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  were  trained  to 
run  on  a  rodent  treadmill.  They  were  subjected  to  microwave  radiation  for  30  minutes  in  a  circularly 
polarized  exposure  system  at  0,  0.3 1, 3,20  and  6.59  W/kg  whole-body  average  specific  absorption  rate.  The 
physical  performance  was  evaluated  one  week  before  exposure  as  baseline  and  24  hours  after  exposure.  In 
addition,  cardiovascular  functions  were  evaluated  at  two  weeks  after  exposure.  Under  current  experimental 
conditions,  alterations  in  these  biological  endpoints  were  not  found. 


INTRODUCTION 

Radio  frequency  (RF)  radiation  can  have  highly  predictable  effects  on  behavior  at  modest  and  even 
low  levels  of  exposure  [Justesen  1979].  In  addition,  introduction  of  weak  RF  fields  into  sensitive  tissues  may 
promote  bona  fide  physiological  reactions  that  lead  to  changes  in  behavior.  Operant  behaviors  have  been 
studied  extensively  in  animals  exposed  to  RF  radiation.  Results  of  operant  behavioral  studies  form  the  basis 
of  contemporary  western  RF  personnel  protection  guidelines  and  standards.  That  absorption  of  significant 
RF  radiation  can  cause  work-stoppage  and  work-decrement  is  beyond  dispute.  However,  work-stoppage  and 
work-decrement  experiments  were  all  based  on  tasks,  such  as  pressing  of  a  lever  or  levers,  that  do  not  require 
sustained,  strenuous  effort  When  forced  expenditure  of  effort  at  a  task  is  required  over  a  long  period  of  lime, 
one  can  assess  ENDURANCE  if  an  agent  is  introduced  that  interferes  with  performance  of  the  task.  In 
contrast  to  operant  behavioral  studies,  few  investigators  [Hunt  et  al  1975,  Galvin  et  al  1986,  Akyel  et  al 
1993]  have  utilized  endurance  as  an  endpoint  in  studying  biological  effects  of  RF  radiation. 

Treadmill  running  is  a  standard  laboratory  procedure  for  the  study  of  exercise  physiology.  Apart 
from  its  more  strictly  physiological  uses  in  the  measurement  of  oxygen  consumption,  muscle  blood  flow,  fat 
metabolism,  hepatic  function  etc.,  the  treadmill  also  provides  a  convenient  way  of  assessing  an  animals’s 
physical  endurance  following  various  drug  and  environmental  manipulations  including  ionizing  radiation. 
Previous  research  [Gerald  1978]  has  shown  that  an  orderly  relationship  exits  among  endurance,  speed  at 
which  the  animal  is  required  to  run  and  the  strength  of  motivational  stimuli  which  the  animal  is  willing  to 
tolerate.  Although  endurance  performance  was  susceptible  to  degradation  immediately  after  microwave 
exposure,  recovery  appears  to  be  rapid  [Hunt  et  al.  1975].  In  order  to  assess  the  persistence  of  microwave 
effects,  both  endurance  and  motivational  stimuli  were  evaluated  at  24  hours  after  microwaves  exposures  in 
rats  exposed  to  graded  doses  of  microwaves. 


491 


Lu  et  al.  (1999J  has  identified  a  delayed  hypotensive  effect  in  rats  after  exposure  to  Ultra-Wide-Band 
pulses.  The  effect  appears  to  reach  a  maximum  two  weeks  after  exposure.  In  order  to  assess  the  induction 
of  this  delayed  hypotension  in  other  modalities  of  RF  radiation,  blood  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  also 
included  in  the  present  report. 


MATERIAL  AND  METHODS 

ANIMALS:  Male  normotensive  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  were  used  at  5  to  8  months  of  age.  At  the  time 
of  exposure,  their  average  body  weight  and  standard  deviations  were  363  ±  33  (sham,  n=  7),  365  ±  23  (0.31 
W/kg,  n=  7),  352  ±  38  (3.20  W/kg,  n=  6)  and  363  ±  36  g  (6.59  W/kg,  o=  7).  They  were  maintained  in  the 
vivarium  at  21-23  °C  ambient  temperature,  100%  conditioned  fresh  air  for  more  than  10  exchanges  per  hour, 
and  a  12L-12D  (light  on  0600-1800  hours).  Tap  water  and  feed  (Purina  Rodent  Diet  5008,  Ralston  Purina 
Co.,  St.  Louis,  MU,  U.S.A.).  They  were  quarantined  and  acclimated  to  the  vivarium  environment  for  at  least 
1  month  before  introduction  into  the  experiment. 

EXPOSURES:  A  circularly  polarized  waveguide  exposure  system  [Guy  and  Chou  1976]  was  used 
throughout  these  experiments.  Animals  were  individually  exposed  one  at  a  time.  A  five  power  meter  method, 
measuring  forward,  left-hand  reflected,  right-hand  reflected,  left-hand  transmitted  and  right-hand  transmitted 
powers,  was  used  to  determine  the  whole-body  average  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR).  The  SAR  was 
determined  by  the  net  power  loss  between  loaded  and  empty  waveguide  divided  by  the  body  weight  of  the 
animal.  Ten  readings,  approximately  3  minutes  apart,  were 
recorded  during  every  exposure.  The  accuracy  of  this 
dosimetric  method  was  confirmed  in  this  laboratory  by 
using  calorimetric  measurement  of  absorbed  doses  in  a 
water  phantom.  The  microwave  was  2.45  GHz  CW 
radiation.  Four  exposure  conditions  were  used.  The 
whole-body  average  S  ARs  at  each  condition  were  0  (sham, 
n=  7),  0,31  ±  0.02  (S.D.,  n=  7),  3.20  ±  0.34  (S.D.,  n=  6), 
and  6.59  ±  0.56  W/kg  (S.D.,  n=  7).  Colonic  temperature 
was  measured  immediately  after  exposure  by  inserting  a 
lubricated  thermistor  probe  through  the  rectal  orifice  5  cm 
into  the  colon.  For  comparison,  38  animals  used  in  a  Y- 
maze  study  were  also  included.  These  Y-maze  animals 
received  similar  exposures  except  water  was  removed 
from  home  cage  24  hours  before  exposure. 

TREADMILL:  A  commercially  available  rodent  treadmill  was  used  (Fig.  1,  Columbus  Instruments, 
Columbus,  OH,  U.S.A.).  The  speed  of  moving  belt,  inclination,  and  intensity  of  the  electrical  pulse  trains 
(provided  by  a  stainless  steel  grid  at  right  side  of  the  figure)  can  all  be  programmed.  The  animal  had  a  choice 
between  running  on  a  treadmill  belt  surface  or  receiving  motivational  stimuli  in  form  of  electrical  pulses  if 
it  chose  to  stay  on  the  stationary  grid.  The  electrical  pulses  were  generated  by  rectifying  a  120  V,  60  Hz 
power.  The  pulse  train  characteristics  were  0.2  s  pulse  train  duration,  and  1  Hz  pulse  train  repetition  rate. 
An  infrared  photosensor  was  used  to  activate  these  pulse  trains  when  the  sensor  detected  the  presence  of  the 
animal  in  the  grid  area.  Each  time,  the  animal  left  the  grid  area,  the  pulse  train  was  deactivated  and  the  clock 
was  reset.  To  prevent  injury,  the  total  duration  of  a  pulse  train  was  set  at  20  s  even  if  the  animal  stayed  in  the 
grid  area  continuously  for  a  longer  period  of  time.  In  the  present  experiment,  8°  inclination  was  used.  Two 
treadmill  speeds  were  used,  i.e.,  10  m/min  for  task  familiarization  and  25  m/min  for  endurance  testing.  The 
workload  at  25  m/min  and  8  0  inclination  was  approximately  29  W/kg  or  78-80  %  of  the  maximum  aerobic 
power  of  an  endurance  trained  rat  [Shepherd  and  Gollnick  1976,  Slentz  etal  1990]. 

TASK  FAMILIARIZATION;  Rats  require  training  to  learn  the  running  task.  In  order  to  familiarize 
animals  with  the  treadmill  apparatus,  and  to  train  them  to  perform  the  running  task  with  minimal  increase  in 
physical  endurance,  a  slow  and  easy  treadmill  speed  (10  m/min  8°  inclination)  was  used  during  the.  task 
familiarization.  The  training  or  familiarization  schedule  was  10  minutes  daily  for  5  consecutive  days.  The 
effectiveness  of  this  training  procedure  was  clearly  evident  by  a  gradual  and  significant  reduction  of  the  total 
amount  of  time  that  animals  spent  at  the  grid  and  the  number  of  visits  to  the  grid  (Fig.  2). 


492 


ENDURANCE  AND  CARDIOVASCULAR  EFFECTS 


ENDURANCE:  Physical  endurance  was  defined  100 
as  the  duration  of  time  spent  running  till  exhaustion.  ^ 

However,  the  criteria  for  exhaustion  has  varied  among  §  90 
investigators  [Jones  etai  1967,  King  and  Gollnick  1970,  1  80 
Gerald  1978,  Belcastro  et  al.  1984,  Heyes  et  al  1988,  Ji  i  ro 
and  Fu  1992,  Seward  et  al.  1995],  The  exhaustion  was  g  w 
usually  defined  operationally  as  the  animal  failed  to  keep  2 
in  pace  with  the  treadmill’s  moving  surface  and  received  £  50 
motivational  stimuli  continuously.  In  a  trained  animal,  the  40 
animal  did  not  stay  on  the  stationary  grid  for  more  than  Is  |  M 
if  the  animal  was  capable  of  and  willing  to  run.  In  the  fc 
present  experiment,  exhaustion  was  defined  as  the  animal  §  20 
receiving  motivational  stimuli  continuously  for  20  s.  For  i  10 
the  endurance  test,  the  animal  was  required  to  run  at  25  * 

m/min  till  exhaustion.  Number  of  visits  to  the  grid, 
duration  of  time  spent  on  the  grid  and  duration  of  time 
spent  running  were  recorded.  This  endurance  test  is  a  strenuous  task.  The  colonic  temperature  of  animals 
could  reach  as  high  as  42  °C  depending  on  duration  of  treadmill  running.  The  final  colonic  temperature 
attained  by  animals  appeared  to  be  dependent  on  the  total  run  time,  e  g.,  40.6  °C  at  866  $,  41.1  °C  at  848  s, 
41.7  °C  at  1556  $,  42.0  °C  at  1565  s,  and  42.2  °C  at  1978  s.  Each  animal  received  two  endurance  tests, 
baseline  determination  at  1  week  before  exposure,  and  post-exposure  endurance  at  24  hours  after  exposure. 
The  time  separation  between  endurance  tests  was  to  prevent  interaction  and  training  effect  between  tests. 

CARDIOVASCULAR  FUNCTIONS:  The  method  used  for  heart  rate,  systolic  (Ps),  mean  (PM)  and 
diastolic  (PD)  arterial  blood  pressures  has  been  published  previously  [Lu  et  al.  1999].  A  commercially 
available  non-invasive  rodent  blood  pressure  measurement  system  was  used  (ITTC  Life  Sci.,  Woodland  Hills, 
CA,  U.S.A.).  The  system  includes  a  tail  cuff  for  tail  artery  occlusion,  photoelectric  sensor  for  detection  of 
arteiy  pulsations,  pressure  sensor  for  monitoring  the  cuff  pressure,  and  associated  amplifiers  for  photoelectric 
and  pressure  sensors.  The  tail  cuff  was  first  inflated  to  20-30  mm  Hg  higher  than  the  pressure  needed  to 
occlude  the  tail  artery.  The  cuff  pressure  was  then  gradually  decreased  approximately  at  2  mm  Hg  per  heart 
beat.  Systolic  pressure  was  the  cuff  pressure  when  tail  pulsation  reappeared  during  the  deflection  cycle.  The 
mean  arterial  pressure  was  the  cuff  pressure  when  the  amplitude  of  tail  pulsation  reached  a  maximum. 
Diastolic  arterial  pressure  was  calculated  according  to  PD  =  (PM  x  3  -  Ps)  /  2.  Heart  rate  was  determined  from 
pulse  duration  between  arterial  pulses.  Average  of  40  to  60  pulse  durations  were  routinely  collected.  Six 
determinations  were  performed  every  4  to  5  minutes  to  prevent  arterial  collapse.  These  cardiovascular 
functions  were  determined  in  each  exposed  animal  at  two  weeks  after  exposure.  Due  to  the  known  variation 
of  cardiovascular  functions,  39  additional  animals  from  a  Y-maze  study  in  which  animals  received  similar 
treatments  were  also  included  in  this  report.  Cardiovascular  functions  of  these  Y-maze  animals  were  also 
determined  at  2  weeks  after  2.45  GHz  CW  microwave 
exposures. 

STATISTICS:  Analysis  of  variance, 

Student’s  t-test  and  paired  t-test  were  used  when 
appropriate.  The  null  hypothesis  was  rejected  at  the 
0.05  level. 


RESULTS 


Error  bars  shown  in  the  results  section  are 
standard  errors  of  mean.  The  colonic  temperature  of 
animals  after  30  minute  exposure  at  various  SAR  is 
shown  (Fig.  3).  Two  different  pre-treatments,  normal 
hydration  and  water  withheld  for  24  hrs  were 
included.  Apparently,  water  deprivation  for  24  hrs 
had  a  significant  impact  on  colonic  temperature  response  of  animals  to  microwave  exposure.  Different  post¬ 
exposure  temperature  was  noted  in  rats  exposed  at  0,  3.20  and  6.59  W/kg  but  not  at  0.31  W/kg.  All  the 
microwave  doses  caused  significant  increases  in  colonic  temperature  in  rats  with  normal  hydration.  The 


2  3  4  5 

TRAINING  SESSION 


493 


LU,  MATHUR,  AND  AKYEL 


increase  in  colonic  temperature  could  exceed  the  total  amount  of  energy  deposition  in  animals.  This  occurred 
in  animals  with  normal  hydration  exposed  at  0.31  W/kg,  and  water  deprived  animals  at  6.59  W/kg. 
Apparently,  change  in  colonic  temperature  is  highly  dependent  on  the  hydration  history  and  reaction  of  the 
animal.  On  the  other  hand,  excessive  restlessness  did  not  appear  to  be  the  cause  of  excessive  increase  in 
colonic  temperature  in  rats  with  normal  hydration  exposed  at  0.31  W/kg. 

All  other  endpoints  were  not  adversely  affected  by  these  microwave  exposures.  The  endurance 
endpoints  at  24  hrs  after  exposure  were  number  of  visits  to  the  grid  (Fig.  4),  time  spent  on  the  stationary  grid 
(Fig.  5),  and  the  run  time  on  the  treadmill  (Fig.  6)  at  25  m/min.  Cardiovascular  endpoints  at  two  weeks  after 
exposures  were  shown  in  Figures  7,  8, 9  and  10. 


SHAM  0.31  Wkg  3.20  Wkg  6.59  W/kg  SHAM  0.31  Wftg  3,20  W/kg  6.59  W/kg 


494 


ENDURANCE  AND  CARDIOVASCULAR  EFFECTS 


CONCLUSION 


Exposure  to  2.45  GHz  CW  at  6  W/kg  whole-body  average  specific  absorption  rate  for  30  minutes 
In  rats  did  not  adversely  affect  endurance  performance  at  24  hrs  after  exposure  nui  the  cardiovascular 
functions  at  2  weeks  after  exposure.  Rats  were  visibly  exhausted  when  water  deprived  for  24  hrs  and  exposed 
to  a  high  microwave  dose.  Therefore,  these  results  only  confirmed  that  endurance  deficit  did  not  occur  24 
hours  after  exposure  in  rats  [Hunt  et  aL  1975]. 

Absence  of  delayed  cardiovascular  effects  did  not 
exclude  the  occurrence  of  cardiovascular  reactions 
during  the  microwave  exposure.  The  magnitude  of 
increase  in  core  body  temperature  is  known  to  cause 
increase  in  heart  rate  [Lu  et  aL  1999],  especially  in 
3  and  6  W/kg  exposures  in  water  deprived  rats. 

Therefore,  it  was  concluded  that  a  single  episode  of 
significant  CW  microwave  exposure  did  not  cause 
persistent  effects  on  physical  endurance  and 
cardiovascular  functions. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:  This  work  was 
supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  under  the  contract  No. 

DAMD17-94-G-4069  with  McKesson  BioServices. 

The  authors  wishes  to  acknowledge  the  technical 

assistance  provided  by  Norman  Harris  and  Monica  Gonzalez.  In  conducting  this  research,  the  investigators 
adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals.’* 


DISCLAIMER:  The  view,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and 
should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  United  States  Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy,  and  decision. 


REFERENCES 

Akyel,  Y;  Belt,  M;  Raslear,  TG;  Hammer,  RM  [1993]:  The  effect  of  high-peak  power  pulsed  microwaves  on 
treadmill  performance  in  the  rat.  In:  “Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine”,  Bland,  M  (ed.), 
San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press,  pp.  668-670. 

Belcastro,  AN;  Turcotte,  R;  Rossiter,  M;  Secord,  D  [1984]:  Myofibril  ATPase  activity  of  cardiac  and  skeletal 
muscle  of  exhaustively  exercised  rats.  Int.  J.  Biochem.  16: 297-303. 

Galvin,  MJ;  Tilson,  HA;  Michell,  CL;  Peterson,  J;  McRee,  DI  [1986]:  Influence  of  pre-  and  post-natal 
exposure  of  rats  to  2.45  GHz  microwave  radiation  on  neurobehavioral  function.  Bioelectromagnetics  7:  57- 
71. 


Gerald,  MC  [1978]:  Effect  of  (+)-amphetamine  on  the  treadmill  endurance  performance  of  rats. 
Neuropharmaco.l.  17: 703-704. 

Guy,  AW;  Chou,  CK  [1976]:  System  for  quantitative  chronic  exposure  of  a  population  of  rodents  to  UHF 
fields.  In:  “Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Waves,  Vol  11,”  Johnson,  CC;  Shore,  ML  (eds.),  HEW 
Publ.  (FD A)-77-80 1 1 ,  pp.  38 ) -4 1 1 . 

Heyes,  MP;  Garnett,  ES;  Coates,  G  [1988]:  Nigrostriatal  dopaminergic  activity  is  increased  during  exhaustive 
exercise  stress  in  rats.  .  Life  Sci.  42:  1537-1542. 

Hunt,  EL;  King,  NW;  Phillips,  RD  [1975]:  Behavioral  effects  of  pulsed  microwave  irradiation.  Ann.  N.Y. 
Acad.  Sci.  247: 440-453. 

Ji,  LL;  Fu,  R  [1992]:  Response  of  glutathione  system  and  antioxidant  enzymes  to  exhaustive  exercise  and 
hydroperoxide.  J.  Appl.  Physiol.  72:  549-554. 


495 


LU,  MATHUR,  AND  AKYEL 


Jones,  DC;  Osborn,  GK;  Kimeldorf,  DJ  [  1967J:  Treadmill  exercise  performance  by  the  aging  irradiated  rat. 
Rad.  Res.  30;  714-724. 

Justesen,  DR  [1979]:  Behavioral  and  psychological  effects  of  microwave  radiation.  Bull.  N.Y.  Acad.  Med. 
55:  1058-1078. 

King,  DW;  Gollnick,  PD  [1970]:  Ultrastructure  of  rat  heart  and  liver  after  exhaustive  exercise.  Am.  J. 
Physiol.  218;  1150-1155. 

Lu,  S-T;  Mathur,  SP;  Akyel,  Y;  Lee,  JC  [1999):  Ultrawide-Band  electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension 
in  rats.  Physiol.  Beh.  67:  463  and  65:753-761. 

Seward,  SW;  Seiler  KS;  Starnes,  JW  [1995]:  Intrinsic  myocardial  function  and  oxidative  stress  after 
exhaustive  exercise.  J.  Appl.  Physiol.  79:  251  255. 

Shepherd,  RE;  Gollnick,  PD  [1976]:  Oxygen  uptake  of  rats  at  different  work  intensities.  Pflugers  Arch.  362: 
219-222. 

Slentz,  CA;  Davis,  M;  Settles,  DL;  Pate,  RR;  Settles,  SJ  [1990]:  Glucose  feeding  and  exercise  in  rats: 
glycogen  use,  hormone  response,  and  performance.  J.  Appl.  Physiol.  69:  989-994. 


496 


Bioelectromagnetics  21:439-454  (2000) 


Effects  of  High  Peak  Power  Microwaves  on  the 
Retina  of  the  Rhesus  Monkey 


Shin-Tsu  Lu,1*  Satnam  P.  Mathur,1  Bruce  Stuck,2  Harry  Zwick,2 
John  A.  DAndrea,3  John  M.  Ziriax,3  James  H.  Merritt,4  Gerard  Lutty,5 
D.  Scott  McLeod,5  and  Mary  Johnson6 

cKessonHBOC  BioServices,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 
2U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research, 

Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

3U.S.  Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 
4U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 
5Wilmer  Eye  Institute,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  Baltimore,  Maryland 
6 Maryland  Center  for  Eye  Care,  University  of  Maryland,  Baltimore,  Maryland 

We  studied  the  retinal  effects  of  1.25  GHz  high  peak  power  microwaves  in  Rhesus  monkeys.  Pre¬ 
exposure  fundus  photographs,  retinal  angiograms,  and  electroretinograms  (ERG)  were  obtained  to 
screen  for  normal  ocular  structure  and  function  and,  after  exposure,  as  endpoints  of  the  study. 
Histopathology  of  the  retina  was  an  additional  endpoint.  Seventeen  monkeys  were  randomly 
assigned  to  receive  sham  exposure  or  pulsed  microwave  exposures.  Microwaves  were  delivered 
anteriorly  to  the  face  at  0,  4.3,  8.4,  or  20.2  W/kg  spatially  and  temporally  averaged  retinal  specific 
absorption  rates  (R-SAR).  The  pulse  characteristics  were  1.04  MW  («  1.30  MW/kg  temporal  peak 
R-SAR),  5.59  ps  pulse  length  at  0,  0.59,  1.18,  and  2.79  Hz  pulse  repetition  rates.  Exposure  was  4h 
per  day  and  3  days  per  week  for  3  weeks,  for  a  total  of  nine  exposures.  The  preexposure  and 
postexposure  fundus  pictures  and  angiograms  were  all  within  normal  limits.  The  response  of  cone 
photoreceptors  to  light  flash  was  enhanced  in  monkeys  exposed  at  8.4  or  20.2  W/kg  R-SAR,  but  not 
in  monkeys  exposed  at  4.3  W/kg  R-SAR.  Scotopic  (rod)  response,  maximum  (combined  cone  and 
rod)  response,  and  Naka-Rushton  Rmax  and  log  K  of  scotopic  b-waves  were  all  within  normal  range. 
Retinal  histopathology  revealed  the  presence  of  enhanced  glycogen  storage  in  photoreceptors  among 
sham  (2/5),  8.4  W/kg  (3/3),  and  20.2  W/kg  (2/5)  exposed  monkeys,  while  enhanced  glycogen  storage 
was  not  observed  in  the  4.3  W/kg  (0/4)  exposed  group.  Supranormal  cone  photoreceptor  b-wave  was 
R-SAR  dependent  and  may  be  an  early  indicator  of  mild  injury.  However  no  evidence  of 
degenerative  changes  and  ERG  depression  was  seen.  We  concluded  that  retinal  injury  is  very 
unlikely  at  4  W/kg.  Functional  changes  that  occur  at  higher  R-SAR  are  probably  reversible  since  we 
saw  no  evidence  of  histopathologic  correlation  with  ERG  changes.  Bioelectromagnetics  21:439- 
454,  2000.  Published  2000  Wiley-Liss,  IncJ 

Key  words:  electroretinogram;  retinal  angiogram;  fundus  photograph;  retinal  histopathology 


INTRODUCTION 

The  eye  is  a  critical  organ  that  can  be  injured  by 
radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation  including  microwaves. 
It  is  also  one  of  the  most  studied  organs  regarding  the 
injurious  action  of  microwave  radiation  [Paulsson 
et  al.,  1979].  Ocular  injuries  have  been  investigated  in 
monkeys  and  rabbits  exposed  to  microwaves  of  various 
frequencies,  modulations,  intensities,  duration,  and 
number  of  exposures.  This  report  includes  a  summary 
table  of  representative  in  vivo  studies  of  microwave 
effects  on  lens,  cornea,  retina,  and  electroretinogram 
(Table  1). 

To  date,  most  microwave  eye  research  has 
concentrated  on  damage  to  the  lens  of  the  eye  in  the 
form  of  lenticular  opacity  (cataract  genesis).  The  lens 
is  assumed  to  be  more  susceptible  to  microwave 


Contract  grant  sponsor:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Material  Command;  Contract  grant  number:  DAMD-17-94-C- 
4069;  Contract  grant  sponsor:  Naval  Medical  Research  and 
Development  Command,  Work  Unit  #63706.M00096;  Contract 
grant  number:  DN241243;  Contract  grant  sponsor:  Air  Force 
Research  Laboratory  Work  Unit  7757B330;  Contract  grant 
sponsor:  U.S.  Air  Force;  Contract  grant  number:  41624-96-C- 
9009.  The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report 
are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army,  Navy,  Air  Force,  and  Defense  position, 
policy  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by  other  documentation. 
Approved  for  public  release,  distribution  is  unlimited. 

Correspondence  to:  Shin-Tsu  Lu,  McKessonHBOC  BioServices, 
USA-MCMR,  8308  Hawks  Road,  Bldg.  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force 
Base,  Texas  78235.  E-mail:  shin-tsu.lu@afrlars.brooks.af.mil 

Received  for  review  15  June  1999;  Final  revision  received  11 
November  1999 


Published  2000  Wiley-Liss,  Inc.  iThis  article  is  a  US 
Government  work  and,  as  such,  is  in  the  public  domain 
in  the  United  States  of  America. 


.  Representative  In  Vivo  Studies  on  Ocular  Effects  of  Microwave  Exposure 


440 


Lu  et  al, 


ON  ON  ON 

r-  r-  r- 

ON  ON  ON 


[5  S3  ffi 

On  On 


<N  CM 

On  On 

On  On 


O  «  U  rt 

C  C  C  -*-*  Id 

CD  CD  CD 

&  &  &  |  | 
ed  cd  cd  3  3  3 

u  u  u  o  ^  « 


o  o  S  o  s  s 

■fi  'S  I '3  || 

S  E  £  o  o 

C  G  C  T3  T3 

fO  O  o  rO  C  C 

^i""1  ^  cd  CD  CD 

U  a  B  y  73  T3 

2  2  «t  g  <u  « 

S  U  °  5  E  E 

cd  cd  O  cd  O  O 

u  u  z  u  u  u 


C  Mfc 
o  &  o 
c  o  c 
x>  £  JO 
«  £  * 

.2 

"cd  <n 

•£  G  -S  ^ 

O  CD  O  to 

73  ^  "O  ^ 

si  §f 

1  2  8  S 
E7  E® 


g  8 

c  i_ 

M  0  5 

<u  sl  o 
00  _  O  3 
2  oo ’C  B 
P  ^  o  2 

If -si 

s£'S  3 
8S  o-g 
-n  g  .5  ' 
5  E  S  » 

13  o  -o  <- 
•§  £  '8  -E 
&E-  i' 

_ i  CD  .2 

2  2l  «*  td . 
E  *  S  «. 
5  a  o  -  • 

u  £  < 


s « 

w-s 
I:  o  is 

8  «  E 

T3  «  ~ 
C  l-.  r2 
cd  O  2 
CD  03  g 

£  '55  o 

g  >.  e 

c  S.S 

c|“ 

O  M  £ 

i  s  § 

■§  8« 

D  <D 

o:  oi 


in  CLcn  Cl  * 
oj  x  n  1 

Ex  ei 

U"  u  ^ 

i 

^  m  A-  m  i 

77^7; 

>  J,  m  on  m  c 

v  C/f  CO  c/f  ' 
H  A  CL  |  CLJ 
1 J3  CLcn  CLt 
7  O  ^  O 
.  O  w  O  - 

t  fcO  ^ 

to  6  c/3  k 
•5  =L  O  3.? 

!>  o  >  o  c 
.  on  -  !§  ~  r 

'  ^  T3  ^  T3 
I  CD  V7  CD  L 


ON  iu  H  VO 
cb  £  o 

.1  '§77' 


in  id  in  b  _r 

1—  C/3  O  2  T? 


3  I  p 
CL»n  CL 


U4J  WJJ 

«S  al 

U  O  S3  O 


rS  «  73  I 

9  y  un 

O  o  ^  r,  - 

*i-H  ^ 

CD  Cl  cl  cd  cj 
to  .0  ,  to- 

5  ^  n  g  ; 

EC  is  , 

SSO>; 


^D 

£ 

£ 

g 

M 

NO 

>n 

NO 

CM 

in 

t>- 

CM 

C/3 

NO 

C/3 

0 

CL 

c A 

CL 

m 

CL 

CL 

C/5 

CL 

ON 

X 

O 

O 

CL 

NO 

ON 

CL  . 
Cl 

NO 

X 

X 

in  x 

xt 

to  5.  to  1^ 

^  N?^  X)> 

»  >  73  ^  ^2 
;  -rf  <u  "'cf  3  — 


-  CD  3  CD  -  r  CD 

to  CL  to  N  to 

cd  „  cd  PC  «d 

CD  ^  O  O  O  N 

ffi  ^  in  ^  ffi 

cd  q  cd  ^  cd  Q 


>>  >■> 

+_.  W  w  CD  CD 

•s-s-s-sli 

a!  os  os  os  §  S 


>, 

(D  ^ 

'c  ^ 

.0  *s 


CW,  ?  mW/cnr,  (?  W/kg),  0.25  h  x  2  Reduced  30  Hz  flicker  and  photopic  amplitude,  Lim  et  al.,  1993 

delayed  30  Hz  flicker  and  photopic  implicit 
time,  color  vision  abnormalities 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


441 


induced  damage  than  other  parts  of  the  eye  due  to  its 
lack  of  vascularization.  This  lack  of  vascularization  is 
believed  to  prevent  thermal  homeostasis  and  lead  to  an 
exaggerated  temperature  rise  [Michaelson  and  Lin, 
1987].  Conclusions  drawn  from  data  by  Carpenter 
[1979]  and  Guy  et  al.  [1975]  indicated  that  the 
threshold  for  lenticular  opacity  was  an  exposure  which 
induced  a  41.5  °C  intralenticular  temperature.  Depend¬ 
ing  on  the  wavelength  of  the  RF  radiation,  threshold 
power  density  for  damage  of  the  rabbit  lens  was 
150mW/cm2  or  higher  (estimated  lenticular  specific 
absorption  rates,  SARs  >  lOOW/kg)  for  100  min.  This 
threshold  exposure  intensity  is  two  orders  of  magni¬ 
tude  higher  than  the  current  personnel  protection 
guidelines  [IEEE  C95.1,  1999].  Michaelson  and  Lin 
[1987]  concluded  that  similar  lenticular  effects  were 
induced  by  continuous  wave  (CW)  and  pulsed 
microwaves  of  the  same  average  intensity.  A  series 
of  experiments  [Stewart-DeHaan  et  al.,  1983;  1985], 
using  isolated  rat  lenses  exposed  in  vitro  to  918  MHz 
24  kW  pulses  at  various  pulse  repetition  rates, 
appeared  to  support  a  high  threshold  for  microwave 
induced  lenticular  injuries  and  by  Creighton  et  al. 
[1987]  who  found  an  absolute  threshold  for  inducing 
holes  in  lens  fibers  at  23 1  W/kg  for  6  min. 

Corneal  endothelial  abnormalities  were  induced 
by  microwave  exposure  in  cynomolgus  monkeys 
by  Kues  et  al.  [1985].  They  concluded  that  pulsed 
microwave  radiation  (2.45  GHz,  10  ps  pulse  width,  100 
pulses  per  second)  was  twice  as  effective  as  CW 
microwaves  of  the  same  average  power  density.  Kues 
et  al.  [1992]  reported  increased  sensitivity  of  the 
nonhuman  primate  to  microwave  radiation  following 
pretreatment  with  ophthalmic  drugs,  such  as  0.5% 
Timolol  maleate  and  2%  pilocarpine.  In  these  pre¬ 
treated  eyes,  the  absolute  threshold  for  microwave 
induced  ocular  injuries,  which  included  increased  iris 
vascular  leakage  and  corneal  endothelial  injury,  dec¬ 
reased  tenfold  from  2 .6  W/kg  ( 10  mW/cm2)  to  0.26  W/kg 
(lmW/cm2).  Trevithick  et  al.  [1987]  determined  in 
rabbits  that  the  threshold  SAR  for  destruction  of  a 
single  corneal  epithelial  cell  was  33  W/kg  from  a 
35  GHz  pulsed  microwave  source.  However,  keratitis 
was  not  found  by  Rosenthal  et  al.  [1976]  in  rabbits 
exposed  to  35  GHz  (40  mW/cm2,  175  W/kg)  or 
107  GHz  (40 mW/cm2,  238  W/kg)  microwaves  for  1  h. 

Tengroth  and  Aurell  [1974]  reported  an  increased 
incidence  of  chorioretinal  scar  in  microwave  workers 
with  unspecific  exposure  intensities.  Microwave- 
induced  retinal  injury  was  noted  by  Paulsson  et  al. 
[1979]  as  neuronal  degeneration  in  the  rabbit  and  by 
Kues  [1992;  1993]  and  Kues  and  Monahan  [1992]  as 
submacula  detachment,  degenerative  changes  in 
photoreceptor  outer  segments,  vacuolization  of  the 


outer  retinal  layers,  focal  retinal  detachments,  karyo- 
lysis  of  photoreceptors,  and  pyknotic  changes  of  the 
pigmented  epithelium  in  the  monkey.  These  investi¬ 
gators  observed  retinal  degeneration  in  experimental 
animals  subjected  to  repetitive  exposure  to  pulsed 
microwaves.  In  a  series  of  meeting  abstracts  [Kues, 
unpublished  observations]  and  in  Kues  and  Monahan 
[1992],  it  was  noted  that  the  threshold  SAR  for  primate 
retinal  degeneration  was  3.9  W/kg  for  2.45  GHz  pulsed 
microwave  (10  ps  pulse  width,  100  pulses  per  second, 
15  mW/cm2  average  power  density,  or  15  kW/cm2  peak 
power  density)  and  3.6  W/kg  for  the  1.25  GHz  (10  ps 
pulse  width,  0.225  pulses  per  second,  12.5  mW/cm2 
average  power  density,  5.56  kW/cm2  peak  power 
density)  microwaves.  Timolol  maleate  pretreatment 
was  observed  to  enhance  the  severity  of  the  retinal 
injuries  in  monkeys  in  a  series  of  27  four-hour 
2.45  GHz  pulsed  microwave  (10  ps,  100  pulses  per 
second,  5  or  10  mW/cm2,  SARs  ~  1  or  2  W/kg) 
exposures,  wherein  Kues  and  McLeod  [unpublished 
observation]  found  a  2-4  fold  decrease  in  injury 
threshold.  These  threshold  SARs  for  retinal  injuries 
from  repetitive  exposures  are  lower  than  the  permis¬ 
sible  local  SAR  for  exposures  in  controlled  environ¬ 
ments  (8  W/kg  spatial  average  over  one  gram  of  tissue 
defined  in  the  IEEE  C95.1  [1999])  and  the  threshold 
SAR  for  acute  lenticular  injuries. 

Because  of  criticisms  concerning  the  use  of 
halothane  anesthesia  during  microwave  exposures, 
Kues’  group  subsequently  exposed  unanesthetized 
monkeys  [Kues,  1992;  1993].  Degenerated  cones  were 
observed  in  monkeys  exposed  to  7  four-hour  1 .25  GHz 
pulsed  microwave  exposures  (0.5  ps,  16  pulses  per 
second,  average  ocular  SAR  3.5-4.0W/kg)  [Kues, 
unpublished  observation],  9  four-hour  1.25  GHz 
exposures  (0.5  ps,  16  pulses  per  second,  ocular  SAR 
4.0  W/kg)  [Kues  and  Monahan,  1992;  Kues,  1992; 
1993],  and  30  exposures  (duration  of  each  exposure 
was  not  specified)  at  2.7  GHz  (1  ps,  20  pulses  per 
second,  ocular  SAR  2.6  W/kg)  [Kues,  unpublished 
observation].  However,  retinal  injuries  were  not  ob¬ 
served  in  monkeys  exposed  to  2.85  GHz  pulsed  micro- 
waves  ( 1  ps,  20  pulses  per  second,  ocular  SAR  3.5  W/kg, 
three  times  per  week  for  10  weeks)  [Kues,  unpublished 
observation].  Differences  in  specific  pulse/frequency 
parameters  and  in  the  SAR  resulting  from  frequency 
dependent  absorption  by  the  photopigments  were  sug¬ 
gested  by  Kues  as  the  causes  of  the  difference  in  the 
effectiveness  of  various  pulsed  microwave  exposures. 

Contrast  sensitivity  functions  are  used  widely  as 
a  measure  of  basic  visual  spatial  resolution.  Hence  the 
physical  changes  observed  by  various  investigators 
might  be  reflected  in  a  measure  of  contrast  sensitivity. 
However,  visual  contrast  sensitivity  was  not  altered 


442  Lu  et  al. 


during  repeated  exposures  to  5.6  GHz  microwaves 
(2.3  ps  pulse  width,  100  pulses  per  second,  18- 
108mW/cm2  averaged,  6kW/cm2  peak,  1-6  W/kg 
whole-body  average  SAR,  4  exposures  lasting  30  min 
each)  [D’ Andrea,  unpublished  observation].  In  a  follow 
up  study,  visual  contrast  sensitivity  again  remained 
unaltered  during  repeated  exposures  to  1 .3  GHz  pulsed 
microwaves  (4  W/kg  at  the  eye,  lW/kg  whole-body 
average  SAR,  0.5  ps  pulse  width,  16  pulses  per  second, 
1  MW  peak  power  output,  36  h  total,  4  h  per  session,  nine 
sessions  total)  [D’ Andrea,  unpublished  observation], 

Yee  [1983]  reported  a  reduction  of  b-wave 
amplitude  and  increased  c-wave  amplitude  of  the  sco- 
topic  adapted  single  flash  electroretinogram  (ERG)  in 
rabbits  after  a  3-4  h  exposure  to  3  GHz  pulsed  micro- 
waves  (6  ps  pulse  width  and  1875  pulses  per  second, 
0.7  mW/cm2,  622mW/cm2  peak,  ~  1.53  kV/m  peak). 
Recovery  occurred  in  half  an  hour  after  the  exposure. 
Kues  [1992;  1993]  and  Kues  and  Monahan  [1992]  ex¬ 
amined  ERG  changes  in  adult  Rhesus  monkeys  before 
and  after  7-9  four-hour  exposures  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed 
microwaves  (0.5  ps,  16pps,  3.5-4.0W/kg  ocular 
SAR).  They  noted  a  50-60%  reduction  in  the  scotopic 
single  (rod)  flash  response,  a  90%  reduction  in  the 
30  Hz  flicker  (cone)  response,  and  a  complete  extinc¬ 
tion  of  photopic  single  flash  (cone)  response  following 
these  repetitive  exposures.  The  ERG  returned  to 
normal  one  week  after  microwave  exposures.  Lim 
et  al.  [1993]  reported  a  case  of  abnormal  flicker 
electroretinogram  in  a  man  with  facial  erythema  after 
two  15  min  accidental  exposures  (30  W,  6  GHz, 
continuous  wave  radiation)  while  inspecting  a  3.2 
meter  satellite  communication  transmitting  antenna. 

The  reports  by  Kues  and  his  colleagues  on 
microwave-induced  retinal  injuries  in  the  monkey  have 
appeared  primarily  in  meeting  abstracts.  As  such, 
detailed  descriptions  of  experiments  are  mostly 
lacking.  In  addition,  the  incidence  of  the  retinal 
injuries  indicated  either  by  histopathological  changes 
or  ERG  changes  are  never  clearly  indicated.  Due  to  the 
potential  health  and  safety  implications  of  microwave- 
induced  retinal  hazards  in  humans,  a  retinal  study  by 
using  rhesus  monkeys  was  performed. 

The  objective  of  the  project  was  to  determine  if 
high  peak  power  microwave  radiation  could  induce 
retinal  injuries.  The  study  endpoints  were  changes  in 
fundus  photographs,  angiography,  electroretinograms, 
and  histopathology  of  monkeys  exposed  to  1 .25  GHz 
pulsed  microwaves  at  0, 4.3, 8.4,  and  20.2  W/kg  retinal 
SAR.  The  following  special  considerations  were 
incorporated  into  the  experimental  design: 

1.  Extensive  densitometry  and  dosimetry  were  per¬ 
formed  prior  to  experimentation. 


2.  Transmitter  output  power  was  continuously  mon¬ 
itored  and  recorded. 

3.  Extensive  preexposure  screenings  were  used  to 
ensure  retinal  normality  prior  to  the  acceptance  of 
experimental  subjects  into  the  study. 

4.  All  diagnostic  procedures  were  applied  uniformly 
to  all  subjects  regardless  of  treatment. 

5.  Graded  multiple  retinal  doses  were  used  to 
maximize  the  probability  of  observing  retinal 
changes  caused  by  microwave  exposures. 

6.  Preexposure  baselines  were  used  as  individual 
controls. 

7.  Data  obtained  from  the  exposed  monkeys  were 
compared  with  those  of  sham-exposed  monkeys 
which  were  run  concurrently  with  the  experimen¬ 
tal  monkeys. 

8.  Ketamine  restraint  and  general  anesthesia  were 
not  used  during  exposure. 

9.  A  minimum  of  72  h  recovery  period  was  manda¬ 
tory  between  pre-screenings  and  beginning  of 
exposures. 

10.  Fluorophotometry  was  not  used. 

1 1 .  Exposures  were  randomized. 

12.  All  except  one  (code  keeper)  investigator  were 
blind  to  the  experimental  treatments. 

13.  Long  distance  transportation  was  avoided. 

14.  Experimental  subjects  were  transported  in  a  metal 
cage  with  opaque  plastic  cover  and  in  an  enclosed 
air  conditioned  van.  These  considerations  were 
incorporated  to  ensure  data  quality  and  to  avoid 
introducing  unidentified  confounding  factors  and 
unintentional  biases  by  investigators. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 
Animal  Model 

Seventeen  adult  (six  male,  11  female)  Rhesus 
monkeys  ( Macaca  mulatta,  4.0-9.5  y  old,  4.3-8. 8  kg), 
clinically  healthy,  physical  defect  free,  and  negative 
for  tuberculosis  and  B  virus  (Herpesvirus  simiae,  Cer- 
copithecine  herpesvirus  1)  were  used.  They  were 
housed  individually  in  standard  stainless  steel  primate 
cages  in  air  conditioned  rooms.  Standard  feed  (Monkey 
Diet  #5038,  PMI  Feeds,  Inc.)  and  water  were  available 
ad  libitum.  The  ambient  environment  was  maintained 
at  22  ±  1  °C  and  50-55%  relative  humidity  with  more 
than  10  fresh  air  exchanges  per  hour.  The  photoperiod 
was  12L:12D  (light  was  kept  on  between  0600  and 
1800  hours).  Additionally,  monkeys  were  screened 
against  ocular  abnormalities  by  fundus  photography, 
fluorescein  and  indocyanine  green  angiographies,  and 
electroretinography  (ERG).  An  additional  five  mon¬ 
keys  were  screened  but  not  accepted  due  to  abnormal 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


443 


angiograms  (2),  abnormal  electroretinograms  (2),  or 
hypersensitivity  to  ketamine/xylazine  anesthesia  (1). 

General  Procedures 

Each  monkey  was  subjected  sequentially  to 
procedures  grouped  into  preexposure  ocular  screening, 
chair  acclimation,  microwave/sham  exposure,  post¬ 
exposure  evaluation,  and  euthanization/histopathology 
evaluation.  The  preexposure  screening,  under  keta¬ 
mine/xylazine  or  sodium  pentobarbital  anesthesia, 
included  ERG  evaluation  and  on  a  separate  day, 
funduscopy,  followed  immediately  by  angiography 
performed  by  using  a  scanning  laser  ophthalmoscope 
(SLO).  Chair  acclimation  and  microwave/sham  expo¬ 
sures  were  performed  without  anesthesia  in  an 
anechoic  chamber.  Chair  acclimation  included  place¬ 
ment  of  the  monkeys  in  a  restraining  chair  fabricated 
entirely  from  polyvinyl  chloride  (PVC)  with  head 
restraints  to  limit  head  movements.  Acclimation  was 
gradually  increased  to  four  hours  daily  for  a  minimum 
of  five  days.  A  monkey  was  successfully  acclimated 
when  it  could  sit  quietly  in  the  chair  for  4  h.  Three  to  4 
days  after  the  chair  acclimation,  monkeys  were 
exposed  individually,  4h  daily,  3  days  per  week  for  3 
weeks,  for  a  total  of  nine  exposures.  Two  monkeys 
were  exposed  separately,  one  in  the  morning  (0800- 
1200  hours)  and  one  in  the  afternoon  (1230-1630 
hours).  The  morning  and  afternoon  exposures  were 
selected  randomly  and  mutually  exclusively  from  one 
of  the  four  microwave  doses. 

Twenty-four  hours  after  the  last  of  nine  expo¬ 
sures,  the  monkey  was  subjected  to  postexposure 
evaluations  which  in  sequence  included  ERG,  fundus 
photography,  and  SLO/angiograms.  Immediately  after 
the  last  procedure,  the  animal  was  euthanized  with 
3  ml  (300  mg)  of  sodium  pentobarbital.  Enucleation 
was  performed  immediately  after  the  euthanization. 
Eyeballs  were  slit  at  the  limbus,  immersion  fixed  in 
25%  Kamovsky’s  fixative  (1%  paraformaldehyde  and 
1.25%  glutaraldehyde  in  0.1  M  cacodylate  buffer,  pH 
7.2),  processed,  sectioned  at  2.5  pm  in  glycol  metha¬ 
crylate  block  through  the  disk  and  macula,  and  stained 
with  periodic  acid  Schiff’s  (PAS)  and  Harris’  hema¬ 
toxylin.  The  endpoints  of  this  study  included  fundus 
photographs,  retinal  angiograms,  ERGs  (rod  b-wave 
amplitude  and  implicit  time,  cone  a-  and  b-wave 
amplitudes  and  implicit  time,  mixed  cone  and  rod  a- 
and  b-wave  intensity  response  function,  30  Hz  flicker 
amplitude,  and  summed  scotopic  oscillatory  potential 
amplitudes)  and  retinal  histopathology. 

Microwave  Exposure 

The  pulsed  microwave  radiation  was  generated 
from  an  FPS-7  transmitter  operated  at  1.25  GHz, 


1.04  MW  peak  power,  5.59  ps  pulse  width  at  0,  0.59, 
1.18,  and  2.79  Hz  pulse  repetition  rates.  The  retinal 
specific  absorption  rates  (R-SAR)  were  0,  4.3  ±0.1 
(SD,  n  =  4),  8.4  ±0.3  (SD,  n  =  3),  and  20.2  ±0.4 
(SD,  n  =  5)  W/kg.  The  distance  between  the  frontal 
supra-orbital  ridge  and  the  geometric  center  of  the 
open-end  waveguide  was  7.6  cm.  Initial  testing 
indicated  intolerance  (restlessness  and  rapid  eye 
blinking)  could  occur  within  5  min  at  26  W/kg. 
However,  exposures  up  to  20  W/kg  for  4h  were 
tolerated  by  all  monkeys.  The  warmest  surface 
temperature  (cornea)  never  exceeded  35  °C.  In  fact, 
all  the  exposures  could  only  be  described  as  uneventful 
and  subjects  spent  the  majority  of  time  in  the  exposure 
chamber  sleeping. 

Exposure  Facility 

The  microwave  pulses  were  generated  by  the 
FPS-7  radar  system.  These  microwave  pulses  were 
transmitted  through  a  WR650  waveguide  system  into 
an  anechoic  chamber  (Fig.  1).  An  open-end  WR650 
waveguide  was  used  as  an  antenna  to  provide  vertical  E 
and  horizontal  H  polarizations.  An  E-H  tuner  was 
used  to  minimize  the  mismatch  (13-15  dB  or  more 
down  from  the  forward  power).  The  ambient  tempera¬ 
ture  of  the  anechoic  chamber  was  monitored  con¬ 
tinuously  with  a  telethermometry  system  (YSI  405 
probe  and  Cole-Parmer  Thermistor  Thermometer 
E-08502-14).  An  independent  air  conditioner  unit 
was  used.  For  quality  assurance,  redundant  power 
measurements  were  made  and  recorded  every  15  min. 
All  the  power  measurement  components,  such  as 
directional  couplers,  attenuators,  connectors,  and 
cables  were  individually  and  periodically  calibrated 
and  recorded  with  a  scaler  network  analyzer  (HP 
8757C)  with  matching  detectors  (HP  85025A)  and 
cables.  A  sweep  oscillator  (HP  8350B)  with  an  RF 
plug-in  (HP  83525B),  calibrated  bridge  (HP  85027), 
and  connector  kits  were  used  during  calibration.  All 
the  power  measurement  instruments  were  factory- 
calibrated  annually.  All  temperature  measurement 
devices  were  calibrated  in  a  water  bath  against  an 
NIST  traceable  ASTM  mercury-in-glass  thermometer. 

The  FPS-7  transmitter  produced  trapezoidal 
pulses  with  rise-  and  fall-time  of  approximately 
0.9  ps  and  50%  width  of  6ps.  The  square  wave 
equivalent  pulse  width  calculated  from  pulse  energy 
and  peak  power  was  5.59  ps.  The  width  of  the  entire 
sideband  was  less  than  20  MHz.  Power  densities  at  the 
E-H  plane  and  bore-sight  power  densities  at  various 
distances  from  the  antenna  were  measured  with  a 
Narda  8721  probe  and  8716  meter  positioned  by  a 
triaxial  scanner.  A  continuous  wave  microwave  signal 
was  used  for  field  mapping.  The  configuration  allowed 


444  Lu  et  al. 


Fig.  1.  Block  diagram  of  the  exposure  system. 


localized  exposure  limited  to  head  and  neck  of 
the  monkey  (Fig.  2).  The  spatial  peak-power  density 
was  2.8mW/cm2  per  W  of  transmitted  power.  Care 
in  positioning  the  monkey,  chair  training,  and  head 
immobilization  were  extremely  important  to  obtain  a 
consistent  exposure  at  7.6  cm  from  the  antenna. 

Ocular  Thermometric  Dosimetry 

A  thermometric  dosimetry  procedure  [Gambrill 
et  al.,  1993;  Lu  et  al.,  1993]  with  RF  transparent 
temperature  probes  (Luxtron  3000  Fluoroptic  Thermo¬ 
meter  and  2  Luxtron  MAM-05  probes,  four  sensors 
each  at  5  mm  spacing)  was  used.  The  rate  of  tem¬ 
perature  change  during  dosimetric  exposure  (d77dfeXp> 
40  s)  was  adjusted  by  the  average  of  the  rates 
of  temperature  change  during  preexposure  period 
(d77dJpre,  40  s)  and  postexposure  period  (d77d?post, 
40s)  as  dT/dt  =  dT/dtexp-[(dT/dtprc  +  d77dfpost)/2]. 
The  local  SAR  was  calculated  by  the  following 
formula  using  average  specific  heat  of  tissue 
(C  =  3474  J/kg)  and  SAR  (W/kg)  =  C  •  dT/dt  Four 
replications  were  performed  for  each  local  SAR 
determination.  The  SAR  data  were  normalized  to 


W/kg  per  W  of  transmitted  power.  For  ocular  dosi¬ 
metry,  the  FPS-7  transmitter  was  operated  nominally  at 
1  MW  peak  power,  6  ps  pulse  width,  17.5  Hz  pulse  re¬ 
petition  rate,  and  80-100  W  average  transmitter  output. 

Two  6  year  old  female  monkey  carcasses  (4.5  and 
4.9  kg)  were  used.  A  fistula  was  created  surgically  in 
each  of  four  quadrants  of  ocular  globe — superior,  oral, 
nasal,  and  temporal — through  the  eyelids  (Fig.  3). 
Fiber  optic  temperature  probes  were  inserted  along  the 
outer  contour  of  the  ocular  globe,  so  as  not  to  penetrate 
the  eye  wall,  until  the  last  sensor  of  the  probe  was 
resting  near  and  slightly  deeper  than  the  limbus.  The 
current  procedure  represents  a  retinal  SAR  rather  than 
an  intraocular  SAR  since  only  a  thin  layer  of 
conjunctiva  and  sclera  separated  the  probe  and  the 
retina.  Sixteen  retinal  SARs  per  globe  and  32  retinal 
SARs  per  carcass  were  determined. 

Electroretinogram 

Electroretinograms  (ERG)  were  used  as  preex¬ 
posure  screening  criteria  (3-4  weeks  before  exposure) 
for  ocular  health  and  as  a  postexposure  endpoint  (24  h 
after  the  last  exposure).  An  Electrophysiologic  Perso- 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


445 


Contour  I  Ine  ur  It  In  dB 


Fig.  2.  Power  density  contourof  the  exposure  system  at  7.6  cm.The  image  in  the  center  of  this  graph 
shows  the  position  of  the  monkey  and  relative  size  between  the  field  and  the  monkey. 


tions. 


nal  Interfaced  Computer  System  (LKC  Technologies, 
Inc.,  EPIC-2000)  was  used.  The  monkey  was  anesthe¬ 
tized  with  ketamine  (20  mg/kg,  i.m.)  and  xylazine 
(2  mg/kg,  i.m.).  Two  to  three  drops  of  0.5%  propar- 
acain  hydrochloride  ophthalmic  solution,  1%  tropica- 
mide  ophthalmic  solution,  and  2.5%  phenylephrine 
hydrochloride  ophthalmic  solution  were  instilled  into 
the  conjunctiva  pouch  for  corneal  analgesia  and 
dilation  of  the  iris.  Ground  (attached  to  inner  surface 
of  the  leg),  indifferent  (attached  to  forehead  skin 
surface),  and  active  (ERG-Jet  contact  lens,  Life-Tech, 
Inc.  attached  to  corneal  surface)  electrodes  were  used. 
The  Jet  electrode  was  filled  with  2.5%  hydroxypropyl 
methylcellulose  ophthalmic  demulcent  solution  (Goni- 
sol)  and  then  attached  to  the  corneal  surface.  The  eyes 
were  dark-adapted  (scotopic  adaptation)  in  a  shielded 


446 


Lu  et  al. 


dark  room  for  30  min.  The  ERG  was  recorded  after 
scotopic  adaptation. 

In  sequence,  the  scotopic  intensity  response 
curve,  scotopic  30  Hz  flicker  responses,  and  photopic 
responses  were  obtained.  The  intensity  (luminance) 
of  the  light  flashes  was  expressed  in  dB  to  the  base 
of  2.23  cd-s/m2  (candela-seconds  per  meter  squared). 
The  light  intensities  used  in  determining  scotopic 
intensity  response  curves  were  between  —40.46  and 
24.28  dB  in  2-4  dB  steps.  The  30  Hz  flicker  stimulus 
consisted  of  photic  pulses  at  2.23  cd-s/m2  (OdB). 
Background  illumination  for  the  photopic  response 
was  28.8  cd/m2  and  a  2.23  cd-s/m2  (OdB)  photic 
pulse  was  used.  The  above  tests  were  in  accordance 
with  the  ISCEV  recommendations  [International 
Standardization  Committee,  1989;  Marmor  and  Zren- 
ner,  1995]  for  “rod  response”,  “maximum  response”, 
and  “cone  response.”  The  relationship  between  the 
ERG  b-wave  amplitude,  R  (in  pV),  and  stimulus 
intensity,  I  (in  cd-s/m2),  was  given  by  Naka  and 
Rushton  [1966]  as  follows: 

R{I)  __  I" 

Rmax  ~~  /"  +  K" 


where  Rmax  is  the  asymptotic  amplitude  of  the  b-wave 
(in  pV),  K is  the  intensity  at  which  b-wave  amplitude  is 
half  of  its  asymptotic  value  (in  cd-s/m2),  and  n 
determines  the  slope  of  the  function  at  1  —  K.  Rimx 
and  log  K  can  provide  additional  insights  into  the 
pathophysiologic  mechanisms  underlying  retinal  dis¬ 
ease  [Massof  et  al.,  1984;  Peachey  et  al.,  1992],  The 
b-wave  intensity  response  data  were  used  to  derive 
Naka-Rushton  constants  according  to  the  method 
developed  by  Severns  and  Johnson  [1993].  Gonisol 
was  washed  out  with  0.9%  normal  saline  after  the 
completion  of  ERG  test  procedures. 

Fundus  Photography,  Fluorescein  Angiography 
(FA)  and  Indocyanine  Green  Angiography 
(ICG) 

These  procedures  were  used  both  as  preexposure 
screening  for  ocular  health  and  as  postexposure 
endpoints.  Preexposure  screening  was  performed 
independently  of  the  ERG  evaluation,  and  usually 
performed  at  least  4  days  before  the  commencement  of 
the  microwave  exposures.  The  postexposure  endpoint 
studies  were  performed  24  h  after  the  last  sham/ 
microwave  exposures  and  after  the  ERG  procedures. 
Monkeys  were  anesthetized  with  ketamine  (20  mg/kg, 
i.m.)  and  xylazine  (2  mg/kg,  i.m.)  initially  and  then 
anesthetized  with  sodium  pentobarbital  (10-20  mg/kg, 


i.v.)  through  the  cannula  and  supplemented  when 
needed.  Two  to  3  drops  of  0.5%  Proparacain  hydro¬ 
chloride  ophthalmic  solution,  1%  Tropicamide 
ophthalmic  solution,  and  2.5%  Phenylephrine  hydro¬ 
chloride  ophthalmic  solution  were  instilled  into  the 
conjunctival  pouch  for  inducing  cycloplegia  and 
mydriasis.  To  reduce  the  incidence  of  postinjection 
emesis,  acepromazine  maleate  (0.5 -1.0  mg/kg,  i.v.) 
was  administered  approximately  15  min  before  dye 
injections  (Fluorescein  and  Indocyanine  Green).  The 
eyelids  were  held  open  by  an  ophthalmic  speculum, 
and  the  cornea  was  irrigated  frequently  with  0.9% 
normal  saline  to  prevent  drying.  A  fundus  camera  and 
scanning  laser  ophthalmoscope  (Rodenstock)  were 
used.  Fundus  photographs  were  taken  as  Polaroid 
prints  and  slides  for  permanent  records.  FA  was 
accomplished  with  intravenous  injection  of  a  0.2  ml 
bolus  of  10%  sodium  fluorescein  (Alcon  Labs.,  Inc.) 
and  repeated  up  to  1  ml.  ICG  was  accomplished  by 
intravenous  injection  of  a  0. 1  ml  bolus  of  indocyanine 
green  (Becton  Dickinson  and  Company).  Each  bolus 
of  dye  injection  was  followed  by  1  ml  of  0.9%  normal 
saline  flush.  The  FA  and  ICG  images  were  recorded  by 
a  video  recorder  so  that  permanent  records  could  be 
maintained  and  reviewed. 

Euthanization  and  Retinal  Histopathology 

Immediately  after  the  completion  of  postexpo¬ 
sure  FA/ICG  angiograms,  the  monkeys  were  eutha¬ 
nized  with  intravenous  sodium  pentobarbital  (3  ml, 
300  mg)  until  the  heart  beats  stopped.  Bilateral 
enucleation  was  performed  immediately.  The  extir¬ 
pated  eyes  were  slit  at  the  limbus  and  immersed  in  the 
1/4  strength  Karnovsky’s  fixative  (1%  paraformalde¬ 
hyde  and  1.25%  glutaraldehyde)  in  0.1  M  cacodylate 
buffer,  pH  7.2  at  room  temperature  for  15  min.  After 
the  initial  fixation,  the  anterior  segments  were  removed 
and  the  tissue  was  returned  to  fixative.  The  ocular 
tissue  in  1/4  strength  Karnovsky’s  fixative  was  sent  to 
the  ocular  histology  laboratory  at  Wilmer  Eye 
Institute,  Johns  Hopkins  University,  and  stored  refri¬ 
gerated  at  4°C  until  processing. 

Following  several  washes  in  0.1  M  cacodylate 
buffer,  pH  7.4,  at  4°C,  the  posterior  eyecups  were 
dehydrated  in  graded  alcohols  (30,  50,  70,  80,  90,  95, 
and  95%  v/v)  for  30  min  each  on  a  rotator  at  room 
temperature.  Tissues  were  trimmed  during  the  70% 
alcohol  step  to  approximately  6x8  mm,  which 
included  the  disk  and  macular  region  of  the  posterior 
pole.  The  6  mm  dimension  was  along  the  inferior  to 
superior  plane,  while  the  8  mm  dimension  was  along 
the  temporal  plane  extending  from  the  nasal  aspect  of 
the  nerve  head.  Trimmed  tissues  were  imaged  by  using 
a  calibrated  macroscopic  setup  which  included  goose- 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


447 


neck  fiber  optic  lighting,  and  a  Hamamatsu  CCD 
camera  with  a  50  mm  lens  and  20  mm  extension  tube. 
Dehydration  was  then  allowed  to  continue.  The 
remaining  peripheral  tissue  not  embedded  for  histo- 
pathological  evaluation  was  stored  in  70%  alcohol  at 
4°C. 

Following  the  second  95%  alcohol  dehydration 
step,  the  tissue  was  infiltrated  overnight  at  room 
temperature  in  catalyzed  glycol  methacrylate  polymer 
(catalyzed  JB-4  solution  A,  Polysciences,  Inc.).  The 
infiltrate  was  replaced  with  freshly  prepared  catalyzed 
JB-4  solution  A  in  the  following  morning  and 
infiltration  was  resumed  for  three  additional  hours. 

Tissues  were  then  embedded  in  24  mm  Wheaton 
snap  cap  vial  lids  which  had  prepoured  bottoms  from 
the  previous  day,  and  the  blocks  were  polymerized 
under  vacuum.  The  blocks  were  trimmed  so  that  the 
macular  and  disk  regions  were  approached  from  the 
inferior  region  of  each  eye  and  would  be  included  in 
the  same  plane.  Blocks  were  faced  until  complete 
sections  of  full  thickness  eyewall  were  obtained.  At 
that  time,  four  slides  containing  three  sections  each 
(2.5  pm  in  thickness)  were  collected  and  dried  on  a 
slide  warmer.  The  process  (collecting  four  slides  con¬ 
taining  three  sections  each)  was  repeated  at  250  pm 
steps  until  the  foveal  slope  was  reached  by  which  time 
eight  slides  (24  serial  sections)  were  collected.  The 
blocks  were  then  sealed  with  clear  nail  polish  and 
desiccated  at  room  temperature  for  archival  storage. 

Slides  were  stained  by  using  PAS  and  Harris’ 
hematoxylin  several  days  after  complete  drying.  One 
slide  from  the  first  collection  step  of  each  eye  was  used 


to  verify  proper  timing  of  the  staining  procedure  prior 
to  staining  the  remaining  slides.  Two  hours  in  1% 
periodic  acid  followed  by  several  distilled  water  rinses 
and  2h  in  Schiff’s  reagent  yielded  satisfactory  results. 
The  sections  were  counter-stained  for  30  min  in  freshly 
filtered  Harris’  hematoxylin.  The  hematoxylin  was 
blued  in  tap  water  for  2  h.  After  the  staining,  the  slides 
were  allowed  to  dry  overnight  before  mounting.  Two 
slides  each  from  250  pm  step  up  to  the  fovea  and  four 
slides  each  within  the  fovea  were  stained  and  evaluated 
histologically. 

RESULTS 

Dosimetry 

Microwave  energy  deposition  was  not  uniform  at 
various  locations  surrounding  the  eyes  of  the  monkeys. 
The  R-SAR,  expressed  in  W/kg  per  W  of  transmitted 
power,  is  shown  in  Figures  4  and  5  for  two  animals. 
Retinal  absorption  was  clearly  altered  by  the  anato¬ 
mical  structures  surrounding  the  eyes.  In  monkey 
A35Z,  the  supraorbital  ridge  shadowed  the  retinal 
tissue  and  resulted  in  a  lower  superficial  R-SAR  in 
both  eyes  in  the  superior  quadrants  at  0  and  0.5  cm 
(Fig.  4).  At  the  same  time,  maximum  absorption  oc¬ 
curred  at  the  surface  of  the  nasal  quadrants.  The  nasal 
absorption  “hot  spot”  was  confirmed  by  comparing 
thermographic  images  taken  before  and  after  a  2  min 
exposure  (data  not  included).  The  shadowing  effect  of 
the  supraorbital  ridge  was  not  as  readily  apparent  in 
monkey  A47Z  (Fig.  5).  The  ratio  of  the  warmest  spot  to 


A35Z,  Female,  6  years,  4.45  kg 


A35Z-SUM.SPG 


Fig.  4.  Retinal  SAR of  A35Z. 


448  Lu  et  al. 


Fig.  5.  Retinal  SAR  of  A47Z. 

TABLE  2.  Summary  of  the  Retinal  Dosimetry  in  the  Monkeys 


Monkey  number 

Right  globe 

Left  globe 

A35Z 

1.3  ±0.6  ( 1 6)a 

1.1  ±0.4  (16) 

A47Z 

1.3  ±0.4  (16) 

1.3  ±0.7  (16) 

Mean 

1.25  ±0.10  (4) 

“Values  are  mean  SAR  ±  SD  (n)  in  W/kg  per  W  net  power. 


the  coldest  spot  was  2.3-5. 1  in  four  eyes  of  two 
animals.  While  the  R-SAR  spatial  distribution  did  not 
vary  uniformly  between  eyes  or  between  monkeys,  the 
mean  R-SAR  over  the  entire  ocular  globe  was 
relatively  constant  between  the  two  eyes  or  between 
animals  (Table  2).  In  fact,  the  largest  ratio  between  the 
mean  R-SAR  of  four  eyes  was  1.2.  Therefore,  the 
averaged  R-SAR  but  not  local  R-SAR  could  be 
predicted  accurately  in  the  present  exposure  system. 

Funduscopy 

Regardless  of  the  exposure  group,  pre-  and 
postexposure  fundus  pictures  were  all  within  normal 
limits.  Scarring,  tearing,  edema,  hemorrhage,  vascular 
occlusion,  vascular  torturous,  abnormal  pigmentation, 
discolored  patch,  streaks,  or  holes  were  not  noted. 
Representative  fundus  pictures  of  the  four  experimen¬ 
tal  groups  are  shown  in  Figure  6. 

Angiography 

The  pre-  and  post  angiographies  were  all  within 
normal  limits  regardless  of  the  treatment. 

Electroretinogram 

An  example  of  the  scotopic  response -luminance 
relationship  is  shown  in  Figure  7.  The  figure  illustrates 
the  luminance  dependent  appearance  and  amplitude  of 


a-wave  (negative  deflection)  and  b-wave  (positive 
inflection).  Wavelets  (oscillatory  potentials)  were  also 
noted  in  the  majority  of  traces  at  the  ascending  portion 
of  the  b-wave.  The  a-wave  amplitude  increased 
monotonically  with  luminance  above  the  threshold 
(Fig.  8),  while  the  b-wave  amplitude-luminance 
relationship  was  composed  of  at  least  two  limbs  with 
plateaus  or  dips  at  the  intermediate  and  intense  flash 
intensity.  The  first  limb  of  the  amplitude-luminance 
curve  was  fitted  with  a  sigmoid  Naka-Rushton  function 
for  evaluation  of  Rmax  and  log  K  as  indicated  in  the 
Materials  and  Methods  section. 

Other  endpoints  examined  were  “rod”  response 
(3.47  x  1(T3  cd-s/m2  light  flash),  “maximum”  re¬ 
sponse  (combined  rod  and  cone  response,  2.23  cd-s/m2 
light  flash),  30  Hz  flicker  response  (2.23  cd-s/m2  light 
flashes  at  30  Hz),  and  “cone”  response  (response  to 
2.23  cd-s/m2  light  flash  in  the  28.8  cd/m2  light-adapted 
eye).  Specifically,  the  following  endpoints  were 
evaluated:  b-wave  amplitude  and  implicit  time  of  the 
rod  response,  a-wave  amplitude  and  implicit  time  of 
the  maximum  response,  b-wave  amplitude  and  implicit 
time  of  the  maximum  response,  oscillatory  potential  of 
the  maximum  response,  amplitude  of  the  30  Hz  flicker 
response,  a-wave  amplitude  and  implicit  time  of  the 
cone  response,  and  b-wave  amplitude  and  implicit  time 
of  the  cone  response.  Of  these  16  endpoints  examined, 
only  isolated  changes  were  noted.  These  changes  were: 
accelerated  combined  b-wave  implicit  time  at  8.4  W/ 
kg  but  not  at  4.3  and  20.2  W/kg  (Fig.  9),  and  increased 
cone  b-wave  amplitudes  in  the  8.4  and  20.2  W/kg 
groups  (Fig.  10). 

Histopathology 

Other  than  an  increase  of  the  PAS  staining  (Fig. 
11),  all  retinal  histopathology  was  within  normal 
limits.  The  occurrence  rate  of  PAS-positive  retinas  is 
indicated  in  Table  3. 

DISCUSSION 

Rather  than  retinal  degeneration,  enhanced  ERG 
amplitude  and  a  possible  alteration  in  photoreceptor’s 
glycogen  store  were  noted  in  the  present  study. 
Enhanced  ERG  amplitudes  can  be  caused  by  low-dose 
retinal  toxins  or  metabolic  inhibitors  [Noell,  1958]. 
The  ERG  enhancement  can  occur  prior  to  the 
appearance  of  retinal  degeneration  observed  later  as 
ophthalmoscopic  and  histological  changes,  depressed 
ERG  amplitudes,  and  delayed  appearances  of  a-  and 
b-waves.  Agents  known  to  cause  transient  enhance¬ 
ment  of  ERG  amplitude  are  sodium  azide,  trichlor¬ 
oethylene,  sodium  pentobarbital  [Noell,  1958], 
hyperbaric  oxygen  [Ray  and  Hawgood,  1977],  ische- 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


449 


Representative  Fundus  Images 


1. 892ZOD30Jul97.tif  2.892ZOD21Aug97.tif  3.B14ZOD6May97.tif  4.B14ZOD30May97.tif 

SHAMPRE  SHAM  POST  4.42W/kgPRE  4.42  W/kg  POST 


5. 929ZOD1Jul97.tif  6.929ZOD24Jul97.tif  7.A72ZOD30Jul97.tif  8.A72ZOD21Aig97.tif 

8.14  W/kg  PRE  8.14  W/kg  POST  20.0  W/kg  PRE  20.0  W/kg  POST 

Fig.  6.  Representative  fundus  images.  Images  from  left  to  right  on  the  top  row  are  sham  preexpo¬ 
sure,  sham  postexposure,  4.4  W/kg  preexposure  and  4.4  W/kg  postexposure.  Images  on  the  bottom 
row  are  8.1  W/kg  preexposure,  8.1  W/kg  postexposure,  20.0  W/kg  preexposure,  20.0  W/kg  postexpo- 
sure.The  monkey  numbers  are  thefirst  four  letters  of  the  file  name. 


mia  [Brunette  et  al.,  1986],  sodium  iodate  [Adachi- 
Usame  et  al.,  1992;  Hosoda  et  al.,  1993;  Sugimoto 
et  al.,  1996],  and  in  siderosis  caused  by  intraocular 
metal  particles  [Knave,  1969].  Because  of  the  correla¬ 
tion  between  enhanced  ERG  amplitude  and  the 
presence  of  reduced  or  extinct  visual  evoked  poten¬ 
tials,  ERG  amplitude  enhancement  was  hypothesized 
to  result  from  abolition  of  a  physiologic  rivalry 
between  photoreceptor’s  increasing  sensitivity  in  the 
dark  and  inhibitory  cerebral  influence  upon  retinal 
activity  exerted  via  efferent  fibers  in  the  optic  nerve 
[Feinsod  et  al.,  1971a;  1971b].  Enhanced  ERG 
amplitudes  in  isolated  retina  in  vitro  could  be  achieved 
pharmacologically  by  dopaminergic  antagonists  (halo- 
peridol  and  chlorpromazine),  anticholinergic  drug 
(atropine),  and  monoamine  uptake  inhibitor  (amitrip¬ 
tyline)  [Nakagawa  et  al.,  1988]  or  in  vivo  in  rabbits 
after  dopamine  depletion  by  intravitreal  injection  of  6- 
hydroxydopamine  [Olivier  et  al.,  1987]. 

Dopamine  has  been  shown  in  rabbits  to  be 
synthesized  and  degraded  in  a  subset  of  amacrine 


(interamacrine)  cells  located  at  the  junction  of  the 
inner  plexiform  and  inner  nuclear  layers  [Dowling  and 
Ehinger,  1978],  Therefore,  enhanced  ERG  amplitude 
is  a  physiological  event  most  likely  originating  in  inner 
retina  or  optic  nerve.  Thus,  it  is  not  surprising  to  find 
enhanced  ERG  amplitudes  in  the  absence  of  identifi¬ 
able  histopathological  change  in  photoreceptors. 
Our  data  indicate  that  microwave  exposure  can  alter 
retinal  physiology,  however,  under  the  conditions 
of  our  experiment,  it  appears  that  the  functional 
changes  had  not  progressed  to  degeneration,  injury, 
or  inflammation. 

The  PAS  stain  is  used  histologically  for  identify¬ 
ing  the  presence  of  glycogen,  mucin,  and  basement 
membrane.  In  human  and  monkey  retina,  glycogen  is 
found  in  the  inner  layers  of  the  retina  from  the  nerve 
fiber  to  the  outer  plexiform  layer,  in  Muller’s  cells,  and 
in  cone  but  not  rod  photoreceptors  [Mizuno  and  Sato, 
1975].  In  reaction  to  anoxic  or  ischemic  condition,  the 
retina  manifests  injury  first  by  a  reduction  or  depletion 
of  glycogen  storage,  followed  by  impaired  function 


450  Lu  et  al. 


B57Z.  DARK  ADAPTED.  O.D..  10/04/96 


Flash  onset 


Fig.  7.  An  example  of  electroretinographic  response- luminance 
relationship  of  a  dark-adapted  right  eye  (O.D.)  of  a  monkey.  Data 
shown  are  preexposure  baselines.  The  flash  intensity  is  indicated 
in  log  unit  in  numerals.  Each  trace  is  offset  vertically  to  avoid  over¬ 
lapping,  and  horizontally  to  the  beginning  of  the  light  flash. 
Abscissa  is  time  while  ordinate  is  the  recorded  voltage. 


B57  z  10/04/96 


-4-3-2-10  1  2  3 


LOG  LUMINANCE  (cd-s/m2) 


Fig.  8.  The  ERG  amplitudes  and  flash  luminance  curve.  Data  are 
from  the  preexposure  baseline  from  the  same  monkey  in  Figure  7. 
The  solid  line  of  the  first  segment  within  O.D.  (right  eye)  or  O.S.  (left 
eye)  is  a  sigmoid  curve  fitted  with  Naka-Rushton  function.  For 
details,  see  Materials  and  Methods. 


(reduction  in  ERG  amplitudes),  and  finally  by  tissue 
damage  (e.g.,  mitochondria]  swelling  or  vacuolization 
observed  by  light  microscope)  [Ames  and  Gurian, 
1963;  Ames,  1965;  Wassilewa  et  al.,  1976;  Johnson, 
1977]. 


Retinol  SAR  (W/kg) 


Fig.  9.  Effect  of  Microwave  exposure  on  combined  rod  and  cone  b- 
wave  implicit  time.  Data  shown  is  the  ratio  of  postexposure  implicit 
to  preexposure  implicit  time.  Error  bars  are  S.E.  Arrow  head  indi¬ 
cates  the  direction  of  change  in  relation  to  endpoints  of  sham- 
exposed  animals. 


CONE  RESPONSE.  b-WAVE 


Fig.  10.  Effect  of  microwave  exposure  on  cone-b-wave  responses. 
For  description,  see  Fig.  9. 


It  is  known  that  the  retinas  of  alloxan-diabetic 
rats  showed  increased  glycogen  synthesis  in  vitro 
[Kurimoto  et  al.,  1965].  Compensatory  glycogen 
accumulation  in  retina  was  noted  in  various  species 
of  animals  in  response  to  hypoxia  [Kuwabara,  1965; 
Antal,  1979;  Schuschereba  et  al.,  1983].  However, 
compensatory  glycogen  accumulation  occurs  primar¬ 
ily  in  Muller  cells,  not  in  cone  photoreceptors.  In 
contrast  to  glycogen  depletion,  increased  glycogen 
content  in  cone  photoreceptors  has  not  been  reported 
as  a  marker  for  subsequent  events  leading  to  photo¬ 
receptor  degeneration.  In  absence  of  ERG  depression, 
histopathological  changes,  and  a  correlation  between 
an  increase  in  PAS  staining  and  enhanced  ERG 
amplitude,  the  alteration  in  PAS  reactivity  we  observed 
could  only  point  to  a  physiological  condition  instead  of 
a  pathological  state. 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


451 


B87Z,  OD,  sham,  PAS  (-)  B71Z,  OD,  sham,  PAS  (+) 

Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments  Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


B61Z,  OD,  8  W/kg,  PAS  (+)  B59Z,  OD,  4  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 

Normal  outer  segments  Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


B20Z,  OD,  20  W/kg,  PAS  (-)  B63Z,  OD,  20  W/kg,  PAS  (+) 

Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments  Normal  outer  segments 

Fig.  11.  PAS  enhancement.  These  are  representative  photomicrographs  from  monkeys.  Both  PAS 
negative  (left  column)  and  positive  (right  column)  are  included.  Microwave  treatments  and  com¬ 
ments  on  morphology  of  outer  segments  are  also  included. 


452  Lu  et  al. 


TABLE  3.  Occurrence  Rate  of  the  PAS  Positive  Retinas 


SAR 

(W/kg) 

Number  of  eyes  with 
enhanced  PAS 

Number  of  eyes 
examined 

0 

2 

5 

4.3 

0 

4  ' 

8.4 

3 

3 

20.2 

2 

5 

Based  on  the  results  of  clinical  morphology, 
histopathology,  and  electroretinogram,  retinal  degen¬ 
eration  was  not  found  in  the  present  study.  These 
findings  are  in  contrast  to  the  findings  of  Kues  and 
colleagues  as  reviewed  in  the  Introduction.  Two  of  the 
procedures  used  by  Kues  were  avoided  in  the  present 
experiment.  They  are  fluorophotometry  and  the  use  of 
ketamine  as  a  chemical  restraint  for  taking  monkeys  in 
and  out  of  the  restraint  chair.  One  of  the  major  issues  in 
Kues’  report  concerned  the  incidence  of  retinal 
degeneration  in  microwave-exposed  monkeys.  Two 
final  reports  authored  by  Kues  [1992;  1993]  provided 
enough  details  to  allow  us  to  examine  the  incidence  of 
retinal  degeneration  in  15  monkeys  used  in  his 
experiments  to  identify  retinal  injuries  caused  by  the 
1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwave  exposures. 

Of  these  15  monkeys,  one  was  not  sacrificed  for 
morphological  study.  Of  the  remaining  14  monkeys, 
nine  were  subjected  to  fluorophotometry  (seven 
exposed,  two  shams)  and  five  were  not  (four  exposed, 
one  sham).  Retinal  injuries  were  identified  in  five 
monkeys  (four  exposed,  one  eye  of  a  sham-exposed) 
and  fluorophotometry  was  performed  in  all  five. 
Regardless  of  microwave  treatments,  retinal  histo- 
pathologies  were  within  normal  limits  in  monkeys  not 
subjected  to  fluorophotometry. 

In  fluorophotometry,  halothane  anesthesia  (2.5%, 
97.5%  oxygen),  and  0.3  ml  of  10%  sodium  fluorescein 
were  used.  Halothane  as  an  inhalation  anesthetic  is 
known  to  inhibit  respiration  at  any  concentration  and 
to  reduce  systemic  arterial  pressure,  cardiac  contractile 
force,  cardiac  output,  and  total  peripheral  resistance.  It 
is  known  that  anoxia  and  ischemia  can  induce 
irreversible  retinal  damages  in  20-30  min  [Noell, 
1958;  Anderson  and  Davis,  1975;  Johnson,  1977]. 
With  an  increased  oxygen  concentration  in  the  inhaled 
gas  mixture,  hypoxia  could  be  relieved.  However,  the 
retina  is  also  prone  to  injury  by  increased  oxygen 
tension  under  hyperbaric  condition  or  by  increased 
oxygen  concentration  under  normobaric  condition. 
Visual  cell  death  can  occur  during  prolonged  exposure 
to  increased  oxygen  concentration  [Noell,  1958; 
Beehler,  1964;  Penn  and  Thum,  1989;  Nichols  and 
Lambertsen,  1969].  Hochheimer  et  al.  [1987]  demon¬ 


strated  that  intravenous  administration  of  1  ml  of  25% 
sodium  fluorescein  (a  higher  dose  than  that  used  by 
Kues)  in  rabbits  could  reduce  the  amount  of  blue  light 
needed  to  induce  a  phototoxic  retinal  lesion  by  almost 
a  log  unit  (1.6-0. 2  W/cm2).  In  other  words,  a  host  of 
retinotoxic  agents  can  be  present  during  fluorophoto¬ 
metry  if  adequate  care  is  not  exercised. 

Upon  repetitive  administration,  animals  are 
known  to  quickly  build  up  resistance  to  ketamine 
[Cumming,  1976;  Livingston  and  Waterman,  1978].  It 
is  likely  that  the  ketamine  dose  would  have  been 
increased  to  achieve  the  same  restraint  effect  in 
monkeys  in  Kues’  experiments.  High  doses  of 
ketamine  are  known  to  cause  retinal  ultrastructural 
changes  within  one  hour  after  30  mg/kg  [Antal,  1979], 
or  a  transient  loss  of  vision  for  25-30  min  in  humans 
after  regaining  full  consciousness  from  i.m.  or  i.v. 
ketamine  monoanesthesia  at  1.5-2. 6  mg/kg. 

In  summary,  the  original  observation  by  Kues  and 
colleagues  on  the  retina’s  susceptibility  to  microwave 
injury  (four  out  of  1 1  monkeys  exposed  at  4  W/kg)  was 
not  confirmed  by  the  results  obtained  in  the  present 
study  (0  out  of  12  monkeys  at  4-20 W/kg).  The 
fluorophotometric  procedure  and  repetitive  use  of 
ketamine  may  have  predisposed  the  monkeys  to  retinal 
injuries. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Technical  assistance  was  provided  by  Michael 
Belt,  Don  Hatcher,  David  D.  Cox  (U.S.  Navy),  Frank 
Weathersby,  Kevin  Kosub  (Veridian),  Cary  Richardson 
(Geocenter),  Steve  T.  Schuschereba,  Andre  Akers, 
SSgt.  Sally  Ruiz,  SSgt.  Janis  Loveday  (U.S.  Army), 
TSgt.  Leland  Johnson,  TSgt.  Maurice  Tate,  SSgt. 
Vincent  Zavala,  SSgt.  David  Hernandez,  SrA.  Jason 
Cochetti  and  SrA.  Mike  Lilly  (U.S.  Air  Force).  The 
investigators  adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the  Care  and 
Use  of  Laboratory  Animals”  for  the  use  of  laboratory 
animals. 

REFERENCES 

Adachi-Usatni  E,  Mizota  A,  Ikeda  H,  Hanawa  T,  Kimura  T.  1992. 
Transient  increase  of  b-wave  in  the  mouse  retina  after 
sodium  iodate  injection.  Invest  Ophthalmol  Visual  Sci 
33:3109-3113. 

Ames  A  III.  1965.  Studies  of  morphology,  chemistry  and  function 
in  isolated  retina.  In:  Graymore  CN,  editor.  Biochemistry  of 
the  Retina.  New  York:  Academic  Press,  p  22-30. 

Ames  A  III,  Gurian  BS.  1963.  Effects  of  glucose  and  oxygen 
deprivation  on  function  of  isolated  mammalian  retina. 
J  Neurophysiol  26:617-634. 

Anderson  DR,  Davis  EB.  1975.  Sensitivities  of  ocular  tissues 
to  acute  pressure-induced  ischemia.  Arch  Ophthalmol  93: 
267-274. 


Microwave  Retinal  Effects 


453 


Antal  M.  1979.  Ketamine-induced  ultrastructural  changes  in  the 
retina.  Albrecht  v.  Graefes  Arch  Klin  Exp  Ophthal  210: 
43-53. 

Beehler  CC,  Newton  NL,  Culver  JF,  Tredici  T.  1964.  Retinal 
detachment  in  adult  dogs  resulting  from  oxygen  toxicity. 
Arch  Ophthalmol  71:665-670. 

Brunette  JR,  Olivier  P,  Zaharia  M,  Blondeau  P,  Lafond  G.  1986. 
Rod-cone  differences  in  response  to  retinal  ischemia  in 
rabbit.  Doc  Ophthal  63:359-365. 

Carpenter  R.  1979.  Ocular  effects  of  microwave  radiation.  Bull  NY 
Acad  Sci  55:1048-1057. 

Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Jacobi  JH,  Sanwal 
M,  Baskerville  JC,  Bassen  HE,  Brown  DO,  Trevithick  JR. 
1987.  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract.  II. 
Comparison  of  damage  observed  for  continuous  wave  and 
pulsed  microwaves.  Exp  Eye  Res  45:233-246. 

Cumming  JF.  1976.  The  development  of  an  acute  tolerance  to 
ketamine.  Anesth  Analg  55:788-791. 

Dowling  JE,  Ehinger  B.  1978.  Synaptic  organization  of  the 
dopaminergic  neurons  in  the  rabbit  retina.  J  Comp  Neurol 
180:203-220. 

Feinsod  M,  Rowe  H,  Auerbach  E.  1971a.  Changes  in  the 
electroretinogram  in  patients  with  optic  nerve  lesions.  Doc 
Ophthal  29:169-200. 

Feinsod  M,  Rowe  H,  Auerbach  E.  1971b.  Enhanced  retinal 
responses  without  signs  of  optic  nerve  involvement.  Doc 
Ophthal  29:201-211. 

Gambrill  CS,  DeAngelis  ML,  Lu  S-T.  1993.  Error  analysis  of  a 
thermometric  microwave-dosimetry  procedure.  In:  Blank 
M,  editor.  Electricity  and  magnetism  in  biology  and 
medicine.  San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press,  p  593-595. 

Guy  AW,  Lin  JC,  Kramar  PO,  Emery  AF.  1975.  Effect  of 
2450  MHz  radiation  on  the  rabbit  eye.  IEEE  Trans 
Microwave  Theory  Tech  23:492-498. 

Hochheimer  BF,  Lutty  GA,  D’Anna  SA.  1987.  Ocular  fluorescein 
phototoxicity.  Appl  Optics  26:1473-1479. 

Hosoda  L,  Adachi-Usami  E,  Mizota  A,  Hanawa  T,  Kimura  T.  1993. 
Early  effects  of  sodium  iodate  injection  on  ERG  in  mice. 
Acta  Ophthalmol  71:616-622. 

IEEE  (Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers,  Inc.). 
1999.  IEEE  standard  for  safety  levels  with  respect  to  human 
exposure  to  radio  frequency  electromagnetic  fields,  3  kHz  to 
300  GHz.  New  York:  The  Institute  of  Electrical  and 
Electronic  Engineers,  Inc. 

International  Standardization  Committee.  1989.  Standard  for 
clinical  electroretinography.  Arch  Ophthalmol  107: 
816-819. 

Johnson  NF.  1977.  Retinal  glycogen  content  during  ischaemia. 
Albrecht  v.  Graefes  Arch  Klin  Exp  Ophthal  203: 
271-282. 

Knave  B.  1969.  Electroretinography  in  eyes  with  retained  intra¬ 
ocular  metallic  foreign  bodies.  Acta  Ophthalmol  Supple¬ 
ment  100:1-63. 

Kues  H.  1992.  Effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  human.  Monkeys 
exposed  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves.  Defense  Technical 
Information  Center,  ADA249997. 

Kues  HA.  1993.  High  peak  power  microwaves:  a  health  hazard. 
Defense  Technical  Information  Center,  ADA277168. 

Kues  HA,  Hirst  LW,  Lutty  GA,  D’Anna  SA,  Dunkelberger  GR. 
1985.  Effects  of  2.45-GHz  microwaves  on  primate  corneal 
endothelium.  Bioelectromagnetics  6: 177- 1 88. 

Kues  HA,  Monahan  JC.  1992.  Microwave-induced  changes  to 
the  primate  eye.  Johns  Hopkins  APL  Tech  Dig  13: 
244-255. 


Kues  HA,  Monhan  JC,  D’Anna  SA,  McLeod  DS,  Lutty  GA, 
Koslow  S.  1992.  Increased  sensitivity  of  the  non-human 
primate  eye  to  microwave  radiation  following  ophthalmic 
drug  pretreatment.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:379-394. 

Kurimoto  S,  Newell  FW,  Farkas  TG.  1965.  Glycogen  synthesis  by 
the  rat  retina.  In:  Graymore  CN,  editor.  Biochemistry  of  the 
retina.  New  York:  Academic  Press,  p  31-35. 

Kuwabara  T.  1965.  Some  aspects  of  retinal  metabolism  revealed  by 
histochemistry:  Muller  cells  in  the  pathological  condition. 
In:  Graymore  CN,  editor.  Biochemistry  of  the  retina.  New 
York:  Academic  Press,  p  93-98. 

Lim  JI,  Fine  SL,  Kues  HA,  Johnson  MA.  1993.  Visual  abnor¬ 
malities  associated  with  high-energy  microwave  exposure. 
Retina  13:230-233. 

Livingston  A,  Waterman  AE.  1978.  The  development  of  tolerance 
to  ketamine  in  rats  and  the  significance  of  hepatic 
metabolism.  Br  J  Pharmacol  64:63-69. 

Lu  S-T,  DeAngelis  ML,  Gambrill  CS.  1993.  Ocular  microwave 
thermometric  dosimetry  and  thermometry  in  the  rabbit. 
In:  Blank  M,  editor.  Electricity  and  magnetism  in  biology 
and  medicine.  San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press,  Inc. 
p  675-678. 

Marmor  MF,  Zrenner  E.  1995.  Standard  for  clinical  electroretino¬ 
graphy  (1994  update).  Doc  Ophthalmol  89:199-210. 

Massof  R,  Wu  L,  Finkelstein  D,  Perry  C,  Starr  SJ,  Johnson  MA. 
1984.  Properties  of  electroretinographic  intensity-response 
functions  in  retinitis  pigmentosa.  Doc  Ophthalmol  57: 
279-296. 

Michaelson  SM,  Lin  JC.  1987.  Cataract  and  other  ocular  effects. 
In:  Biological  effects  and  health  implications  of  radio¬ 
frequency  radiation.  New  York:  Plenum  Press,  p  183-197. 

Mizuno  K,  Sato  K.  1975.  Reassessment  of  histochemistry  of  retinal 
glycogen.  Exp  Eye  Res  21:489-497. 

Naka  KI,  Rushton  WAH.  1966.  S-potentials  from  colour  units  in 
the  retina  of  fish  (Cyprindae).  J  Physiol  185:536-555. 

Nakagawa  T,  Kurasaki  S,  Masuda  T,  Ukai  K,  Kubo  S,  Kadono  H. 
1988.  Effects  of  some  psychotropic  drugs  on  the  b-wave 
of  the  electroretinogram  in  isolated  rabbit  retina.  Japan 
J  Pharmacol  46:97-100. 

Nichols  CW,  Lambertsen  CJ.  1969.  Effects  of  high  oxygen 
pressures  on  the  eye.  N  Engl  J  Med  281:25-30. 

Noell  WK.  1958.  Differentiation,  metabolic  organization,  and 
viability  of  the  visual  cell.  AM  A  Arch  Ophthalmol  60: 
702-733. 

Olivier  P,  Jolicoeur  FB,  Lafond  G,  Drumheller  A,  Brunette  JR. 
1987.  Effects  of  retinal  dopamine  depletion  on  the  rabbit 
electroretinogram.  Doc  Ophthalmol  66:359-371. 

Paulsson  LE,  Hamneius  Y,  Hasson  HA,  Sjostrand  J.  1979.  Retinal 
damage  experimentally  induced  by  microwave  radiation 
at  55mW/cm2.  Acta  Ophthalmol  57:183-197. 

Peachey  NS,  Alexander  KR,  Derlacki  DJ,  Fishman  GA.  1992. 
Light  adaptation  and  the  luminance-response  function  of  the 
cone  electroretinogram.  Doc  Ophthalmol  79:363-369. 

Penn  JS,  Thum  LA.  1989.  The  rat  as  an  animal  model  for  retino¬ 
pathy  of  prematurity.  Prog  Clin  Biol  Res  314:623-642. 

Ray  DE,  Hawgood  J.  1977.  Influence  of  systemic  factors  on 
hyperbaric  oxygen  toxicity  in  the  rat  visual  system.  Aviat 
Space  Environ  Med  48:1046-1050. 

Rosenthal  SW,  Birenbaum  L,  Kaplan  IT,  Metlay  W,  Snyder  WZ, 
Zaret  MM.  1976.  Effects  of  35  and  107  GHz  microwaves  on 
the  rabbit  eye.  In:  Johnson  CC,  and  Shore  ML,  editors. 
Biological  effects  of  electromagnetic  waves.  Vol.  1,  Rock¬ 
ville,  MD:  Food  and  Drug  Administration,  HEW  Publ. 
(FDA)-77-8010.  p  110-128. 


454  Lu  et  al. 


Schuschereba  ST,  Friedman  HI,  DeVenuto  F,  Beatrice  ES.  1983. 
Morphologic  effects  on  the  retina  of  massive  exchange 
transfusion  with  stroma-free  hemoglobin  solution.  Lab 
Investigation  48:339-352. 

Sevems  ML,  Johnson  MA.  1993.  The  variability  of  the  b-wave  of 
the  electroretinogram  with  stimulus  luminance.  Doc 
Ophthalmol  84:291-299. 

Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Creighton  MO,  Jacobi  JH,  Ross  WM,  Sanwal 
M,  Guo  TC,  Guo  WW,  Trevithick  JR.  1983.  In  vitro  studies 
of  microwave-induced  cataract:  separation  of  field  and 
heating  effects.  Exp  Eye  Res  36:75-90. 

Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Jacobi  JH,  Sanwal 
M,  Baskerville  JC,  Trevithick  JR.  1985.  In  vitro  studies  of 
microwave-induced  cataract:  reciprocity  between  exposure 
duration  and  dose  rate  for  pulsed  microwaves.  Exp  Eye  Res 
40:1-13. 

Sugimoto  S,  Imawaka  M,  Kurata  K,  Kanamaru  K,  Ito  T,  Sasaki  S, 
Ando  T,  Saijo  T,  Sato  S.  1996.  A  procedure  for  recording 
electroretinogram  (ERG)  and  effect  of  sodium  iodate  on 
ERG  in  mice.  Japan  J  Toxicol  Sci  21(suppl.):15-32. 


Tengroth  B,  Aurell  E.  1974.  Retinal  changes  in  microwave 
workers.  In:  Czerski  P,  Silverman  C,  Ostrowski  K,  Suess 
ML,  Waldeskog  B,  editors.  Biologic  effects  and  health 
hazards  of  microwave  radiation.  Warsaw,  Poland:  Polish 
Medical  Publishers,  p  302-305. 

Trevithick  JR,  Creighton  MP,  Sanwal  M,  Brown  DO,  Bassen 
HI.  1987.  Histopathological  studies  of  rabbit  cornea 
exposed  to  millimeter  waves.  Proc  IEEE  EMBS  Conf  9: 
695-697. 

Wassilewa  P,  Hockwin  O,  Korte  I.  1976.  Glycogen  concentration 
changes  in  retina,  vitreous  body  and  other  eye  tissues  caused 
by  disturbances  of  blood  circulation.  Albrecht  v  Graefes 
Arch  Klin  Exp  Ophthal  199:115-120. 

Yee  KC.  1983.  Interaction  of  RF  and  MW  with  the  living 
systems:  research  and  experience  in  China.  In:  Grandolfo 
M,  Michaelson  SM,  Rindi  A,  editors.  Biological  effects 
and  dosimetry  of  non-ionizing  radiation,  radiofrequency 
and  microwave  energies.  New  York:  Plenum  Press, 
p  501-530. 


BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS  OF  HIGH  PEAK  POWER  RADIO  FREQUENCY  PULSES 


Shin-Tsu  Lu  and  John  O.  de  Lorge 

McKessonHBOC  BioServices 
U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment 
Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX  78235 


INTRODUCTION 

During  the  early  years  of  research  on  the  potential  hazards  of  Radio  Frequency  (RF) 
radiation,  scientists  have  considered  the  possibility  that  a  pulsed  RF  field  could  produce  effects 
other  than  those  produced  by  continuous-wave  (CW)  radiation  at  the  same  average  power. 
Recent  developments  in  high  peak  power  pulsed  microwave  systems  have  rekindled  interest  in 
exploring  potential  biological  effects  of  high  peak  power  radiofrequency  pulses.  Systems  capable 
of  delivering  100  gigawatt  (GW)  pulses  to  a  transmitting  antenna  and  establishing  hundreds  of 
kV/m  peak  E-field  intensity  in  the  beam  path  are  known  to  exist  (Agee  ct  al.  1995].  Safety 
aspects  of  high  peak  power,  ultra-short  electromagnetic  signals  have  been  questioned  [Albanese 
et  al.  1994]  and  debated  [Merritt  et  al.  1995,  Adair  1995].  Postow  and  Swicord  [1996] 
concluded  that  pulsed  microwaves  produced  by  radar  transmitters  could  not  cause  biological 
effects  other  than  those  caused  by  exposure  to  continuous  wave  (CW)  radiation  at  the  same 
average  power  density  of  the  pulsed  microwaves.  Apparently,  their  conclusion  should  not  be 
generalized  to  include  the  specific  and  replicable  auditory  effects  of  microwave  pulses.  Lin  [1989] 
found  that  few  protection  guidelines  and  exposure  standards  published  by  various  organizations 
have  established  limits  to  guard  against  potential  hazards  of  pulsed  RF  radiation.  Studies  on 
comparisons  ofbiological  effects  between  high  peak  power  but  low  average  pulsed  RF  radiation 
and  CW  radiation  of  equal  average  intensity  (absorption)  are  sparse.  As  a  result,  existing 
personnel  protection  guidelines  for  high  peak  power  pulsed  radiofrequency  radiation  have  often 
been  based  on  guess  work  with  many  uncertainties.  This  lack  of  an  adequate  or  appropriate 
biological  database  for  pulsed  RF  has  recently  been  recognized  by  at  least  one  standards'  setting 
group,  ICNIRP  [ICNIRP  1998], 

The  majority  of  contemporary  personal  protection  guidelines  utilize  frequency  dependent 
time-averaged  permissible  exposure  intensities  derived  from  a  time-averaged  specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR).  For  RF  pulses,  time  averaging  involves  integration  of  individual  pulses  (peak  power 


Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Vol.  S 
Edited  by  J.C.  Lin,  Kluwer  Acadcmic/Plcnum  Publishers,  2000 


207 


density,  pulse  width,  rise  time,  fall  time,  waveform,  power  spectrum)  and  modulation 
characteristics  (repetition  rate  of  pulse  train  or  bursts  of  pulse  train).  For  simplicity,  a  time- 
average  intensity  of  square  wave  modulated  RF  pulses  is  the  product  of  peak  power  density  and 
duty  factor,  the  ratio  of  pulse  duration  to  the  pulse  period  of  a  periodic  pulse  train  (equal  to  the 
product  of  pulse  width  and  pulse  repetition  rate).  Therefore,  peak  power  density  can  increase 
inversely  with  duty  cycle  or  pulse  duration  and  pulse  repetition  rate.  To  prevent  unintentionally 
high  exposure  and  to  preclude  high  specific  absorption  (SA)  for  decreasingly  shorter  pulse 
durations  of  RF  pulses,  peak  power  limits  are  needed.  Due  to  uncertainties,  various  organizations 
approach  the  issue  of  peak  power  limits  for  RF  guidelines  differently.  For  example,  the 
Czechoslovakian  government  lowers  the  time  averaged  power  density  of  pulsed  microwaves  by 
a  factor  of  2.5  from  that  of  the  CW  microwave  [reviewed  by  Michaelson  and  Lin  1987],  More 
recently,  IEEE  [IEEE  1999]  recommended  the  reduction  of  the  time  averaged  maximum 
permissible  exposure  (MPE)  by  a  factor  of  5  under  pulsed  conditions  when  pulse  duration  is  less 
than  100  ms.  In  addition,  IEEE  also  recommended  a  100  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity  limit 
(-26.5  MW/m2  or  2.65  MW/cm7).  ICNIRP  [ICNIRP  1998]  recommended  lowering  the  MPE 
by  a  factor  of  2  for  pulsed  microwaves.  Additionally,  ICNIRP  further  recommended  S A  limits 
of  10  and  2  mJ  kg'1  for  occupational  and  general  public  to  prevent  the  occurrence  of  a 
microwave-induced  auditory  effect.  Pulsed  RF  may  cause  a  specific  biological  effect,  or  it  may 
cause  enhancement,  attenuation,  or  no  modification  at  all  of  the  biological  effect  caused  by  CW 
KF  at  an  equal  average  SAR.  Knowledge  of  specific  and  synergistic  effects  (positive,  negative, 
or  none)  of  pulse  modulation  are  needed  for  a  valid  evaluation  of  the  MPE  modifier  used  in  RF 
pulses. 

Analysis  of  biological  effects  and  health  implications  of  high  peak  power  RF  pulses  is 
further  complicated  by  the  method  of  generating  RF  pulses.  Conventional  radar  is  operated  in 
a  narrow  band  mode  in  which  fractional  bandwidth  is  lees  than  1%  of  the  center  (carrier) 
frequency.  Recent  development  of  Ultra-Wide-Band  (UWB)  radar  has  increased  the  fractional 
bandwidth  to  more  than  25%  [Taylor  1995],  The  UWB  radar  has  also  been  described  as 
carrierless  radar.  As  the  name  implies,  a  center  frequency  is  not  found.  In  this  type  of  radar, 
risetime  and  duration  of  the  pulse  determine  the  highest  and  median  frequency  [Foster  1995].  The 
lowest  frequency  of  a  UWB  pulse  is  determined  by  the  cutoff  frequency  of  the  transmitting 
antenna.  With  risetime  in  100-300  picoseconds  (ps)  range  and  pulse  duration  in  one  to  several 
nanoseconds  (ns)  range,  the  frequency  spectrum  (90  or  99%  of  the  pulse  energy)  of  the  Fourier 
transform  of  a  radiating  UWB  pulse  can  span  continuously  from  megahertz  (MHz)  to  gigahertz 
(GHz)  (Fig.  1).  This  type  of  RF  pulse  contains  a  broad  spectrum  of  frequencies  such  that  the 
interaction  with  tissue  would  be  expected  to  be  similar  to  that  of  both  high-  and  low-frequency 
narrow  band  RF.  In  essence,  analyses  of  biological  effects  involves  the  process  of  synthesizing 
these  combined  effects  due  to  multiple  frequency  exposure  and  assigning  a  weighing  factor  to 
each  individual  frequency  component.  The  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  produced  by  nuclear 
detonation  possesses  a  similar  problem  as  a  carrierless  pulse  with  a  risetime  of  10  to  100  ns  and 
pulse  width  of 400  ns  to  a  few  microseconds  (ns)  range  [Lin  1975].  The  EMP  produced  by  a 
lightening  discharge  typically  has  a  duration  of  peak  current  from  10  to  100  fis.  The  synthesizing 
procedure  for  evaluation  can  be  rather  tedious,  time  consuming  and  full  of  uncertainties.  In 
addition,  biological  effects  of  multi-frequency  exposure  are  virtually  unexplored.  Another 
approach  to  the  subject  of  biological  effects  of  carrierless  RF  pulses  is  to  extrapolate  from  the 
results  of  animal  experimentation  with  these  pulses.  The  latter  evaluation  procedure  will  be  the 


208 


focus  of  the  present  review  in  dealing  with  the  topic  of  biological  effects  of  high  peak  power 
carrierless  pulses. 


FREQUENCY  (MHz) 


Figure  1.  Typical  unipolar  UWD  pulse  and  its  relative  power  spectrum  by  a  spark  gap  generator. 


BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS  CAUSED  BY  A  SINGLE  PULSE 

One  misconception  in  studies  of  the  biological  effects  caused  by  high  peak-power  RF 
pulses  is  to  equate  high  peak  power  to  high  average  power  because  the  same  power  unit  (W)  and 
the  resultant  SAR  unit  (W/kg)  are  used  in  both  cases.  As  indicated  previously,  high  peak-power 
RF  pulses  can  have  a  low  average  SAR  if  the  duty  factor  is  low.  Another  fimdamental  issue  to 
address  is  to  decide  which  of  the  following  independent  parameters,  SAR  or  SA,  is  the  most 
appropriate  predictor  of  biological  effects. 

Drastic  Biological  Effects  Caused  by  a  Single  Pulse  of  High  Energy  Deposition 

The  biological  effects  of  a  single  pulse  of  high  energy  deposition  can  be  very  drastic.  An 
example  was  the  use  of  high  power  microwaves  for  brain  enzyme  denaturation  in  the  analysis  of 
neurotransmitters.  The  energy  depositions  used  were  as  high  as  57,000  J/kg  in  2.8  s  for  rats 
(-20,500  W/kg  for  2.8  s)  [Lenox  etal.  1977]  or  200,000  J/kg  in  0.35  to  1.4  s  for  mice  (between 
140,000  to  575,000  W/kg)  [Schneider  et  al.  1982].  The  brain  temperatures  reached  as  high  as 


209 


80  °C.  These  research  procedures  were  designed  to  achieve  enzyme  denaturation  in  as  short  a 
period  of  time  as  possible. 

The  susceptibility  of  rodents  to  pulsed  microwave  induced  stun  and  seizure  has  been 
reported.  Guy  and  Chou  [1982]  noted  the  threshold  for  “stun  and  seizure”  (convulsions)  in  rats 
by  a  single  915  MHz  pulse.  They  demonstrated  an  absorption  threshold  at  680  J  in  the  brain  in 
less  than  0.38  s  or  equivalent  to  an  energy  absorption  of 28,000  J/kg.  The  threshold  absorption 
rate  was  equal  to  73,700  W/kg  for  0.38  s.  It  should  be  noted  that  a  very  high  brain  temperature 
(46  #C)  was  recorded  at  the  threshold  for  “stun  and  seizure.”  The  animal  began  moving  again 
when  brain  temperature  returned  to  within  1  °C  of  normal.  Histological  examination  revealed 
demyelination  of  neurons  one  day  after  exposure  and  microfocal  glial  nodules  in  the  brain  one 
month  after  exposure.  Time  averaging  of  this  high  SAR  but  short  duration  threshold  is 
inappropriate  because  an  artificially  low  SAR  can  be  obtained,  i.e.,  7.6  W/kg  (680  J  /  360  s  /  0.25 
kg). 

Modak  et  al.  [1981]  studied  the  effect  of  a  2.45  GHz  microwave  pulse  of  15  or  25  ms 
which  increased  mouse  brain  temperature  by  2  or  4  "C,  respectively.  They  used  a  tuned 
waveguide  exposure  system  which  delivered  90%  of  the  7.5  kW  transmitted  power  into  the  head 
and  1 0%  into  the  bran  of  the  mouse.  Immediately  after  exposure,  the  spontaneous  activity  of  the 
exposed  mouse  decreased  but  began  recovering  within  5  minutes.  The  25  ms  pulse  also  caused 
a  significant  decrease  in  acetylcholine  content  of  the  whole  brain.  These  authors  suggested  that 
increased  membrane  permeability  could  be  llie  mechanism  of  the  observed  change  in  acetylcholine 
content. 


Microwave  Evoked  Body  Movements 

Microwave  evoked  body  movements  in  mice  were  demonstrated  initially  by  Wachtel  et 
al  [1988, 1989],  They  [Wachtel  etal.  1988]  noted  similarities  between  microwave  evoked  body 
movements  and  classical  startle  reflexes.  Startle  is  a  protective  response  of  mammals  to  an 
unexpected,  sudden  and  intense  visual,  auditory,  or  tactile  stimulus  [Fleshier  1965].  Brown  etal. 


Tabic  1.  Evoked  body  movements  in  mice  by  a  single  microwave  pulse 


Peak  Brain  SAR 
(kW/kg) 

Pulse  Duration 
(ms) 

Brain  SA 
(J/kg) 

Incidence 
(%) _ 

15.36 

50 

768 

30 

15.36 

100 

1,536 

68 

15.36 

200 

3,072 

78 

9.47 

200 

1,893 

76 

2.75 

800 

2,197 

78 

0.69 

3,200 

2,211 

29 

Data  from  Brown  et  al  [1 994], 


210 


[1994]  studied  this  effect  in  detail  in  mice  exposed  locally  (head  and  neck)  to  1.25  GHz 
microwave  pulses  ranging  from  50  ms  to  3.2  s.  Results  of  this  study  arc  shown  in  Table  1.  The 
effect  appeared  to  be  a  complex  interaction  between  peak  SAR  and  SA.  For  pulse  durations  less 
than  1  s,  the  incidence  of  microwave  evoked  body  movements  was  dependent  on  SA  instead  of 
peak  SAR  Exposure  to  a  single  long  pulse  (3,200  ms)  was  much  less  effective  in  evoking  body 
movements  than  those  caused  by  shorter  pulses.  Figure  2  makes  it  clearly  evident  that  a  pulse 
train  (80  pulses  per  second,  10  /js  pulse  duration,  peak  brain  SAR  1,474  kW/kg,  brain  SA  at  590, 
1,180,  and  2,360  kJ/kg;  and  administered  between  50  to  200  ms)  induced  a  similar  incidence  of 
evoked  body  movements  as  those  induced  by  a  single  pulse.  However,  the  incidence  of  evoked 
body  movements  decreased  if  the  pulse  duration  was  longer  than  Is  (see  open  symbols  in  Fig.  2). 
Thus,  the  SA  dependency  of  microwave  evoked  body  movements  should  be  modified  as:  the 
incidence  of  microwave  evoked  body  movements  was  dependent  on  average  SA  if  exposure 
duration  was  less  than  Is.  In  other  words,  microwave  evoked  body  movements  were  susceptible 
to  the  influence  of  temporal  summation  but  possessed  a  veiy  poor  temporal  resolution.  Part  of 
tins  complex  interaction  between  SA  and  SAR  appeared  to  be  related  to  changes  in  subcutaneous 
temperature  because  the  incidence  of  the  evoked  body  movements  was  a  linear  function  of  the 
temperature  increment.  A  minimum  temperature  increment  (1 .2  °C)  for  evoking  body  movements 
in  mice  for  exposures  shorter  than  1  s  was  noted  by  extrapolatioa  The  subcutaneous  temperature 
increment  which  could  evoke  body  movements  also  appeared  to  be  very  narrow.  The  inridon^ 
reached  a  maximum  at  a  measured  temperature  increment  of  1.66  *C;  a  total  range  of  less  than 
0.5  °C. 


BRAIN  SPECIFIC  ABSORPTION  (kJ/kg) 


Figure  2.  Comparison  between  short  and  long  pulses.  Solid  symbols  are  data  from  exposures 
less  1  s.  Open  symbols  are  data  from  exposures  longer  than  1  s  [Brown  etal.  1 994], 


Raslear  et  al.  [1992]  studied  the  microwave  evoked  whole-body  movements  in  Long- 
Evans  rats  exposed  to  a  single  1  s,  1.25  GHz  pulse  localized  to  the  head  and  neck  region  of  the 


rat  in  a  WR  650  waveguide  at  graded  forward  power  (40,  80,  120,  1 60  and  200  W).  Dosimetry 
data  was  not  presented  but  estimated  from  Seaman  et  al.  [1992],  Peak  brain  SARs  were  800, 
1,600,  2,400, 3,200,  and  4,000  W/kg  and  brain  SAs  were  800, 1,600,  2,400,  3,200,  and  4,000 
J/kg.  They  noted  that  the  incidence  of  evoked  body  movements  increased  with  power  applied  to 
the  waveguide  exposure  system.  In  addition,  a  significant  increase  in  the  incidence  of  evoked 
body  movements  (15  %)  was  observed  at  a  subcutaneous  temperature  increase  as  low  as  0.2  °C 
and  grew  with  higher  temperature  increases  (40  %  at  0.33  °C,  and  80  %  at  0.65  #C).  It  appeared 
that  evoked  body  movements  required  a  lower  subcutaneous  temperature  increment  in  rats  than 
in  mice  (1.2  to  1.7  °C  from  0  to  100  %  incidence).  Physically,  rats  have  a  much  larger  head  and 
neck  surface  area  than  that  of  mice.  Spatial  summation  of  subcutaneous  temperature  increment 
may  be  the  key  to  the  species  difference  in  sensitivity  to  microwave  evoked  body  movements. 
No  reliable  difference  in  deafened  rats  and  normal  rats  exposed  to  similar  power  levels  was 
observed.  Therefore,  the  findings  indicated  that  an  associated  microwave  acoustic  effect  was 
probably  not  the  underlying  mechanism  for  microwave  evoked  body  movements. 

A  pharmacological  characterization  of  the  microwave-evoked  whole-body  movements  in 
rats  was  performed  by  Akyel  et  al  [1993a],  A  1 .25  GHz,  120  W  pulse  for  1  s  was  delivered  to 
the  head  and  neck  region  of  the  rat  as  in  the  previous  experiment  [Raslear  et  al.  1992],  This  pulse 
was  to  evoke  a  50  %  movement  incidence  in  the  vehicle  injected  animals.  Eleven  drugs  were  used: 
pilocarpine,  atropin,  clonidine,  desipramine,  /7-choIoramphetamine,  buspirone,  morphine, 
naloxone,  d-amphetamine,  pimoxine  and  diazepam.  The  movement  incidence  rates  (50%) 
occurred  as  expected,  and  only  atropin  and  clonidine  injected  rats  failed  to  display  microwave- 
evoked  whole-body  movement.  It  was  concluded  that  a  microwave-evoked  whole-body 
movement  was  quite  different  from  the  neuropharmacology  of  a  classical  startle  response  since 
atropin  should  produce  a  slight  increase  in  the  startle  response  while  clonidine  depresses  it  [Davis 
1980], 

Startle  Modification 

Startle  can  be  modified  by  a  pre-pulse,  a  preceding  brief  sensory  but  not  startle-evoking 
stimulus,  that  is  acoustic,  tactile  or  photic  in  nature.  The  ability  of  a  microwave  pulse  to  serve 
as  a  startle  modifier  was  studied  by  Seaman  et  al.  [1992, 1993, 1994].  The  identical  1 .25  GHz 
pulsed  exposure  system  used  by  Raslear  et  al.  [1992]  provided  the  pulse.  Two  different 
microwave  pre-pulses,  approximately  of  1  ps  pulse  duration,  15.0-30.0  kW/kg  (16.0-44.2  mJ/kg) 
and  35.0-86.0  kW/kg  (66.6-141.8  mJ/kg)  were  delivered  201, 101,  5 1,  3  and  1  ms  before  and  1 
ms  after  the  startle  eliciting  acoustic  stimulus  (94  dB  SPL,  sound  power  level),  or  a  7.82  ps 
microwave  pre-pulse  at  55.9-113.3  kW/kg  (525.0-1,055.7  mJ/kg)  at  157,  107,  57,  and  7  ms 
before  and  43  ms  after  the  eliciting  startle  air  burst  (tactile  stimulus).  The  lower  intensity 
microwave  pre-pulse  (16.0  to  44.2  mJ/kg)  could  not  modify  the  acoustic  startle  amplitude  or 
latency.  However,  acoustic  startle  amplitude  was  reduced  by  the  higher  microwave  pre-pulses 
(66.6-141.8  mJ/kg)  at  51, 101  and  201  ms,  and  enhanced  by  higher  microwave  pre-pulse  at  1  ms 
lead  time.  Acoustic  startle  latency  was  also  delayed  by  the  higher  intensity  microwave  pre-pulses 
at  51  and  201  ms  lead  times.  The  effect  of  the  highest  microwave  pre-pulse  (525.0-1,055.7 
mJ/kg)  was  not  as  clear  cut  in  modification  of  the  tactile  startle  amplitude  because  the  amplitude 
reduction  was  observed  at  a  57  ms  lead  time  only.  On  the  other  hand,  the  latency  of  the  tactile 
response  was  delayed  when  microwave  pre-pulses  were  administered  at  7,  57,  107,  and  157  ms 
lead  times.  It  is  apparent  that  the  heating  potential  of  these  microwave  pre-pulses  was  negligible 


212 


(<]0'3  °C).  Nevertheless,  they  were  adequate  to  elicit  modification  of  ongoing  reflexes  with  a 
threshold  SA  higher  than  the  threshold  SA  that  can  induce  microwave  hearing. 

Thermal  Sensation 

Thermal  sensation  and  thermal  pain  are  other  biological  responses  which  can  be  used  to 
elucidate  the  nature  of  biological  effects  of  high  power  RF.  Excellent  reviews  were  made  by 
Stevens  [1983]  on  comparative  warmth  sensation  elicited  by  infrared  and  microwave  radiation 
and  by  Michaelson  and  Lin  [1987a]  on  thermal  sensation  and  pain  elicited  by  microwave 
exposure.  In  contrast  to  infrared  illumination  which  has  a  short  onset  and  offset  latency  (abrupt 
onset  and  extinction  of  the  sensation),  microwave  illumination  induced  a  warm  sensation  that 
appeared  to  have  a  relative  long  onset  latency  (3.S  to  6  s)  and  long  offset  time  (IS  s  or  more), 
described  as  a  kind  of  “afterglow”  [Justesen  etal.  1982],  The  former  reviews  report  that  above 
the  threshold,  intensity  of  warmth  sensation  increases  with  power  density  of  either  radiations.  The 
three  most  important  variables  governing  the  threshold  power  density  are  skin  location,  size  of 
exposure  area  and  duration  of  exposure.  Each  variable  contributes  differently  to  the  threshold 
power  density  depending  on  the  level  of  warmth  perception.  At  a  barely  perceptible  level, 
threshold  power  density  is  inversely  proportional  to  the  area  of  exposure  (spatial  summation). 
The  area  size  of  the  spatial  summation  may  be  as  large  as  60  cm2  or  more.  It  also  depends  on  the 
location  of  skin  exposure.  The  forehead  is  the  most  sensitive  of  the  areas  tested,  followed  by 
locations  on  the  torso  and  extremities.  The  difference  in  skin  location  sensitivity  becomes  less 
with  increasing  levels  of  warmth  sensation  Sensitivity  (threshold  power  density)  of  warmth 
sensation  is  also  inversely  proportional  to  the  duration  of  exposure  (temporal  summation),  i.e., 
the  longer  the  exposure  duration,  the  lower  the  threshold.  At  a  barely  perceptible  level,  the 
threshold  power  density  becomes  asymptotic  when  the  exposure  duration  is  longer  than  a  critical 
value.  The  critical  period  for  an  asymptotic  threshold  appears  to  be  1  s  for  infrared  radiation 
[Stevens  1983]  and  3  s  for  3  GHz  microwave  radiation  [Eijkman  and  Vendrik  1961],  A  summary 
of  microwave-induced  warmth  sensation  thresholds  is  included  in  Table  2.  In  addition  to  location, 
area,  duration,  frequency,  and  power  density,  the  penetration  depth  is  also  an  important  variable 
in  determining  the  Uireshold  [Blick  et  al.  1997],  The  threshold  can  vary  more  than  an  order  of 
magnitude  (14  fold  difference)  as  shown  in  Table  2. 

The  salient  feature  of  human  warmth  sensation  is  that  the  cutaneous  temperature  increase 
at  the  threshold  is  less  than  0.1  °C.  On  the  other  hand  thermal  pain  is  elicited  by  a  high  cutaneous 
temperature  (45-46  °C)  [Michaelson  and  Lin  1987a],  Irrespective  of  type  of  radiation,  either 
infrared  or  microwave,  human  warmth  sensation  has  a  relatively  low  threshold  for  the  rate  of 
temperature  change  (0.0005  to  0.002  °C/s)  across  the  cutaneous  thermoreceptor  located 
approximately  150  to  200  n m  below  the  skin  surface.  The  rate  of  temperature  change  in  human 
warmth  sensation  (0.0005  to  0.002  °C/s,  4  fold  difference)  for  1  to  10  s  exposure  time 
corresponds  to  1.7  and  7.0  W/kg  average  SAR  if  a  specific  heat,  0.83  kcal  per  kg  per  °C,  is 
assumed  for  the  skin. 

Auditory  Effect  (Microwave  Hearing) 

Frey  [1961]  was  the  first  to  study  systematically  the  human  auditory  response  to  pulsed 
microwaves.  Guy  et  al  [1975]  concluded  that  one  of  the  most  widely  observed  and  accepted 
biological  effects  of  low  average  power  electromagnetic  energy  is  the  auditory  sensation  evoked 


213 


in  man  by  pulsed  microwaves.  The  effect  appears  as  an  audible  clicking,  buzzing  or  chirping 
sensation  originating  from  within  and  near  the  back  of  the  head  and  corresponding  in  frequency 
to  the  recurrence  rate  of  the  microwave  pulses.  This  effect  has  been  the  subject  of  several  reviews 


Table  2.  Thresholds  for  microwave-elicited  human  cutaneous  warmth  sensation 


Frequency 

(GHz) 

Exposure 
Duration  (s) 

Skin  Location 
and  Size  (cm2) 

Threshold 

(mW/cm2) 

Increase  in  Skin 
Temperature  (”C) 

2.45 

10 

Forearm,  107.2 

26.7  +  7.3  (6) 

— 

2.45 

10 

Back,  377 

63.1  +  6.7(15) 

0.054* 

3.0 

1 

Forehead,  37 

58.6 

0.025 

3.0 

2 

Forehead,  37 

46.0 

0.040 

3.0 

4 

Forehead,  37 

33.5 

0.060 

7.5 

10 

Back,  377 

19.5  +  2.9  (15) 

0.049* 

10.0 

1 

Forehead,  37 

21 

0.025 

10.0 

2 

Forehead,  37 

16.7 

0.040 

10.0 

4 

Forehead,  37 

12.6 

0.060 

10.0 

10 

Back,  377 

19.6  ±  2.9  (15) 

0.073* 

35.0 

10 

Back,  377 

8.8  ±  1.3  (15) 

0.078* 

94.0 

10 

Back,  377 

4.5  ±0.6  (15) 

0.071* 

Data  shown  are  mean  ±S  .E.  (no.  of  subjects)  from  Hendler  [1968],  Hendler  et  al.  [1 963],  Justesen  et  al.  [1982],  and 


Blickefat[1997].  **"  indicates  data  calculated  by  Riu  et  al.  [1997], 


[Chou  etal.  1982a,  Lin  1978,  1980, 1990,  NCRP  1986].  Foster  and  Finch  [1974]  showed  both 
theoretically  and  experimentally  in  a  physiological  solution  that  microwave  pulses  could  produce 
significant  acoustic  energy  by  thermal  expansion  from  5  x  10"6  °C  temperature  rise  in  the  solution 
from  absorption  of  microwave  pulses.  It  is  generally  accepted  that  the  pulsed  microwave- 
induced  audible  sound  is  generated  by  a  thermoelastic  expansion  of  cranial  tissue  [Lin  1976, 
1976a,  1976b,  1976c,  1977,  Lin  etal.  1975]  that  launches  an  acoustic  wave  which  is  detected  by 
hair  cells  in  the  cochlea.  Essentially  identical  electrical  activities  elicited  by  microwave  and 
acoustic  pulses  were  recorded  in  the  auditory  pathway  of  cats  and  guinea  pigs  at  the  primary 
auditory  cortex  [Taylor  and  Ashleman  1974,  Chou  et  al.  1976],  the  medial  geniculate  nucleus 
[Taylor  and  Ashleman  1974,  Guy  et  al.  1975,  Lin  et  al.  1979,  1982],  the  inferior  colliculus 
nucleus  [Cain  and  Rissman  1978,  Lin  et  al.  1979],  the  lateral  lemniscus  nucleus  [Lin  et  al.  1979, 
1982],  the  superior  olivary  nucleus  [Lin  et  al.  1979, 1982]  and  the  eighth  cranial  nerve  [Taylor 
and  Ashleman  1974],  In  addition,  brainstem  potential  and  cochlear  microphonics  evoked  by 
microwave  pulses  were  comparable  to  those  evoked  by  acoustic  pulses  [Lin  et  al.  1979, 1982, 
Chou  etal.  1975,  1976], 

Taylor  and  Ashleman  [1974]  demonstrated  the  dependency  of  the  microwave-induced 


214 


auditory  effect  on  cochlea  in  cats  by  measuring  the  electrical  responses  in  the  eighth  cranial 
nerve,  the  medial  geniculate  nucleus,  and  the  primary  auditory  cortex  to  both  acoustic  and  2.45 
GHz  microwave  pulses.  They  concluded  that  evoked  electrical  responses  were  similar  between 
acoustic  and  microwave  pulses.  Furthermore,  cochlear  destruction,  i.e.,  perforation  of  round 
window  and  aspiration  of  perilymph,  resulted  in  abolishment  of  evoked  electrical  potential  from 
acoustic  and  microwave  pulses.  Chou  etal.  [1975]  recorded  the  sonic  oscillations  at  50  kHz  from 
the  round  window  of  guinea  pigs  during  pulsed  918  MHz  irradiation.  The  oscillations  promptly 
followed  the  onset  of  pulsed  radiation,  preceded  the  nerve  response  and  disappeared  after  death. 
It  is  therefore  reasonable  to  conclude  that  the  pulsed  microwave  induced  auditory  effect  is  a 
cochlear  response  to  acoustic  signals  that  are  generated  in  the  head  by  pulsed  microwaves. 

For  pulsed  microwaves  with  durations  shorter  than  30  ps,  the  microwave-induced 
auditoiy  threshold  was  independent  of  temporal  peak  power  density  (or  temporal  peak  specific 
absorption  rate)  and  was  entirely  dependent  on  the  energy  density  of  the  microwave  pulse  or 
specific  absorption  (SA)  per  pulse  [Chou  et  al.  1982a,  Lin  1978, 1980, 1990,  NCRP  1986],  The 
auditory  threshold  SA  per  pulse  has  been  determined  in  human  volunteers  (16  mJ/kg),  cat  (10  to 
12  mJ/kg)  [Guy  et  al.  1975],  cat  (4  mJ/kg)  [Lebovitz  and  Seaman  1977]  and  rats  (0.9  to  1.8 
mJ/kg  whole-body  averaged  SA)  [Chou  et  al.  1982a],  The  heating  potential  of  these  pulses  at 
these  auditory  thresholds  was  on  the  order  of  10"6  ®C.  It  is  the  most  sensitive  biological  effect 
induced  by  microwave  radiation.  For  microwaves  with  pulse  durations  longer  than  50  ps,  the 
auditory  threshold  is  dependent  on  peak  SAR.  Microwave-induced  pressure  waves,  their 
fundamental  frequency,  and  propagation  have  been  characterized  in  mammalian  brain  and  models 
with  a  hydrophone  [Olsen  and  Lin  1981,  1983,  Lin  et  al.  1988],  A  near  identical  result  between 
prediction  by  the  thermoelastic  theory  and  hydrophone  data  further  strengthens  this  explanation 
of  the  basic  mechanism  of  microwave-induced  auditoiy  sensation.  These  studies  also  pointed  out 
that  a  pressure  wave  could  be  created  by  a  single  microwave  pulse  within  the  cranial  structure. 

One  of  the  consequences  of  the  microwave  acoustic  effect  could  be  annoyance. 
Annoyance  caused  by  pulsed  microwaves  was  not  explicitly  demonstrated  in  humans  or  animals. 
Indirect  evidence  of  avoidance  has  been  presented  by  some  investigators  [Frey  et  al.  1975,  Frey 
and  Field  1975,  Johnson  et  al.  1976,  Hjeresen  et  al.  1978],  However,  the  avoidance  resulted 
from  exposure  to  multiple  pulses.  Critical  pulse  repetition  rate  and  duration  of  exposure  needed 
to  elicit  an  avoidance  behavior  have  not  been  explored. 

Lin  [1989]  proposed  that  this  thermoelastic  induced  pressure  wave  could  be  one  of  the 
important  mechanisms  responsible  for  pulse  modulated  RF  interactions  with  biological  systems. 
He  has  calculated  the  peak  pressure  and  displacement  in  various  spherical  head  models  irradiated 
with  10  gs  rectangular  microwave  pulses  (Table  3).  The  isolated  rat  lens  was  found  to  displace 
by  10  nm  when  irradiated  with  a  10  ps,  300  J/m2  microwave  pulse  [Brown  and  Wyeth  1983]. 
Substantial  displacement  and  pressure  (10  nm,  170  N/m2)  could  develop  within  the  cranial 
structure  if  the  peak  power  density  reaches  5  MW/m2.  Considerable  damage  to  cell  membrane 
and  cytoplasm  could  occur  by  mechanical  stress.  Some  supporting  evidence  (in  vitro  lenticular 
damage  by  multiple  pulses)  has  been  provided  by  a  group  of  investigators  [Stewart-DeHaan  et 
al.  1983;  1 985;  Creighton  et  al.  1 987], 

Miscellaneous  Effects  Caused  by  a  Single  Electromagnetic  Pulse 

Hirsh  et  al.  [1968]  exposed  trained  rats  to  an  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  and  studied 
their  ability  to  run  a  maze  during  and  after  EMP  exposure.  The  EMP  pulse  used  was  600  kV/m, 


215 


3  ns  duration.  “Startle”  was  noted  to  be  associated  with  the  EMP  pulse  and  the  ability  of  animals 
to  run  the  maze  was  compromised.  Recovery  began  10  minutes  after  exposure  and  was  nearly 
complete  in  30  minutes  after  exposure.  It  was  concluded  that  the  animal's  decision  making 
strategy  had  been  disturbed  in  some  way,  because  there  frequently  was  a  hesitation  at  each  point 
in  the  maze  structure  where  a  decision  was  required  as  to  whether  a  left  or  right  turn  should  be 
taken.  The  observation  was  interpreted  as  evidence  of  a  slowing  of  mental  processes  and 
psychomotor  reactions  Although  Hirsh  e.t  al.  [1968]  indicated  that  the  EMP  pulses  were  not 
accompanied  by  any  auditoiy  or  visual  phenomena  which  could  act  as  stimuli,  one  cannot  dismiss 
that  the  animals  may  have  been  disturbed  by  the  auditory  stimulus  associated  with  the  EMP  pulse. 
Akyel  and  Kaslear  [1993]  observed  characteristic  ear  ‘twitches"  in  rats  associated  with  a  70  kV/m 
EMP  pulse.  Because  ear  ‘twitches”  developed  regardless  of  the  animal's  position  in  the  EMP 
field,  it  was  suggested  that  this  ear  response  was  caused  by  the  very  brief,  high  pitch  sound 
generated  by  the  discharge  of  capacitors  in  the  power  supply.  Sounds  produced  by  capacitor 
discharge  could  be  heard  by  investigators  in  the  shielded  room  which  housed  the  EMP  simulator. 


Table  3.  Peak  pressure  and  displacement  in  spherical  head  model  irradiated  with  10  jis 
rectangular  microwave  pulses  at  a  peak  absorption  rate  of  1  kW/kg 


Sphere 

Radius 

(mm) 

Microwave 

Frequency 

(MHZ) 

Species 

Pressure 

(N/m2) 

Displacement 

(10-4  nm) 

Incident 

Power 

(W/m2) 

20 

2450 

guinea  pig 

0.408 

2.16 

4,450 

30 

2450 

cat,  monkey 

0.369 

1.51 

5,890 

50 

918 

human-infant 

0.961 

9.34 

12,820 

70 

918 

human-adult 

0.682 

3.97 

21,830 

Data  adapted  from  Lin  [1 989]. 


COMPARISON  OF  BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS  CAUSED  BY  MULTIPLE  HIGH  PEAK 
POWER  RF  PULSES  AND  CW  RF  OF  EQUIVALENT  AVERAGE  ABSORPTION 

Because  of  the  availability  of  dedicated  and  specifically  designed  RF  exposure  facilities 
for  studying  biological  effects  of  RF  radiation,  a  majority  of  studies  utilized  either  CW  or  pulse 
modulated  RF.  Few  exposure  facilities  provide  the  flexibility  to  change  pulse  characteristics  such 
as  peak  power,  pulse  duration  and  pulse  repetition  rate  and  quantitatively  examine  associated 
biological  changes.  In  contrast  to  several  proposed  physical  mechanisms  in  explaining  biological 
effects  of  sinusoidal  modulated  [Postow  and  Swicord  1996]  or  of  carrieriess  RF,  a  general  lack 
of  physical  mechanisms  was  proposed  to  explain  the  difference  in  biological  effects  caused  by  CW 
and  pulsed  RF.  The  exception  to  the  above  statement  is  a  proposed  thermoelastic  or 
thermomechanical  effect  associated  with  pulse  modulation.  Neshev  and  Kirilova  [1996]  described 
a  theoretical  model  which  indicated  pulse-modulated  microwaves  could  potentially  influence  the 
conformational  oscillations  of  enzymes  in  living  organisms  and  produce  effects  at  extremely  low 
power  levels.  This  hypothesis  is  still  to  be  proven.  Considering  equipment  and  theoretical 


216 


difficulties,  this  section  evaluates  only  studies  designed  to  compare  the  biological  effects  caused 
by  CW  and  pulsed  RF  of  equal  averaged  SAR.  However,  some  studies  of  historical  importance 
will  also  be  included  even  if  a  CW  counterpart  was  not  studied. 

Behavioral  Effects 

A  behavior  study  [deLorge  1 984]  involving  rhesus  monkeys  exposed  at  near  resonant  (225 
MHz,  CW)  and  supra-resonant  frequencies  (1.3  GHz  and  5.8  GHz)  showed  that  the  performance 
of  monkeys  trained  to  press  levers  in  an  observing-response  paradigm  for  food  was  impaired  at 
different  threshold  intensities  for  different  frequencies.  The  time  averaged  threshold  intensities 
were  8 1  W/m2  (whole-body  average  SAR=  3.24  W/kg)  for  225  MHz,  570  W/m2  (7.41  W/kg)  for 
1.3  GHz  and  1400  W/m 2  (4.3  W/kg)  for  5.8  GHz.  These  threshold  intensities  were  associated 
with  reliable  increases  in  colonic  temperature  in  the  range  of  1  °C  above  the  sham  exposure  level. 
The  peak  intensities  were  81  W/m2  (CW)  for  the  225  MHz,  518  kW/irf  for  the  1.3  GHz  (370 
pps,  3  ps),  and  1.06  MW/ma  for  the  5.8  GHz  (662  pps,  2  ps). 

Thomas  et  al.  [1975]  compared  30  minute  exposure  of  50  to  200  W/m2  CW  and  pulsed 
2.86  GHz  microwaves  on  post-exposure  performance  of  rats  trained  under  a  multiple  fixed-ratio 
(FR),  differential  reinforcement  of  low  rate  (DRL)  operant  schedule.  The  pulses  used  were  1  yrs 
pulse  duration,  500  pps  and  a  duty  factor  of  2.5  *  Iff4.  Instead  of  absolute  response  rate,  change 
in  behavioral  performance  was  expressed  as  percentage  relative  to  the  performance  rate  during 
the  preceding  sham  exposure  within  each  individual  rat.  They  found  that  the  dose-response 
relationships  of  behavior  endpoints  were  biphasic  or  multiphasic  in  nature.  They  noted  that  200 
W/m2  pulsed  microwave  (800  kW/m2  peak)  significantly  increased  response  rate,  approximately 
by  40%  during  the  DRL  portion  ofthe  behavior,  hr  addition,  a  marked  increase  in  the  proportion 
of  shorter  inter-response  times  was  noted  during  the  DRL  portion  of  behavior  when  rats  were 
exposed  to  100  and  200  W/m2  (400  and  800  kW/nf  peak).  In  conjunction  with  the  DRL 
changes,  FR  response  rates  were  lower  than  those  observed  after  sham  exposure  irrespective  of 
types  of  exposures.  The  largest  effect  (10%  of  the  control)  was  found  for  the  200  W/m2  pulsed 
exposure.  Differences  between  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  FR  performance  were  not 
apparent  at  other  doses.  Thomas  et  al.  [1975]  consider  the  most  robust  effect  was  the  increased 
number  of  time-out  responses  after  exposures.  While  the  number  of  time-out  responses  of  50 
W/m2  pulsed  microwave  was  within  control  range,  increased  time-out  responding  was  increased 
after  the  50  W/m2  CW  exposure  sessions.  Increased  time-out  responding  was  found  after  100  and 
150  W/m2  CW  and  pulsed  exposures  and  the  effects  of  pulsed  exposures  was  larger  in  both  cases. 
On  the  other  hand,  time-out  responding  was  lower  than  control  in  pulsed  200  W/m2.  However, 
time-out  responding  during  CW  200  W/m2  exposure  was  not  evaluated.  Because  of  biphasic  and 
multi-phasic  response  curves,  competing  events  with  different  dose-response  characteristics  could 
be  assumed.  However,  the  value  of  this  report  was  somewhat  diminished  because  the  variation 
of  each  data  point  was  not  included  in  this  report. 

Thomas  et  al.  [1 982]  trained  rats  under  a  differential-reinforcement  of  low  rate  paradigm 
and  compared  the  efficacy  of  the  CW  and  pulsed  2.8  GHz  microwaves  on  the  number  of 
appropriate  responses  between  8-12  s  of  inter-response  time  (IRT)  during  each  behavior  session. 
A  fixed  pulse  duration  (2  a<s),  pulse  repetition  rate  (500  pps)  and  duty  factor  (Iff1)  were  used  for 
pulsed  microwaves.  Thirty  minute  exposures  of  sham,  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  at  10,  50,  100, 
and  150  W/m2  were  used.  For  pulsed  microwaves,  the  corresponding  peak  power  densities  were 
10,  50,  100,  and  150  kW/m2.  Rats  were  exposed  at  weekly  intervals,  2  to  3  times  to  a  mixed 


217 


schedule  of  sham,  CW  and  pulsed  conditions.  Within  individual  comparisons  were  made.  They 
found  the  rate  of  emission  of  appropriately  timed  responses  declined  after  exposure  to  pulsed 
microwaves  at  100  and  150  W/m2,  whereas  similar  exposure  to  the  CW  microwaves  did  not 
produce  consistent  effects.  They  further  noted  that  the  overall  responses,  regardless  of  correct 
or  incorrect  responses,  were  not  reduced  as  a  result  of  microwave  exposure.  It  was  concluded 
that  the  rat's  ability  to  respond  was  not  impaired,  but  rather  that  its  ability  to  discriminate  the 
appropriate  IRT  interval  was  disrupted. 

Lebovitz  [1983]  compared  the  effects  of  CW  and  pulsed  1.3  GHz  microwaves  at  two 
different  levels  (5.9  W/kg  for  CW,  6.7  W/kg  for  pulsed,  and  3.6  W/kg  for  both  CW  and  pulsed) 
on  the  performance  of  rats  trained  on  a  multi-component  (fixed-ratio,  timeout,  FJR25  TO  10) 
operant  task  during  exposure.  The  pulse  characteristics  were  1  /is  pulse  duration,  600  pps  and 
6  *  10*4  duty  cycle.  A  circularly  polarized  waveguide  exposure  system  was  used.  Duration  of 
exposure  was  3  hours.  The  results  indicated  that  CW  (5.9  W/kg)  and  pulsed  (6.7  W/kg) 
microwaves  were  equally  effective  in  reducing  response  rates  during  both  the  fixed-ratio  and  the 
timeout  component  of  the  operant  task.  At  3.6  W/kg  the  mean  rates  of  fixed-ratio  responding 
were  unchanged,  whereas  the  rates  of  responding  during  timeout  were  reduced  significantly. 
Again,  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  yielded  essentially  equivalent  results.  The  conclusion  from 
this  report  was  derived  from  the  actual  behavioral  data  from  14  to  15  animals  in  each  treatment 
group.  The  author  further  commented  that  sensitivity  of  the  operant  behavior  to  microwave 
suppression  was  inversely  related  to  the  robustness  of  the  opeiaut  behavior.  Behavior  on  the  FR 
schedule  was  relatively  unaffected  while  behavior  during  the  TO  portion  seemed  to  be  more 
susceptable  to  microwave  exposure. 

D'Andrea  et  al.  [1994]  compared  the  effects  of  two  microwave  pulses  on  the  behavioral 
performance  of  monkeys.  The  behavioral  task  was  a  complex  schedule  composed  of  a  variable 
interval  schedule  (VI  25  s)  on  one  lever  and  a  color  discrimination  task  on  the  other  lever  for 
food.  The  pulsed  microwaves  were  5.62-GHz  operated  at  100  pps  generated  by  a  radar  unit  (2.8 
[jls  pulse  duration,  2.8  x  Iff4  duty  factor)  and  by  the  radar  unit  whose  output  was  amplified  by  a 
Stanford  Linear  Energy  Doubler  (SLED)  (50  ns  pulse  duration,  5  *  Iff7  duty  factor)  which 
enhanced  peak  power  by  a  factor  of  nine  by  adding  a  high  power  pulse  to  the  radar  pulse.  Sham 
exposure  and  three  whole-body  average  SARs  (2,  4  and  6  W/kg)  were  used.  To  achieve  these 
doses,  peak  power  densities  were  0.56, 1.28  and  2.77  kW/m2  for  radar  pulses  and  5.18, 12.70  and 
25.2  kW/m2  for  the  SLED  pulses.  The  duration  of  exposure  was  20  minutes.  Compared  to  sham 
exposures,  significant  alterations  of  lever  responding,  reaction  time,  and  earned  food  pellets 
occurred  during  microwave  exposure  at  4  and  6  W/kg  but  not  at  2  W/kg.  There  were  no 
differences  between  radar  or  SLED.  These  results  complimented  the  earlier  finding  in  de  Lorge's 
[1984]  study  of  the  behavioral  threshold  in  monkeys  exposed  to  5.8  GHz  pulsed  microwaves. 
Furthermore,  it  was  concluded  that  high  peak  power  microwaves  did  not  possess  a  unique  hazard 
at  peak  field  intensity  near  the  100  kV/m  (-26.5  MW/m2).  The  incident  pulse  energy  of  these 
pulses  (1.56  to  7.76  mJ/m2)  was  higher  than  the  threshold  for  microwave  hearing  (20-400  /rJ/m2) 
[Lin  1980,  1990,  Chou  et  al.  1982a],  hence,  an  acoustic  effect  could  be  expected.  Because  of 
equal  pulse  energies  between  radar  and  SLED  pulses,  differences  in  microwave  acoustic  effects 
do  not  seem  to  have  occurred. 

That  microwave  pulses  can  serve  as  a  discrimination  cue  in  behavioral  situations  is 
supported  by  works  of  several  investigators  [Frey  et  al.  1975,  Frey  and  Field  1975,  Johnson  et 
al.  1976,  Hjeresen  et  al.  1978],  Johnson  et  al.  [1976]  trained  rats  to  nose  poke  for  food  pellets 
on  an  FR5  schedule  in  the  presence  of  an  7.5  kHz  acoustic  cue  (10  pps,  3  ps).  When  a  918  MHz 


218 


microwave  signal  (150  W/m2  average,  10  pps,  10  ps,  1.5  MW/m2  peak  power  density)  was  used 
to  substitute  for  the  acoustic  cue  or  administered  during  an  extinction  period  (no  acoustic  cue  was 
given),  the  response  rate  of  the  animals  was  similar  to  that  during  the  period  when  the  acoustic 
cue  was  present.  Frey  et  al.  [1975]  used  a  shuttle  box  with  shielded  and  unshielded  sides  and 
studied  the  amount  of  time  that  rats  spent  in  each  side  of  the  shuttle  box.  A  1 .2  GHz  microwave 
was  presented  as  CW  (24  W/m2,  2.2  W/kg  whole-body  averaged  SAR)  or  pulsed  (10  W/m2 
average,  1  W/kg  whole-body  averaged  SAR,  21  W/m2  peak,  1,000  pps,  0.5  ms  pulse  duration). 
During  the  last  2  of  4  successive  daily  30  min  exposures,  rats  exposed  to  pulse  modulated 
microwaves  spent  less  time  (30  %)  in  an  unshielded  side  of  the  shuttle  box  than  the  CW  exposed 
rats  (64  %)  spent  in  the  unshielded  side.  Frey  and  Feld  [1975]  also  noted  similar  preferences 
(29%  in  the  unshielded  side  of  the  shuttle  box)  in  rats  exposed  to  1.2  GHz  pulsed  (100  pps,  3  ps) 
microwaves  at  two  levels  (4  W/m2  average,  1 .33  kW/m2  peak;  9  W/m2  average,  3  kW/m2  peak). 
Sham  exposed  rats  spent  57  %  of  their  time  in  the  unshielded  side  of  the  shuttle  box.  Hjeresen 
etal.  [1978]  used  a  more  sophisticated  paradigm  to  eliminate  the  original  side  preference.  The 
microwave  pulses  used  were  2.88  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  (95  W/m2  average,  330  W/m2  peak, 
100  pps,  2.3  ps).  They  found  a  similarity  between  microwave  pulses  and  conventional  auditory 
cues  in  motivating  side  preference.  These  results  and  the  absence  of  side  preference  when 
broadband  noise  was  administered  along  with  microwave  pulses,  led  to  the  conclusion  that  an 
auditory  stimulus  perceived  during  pulsed  microwave  exposure  was  capable  of  mediating  the 

preference  response. 

Ocular  Effects 

A  series  of  experiments  was  performed  using  isolated  rat  lenses  exposed  in  vitro  to  91 8 
MHz  pulsed  microwaves  (peak  absorption  rate=  480,000  W/kg,  10  ps  pulse  width,  and  various 
repetition  rates)  for  5  to  6  minutes  [Stewart-DeHaan  et  al.  1983;  1985;  Creighton  et  al.  1987], 
A  very  high  perfusion  rate  (1,600  ml/min)  was  used  to  prevent  excessive  heating  (<0.65  °C).  An 
absolute  threshold  for  inducing  holes  in  lens  fibers  at  23 1  W/kg  average  SAR  for  a  6  min 
exposure  was  estimated  in  these  studies.  It  was  suggested  that  the  lenticular  damage  could  be  due 
to  thermoelastic  expansion  and  the  result  of  pressures  based  on  the  observation  that  large  globules 
formed  in  the  exposed  lens  were  not  normally  seen  except  at  elevated  temperatures  of  47  and  50 
"C  in  lens  in  vitro.  CW  was  less  effective  in  inducing  lenticular  injury  than  pulsed  microwaves. 

Birenbaum  et  al.  [1969]  compared  the  effectiveness  of  the  CW  and  pulsed  (0.5  ps  pulse 
duration,  and  0.001  duty  factor,  i.e.,  2,000  pps)  5.8  GHz  microwaves  on  the  production  of 
lenticular  opacity  (cataract)  in  anesthetized  rabbits.  One  eye  was  exposed  while  the  other  served 
as  control.  A  dielectric  loaded  waveguide  with  1.27  cm  diameter  aperture  was  used  as  a  contact 
applicator.  Supra-threshold  power  densities  for  cataract  formation  were  selected.  Averaged 
aperture  power  density  was  4.34  to  7.89  kW/m2  (4.34  to  7.89  MW/m2  peak  aperture  power 
density)  for  pulsed  microwave  and  4.73  to  7.89  kW/m2  for  CW  microwave.  Duration  of  exposure 
range  from  1.5  to  90  minutes.  One  hundred  rabbits  were  used  for  each  of  the  two  exposure 
protocols.  The  endpoint  was  cataract  formation  one  month  after  exposure.  The  incidence  of 
cataract  formation  was  found  to  be  an  inverse  relation  between  aperture  power  density  and 
duration  of  exposure.  EDJ0  (50%  effective  dose)  of  the  aperture  power  density  and  duration  of 
exposure  from  each  exposure  protocol  was  constructed  and  compared.  It  was  concluded  that  a 
difference  in  effectiveness  of  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  in  inducing  cataract  was  not  found. 
Acute  inflammatory  reactions  of  the  cornea,  conjunctiva,  iris,  and/or  ciliary  body  were  observed 
in  many  eyes  and  probably  produced  in  every  exposed  rabbit  eye.  No  comparison  for  these  acute 


219 


ocular  inflammatory  reactions  was  made  between  pulsed  and  CW  exposures. 

An  assessment  of  injury  to  rabbit  corneas  in  vivo  induced  by  high  peak-power  35  GHz 
microwaves  (156  kW/m2  peak  power  density,  21.8  kW/kg  peak  SAR,  10  to  20/j.s  pulse  width, 
variable  repetition  rate,  15  min  exposure)  was  performed  by  Trevithick  et  al.  [1987],  Light 
microscope  and  scanning  electron  microscope  were  used  to  evaluate  the  cornea  morphology. 
They  found  that  cornea  damage  was  dependent  on  average  SAR.  The  threshold  for  a  single  cell 
destruction  was  approximately  at  33  W/kg.  Furthermore,  the  area  of  involvement  enlarged  as  the 
average  SAR  increased  until  large  areas  of  many  cells  were  completely  destroyed  at  550  W/kg. 
However,  a  CW  counterpart  was  not  performed.  Kues  etal.  [1985]  observed  comeal  endothelial 
abnormalities  in  anesthetized  cynomolgus  monkeys  exposed  to  CW  and  pulsed  2.45  GHz 
microwaves.  They  concluded  that  pulsed  microwaves  (100  W/m2  or  2.6  W/kg  average,  1  kW/m2 
peak,  100  pps,  10  us)  were  2  to  3  times  more  effective  than  CW  (200  to  300  W/m2)  in  inducing 
comeal  endothelial  abnormalities.  This  conclusion  was  derived  after  a  variable  number  of  4  hour 
exposures,  a  variable  number  of  examinations,  and  repetitive  use  of  ketamine  and  halothane. 
There  were  no  attempts  by  other  investigators  to  verify  this  pulse  enhancement  effect. 

Cardiovascular  Effects 

Pressman  and  Levitina  [1963]  compared  the  effects  of  2.4  GHz  CW  (70-120  W/m2)  and 
pulsed  3  GHz  microwaves  (30-50  W/m2  average,  43-71  kW/m2,  1  fis  pulse  duration,  700  pps,  7 
x  10“*  duty  factor)  on  the  heart  rate  of  rabbits.  They  administered  the  incident  fields  from  dorsal 
and  ventral  surfaces  onto  6  different  configurations:  entire  dorsal  surface,  dorsal  back  surface, 
dorsal  head  surface,  entire  ventral  surface,  ventral  stomach  surface  and  ventral  head  surface.  A 
coefficient  of  chronotropic  effect  (K)  was  defined  by  %  of  cases  showing  acceleration  (A)  and 
slowing  (S)  by  K  “  (100  +  A)  /  (100  +  S).  Positive  chronotropic  effect  (accelerated  heart  rate) 
was  defined  as  K  >  1,  negative  chronotropic  effect  (slowing  of  the  heart  rate)  as  K  <  1,  and  no 
effect  as  K  =  1.  They  concluded  that  dorsal  exposure  led  to  a  positive  chronotropic  effect  while 
ventral  exposure  led  to  a  negative  chronotropic  effect.  For  dorsal  exposure,  the  magnitude  of  K 
was  higher  in  pulsed  exposed  animals  than  that  of  CW  exposed  animals  despite  a  lower  averaged 
incident  power  density.  The  magnitude  of  negative  chronotropic  K  was  found  to  be 
proportionately  greater  with  larger  irradiated  surface  in  the  CW  ventrally  exposed  rabbits.  An 
inverse  relation  between  K  and  irradiated  surface  was  noted  in  pulsed  ventrally  exposed  rabbits. 
They  interpreted  that  the  negative  chronotropic  effect  was  caused  by  activation  of  skin  receptors 
and  the  positive  chronotropic  effect  by  brain  activation.  However,  the  maximum  changes  in  heart 
rates  were  +5  and  -8  beats  per  minutes  which  are  well  within  the  range  of  spontaneous  variation. 

Frey  and  Seifert  [1968]  showed  in  the  isolated  frog  heart  that  a  pulsed  1.425  GHz 
microwave  (6  pW/m2  average,  600  W/m2  peak,  1,000  pps,  10  ps)  administered  at  a 
synchronous  period  with  the  R  wave  in  the  ECG  (220  ms  after  the  P  wave)  resulted  in  tachycardia 
(increased  heart  rate)  or  arrhythmia  in  the  isolated  frog  heart.  However,  other  reports  [Liu  et  al. 
1976,  Clapman  and  Cain  1975,  Chou  etal  1980]  failed  to  find  this  pulse  synchronizing  (cardiac 
pacing)  effect.  The  pulse  characteristics  used  by  Liu  et  al.  [1976]  were  1 .42  GHz,  320  pW/m2 
average,  3.2  kW/m2peak,  1  pps,  100  ps).  Clapman  and  Cain  [1975]  attempted  to  replicate  Frey 
and  Seifert's  pulse  and  method  of  study  but  did  not  observe  cardiac  pacing.  In  addition,  the  heart 
rate  did  not  change  in  studies  with  a  different  peak  power  (55  W/m2),  a  different  carrier  frequency 
(3  GHz)  or  different  pulse  durations  (2  and  150  ps).  Chou  et  al.  [1980]  could  not  find  the  pulse 
synchronizing  effect  on  heart  rate  in  rabbits  exposed  in  vivo  to  pulsed  2.45  GHz  microwaves  (10 


220 


ps  pulse,  137  W/m2  peak,  pulse  duration  not  specified)  triggered  by  the  ECG  R  wave  at  various 
delays  (0,  100  and  200  ms)  corresponding  to  R,  T  and  P  waves  of  ECG.  Pakhomov  et  al.  [1995] 
studied  frog  auricle  contraction  rate  in  an  in  vitro  preparation.  The  frog  auricle  was  exposed  to 
pulsed  microwaves  at  915  or  885  MHz  for  2  min  with  a  peak  specific  absorption  rate  range 
between  100  and  3,000  W/kg,  a  pulse  duration  from  10"6  to  10'2  s  and  a  fixed  duty  factor  (7  * 
10'5).  Tachycardia  did  not  occur  unless  the  perfusate  temperature  increased  by  more  than  0.1  °C. 
Apparently,  low  intensity  pulsed  microwaves  syncluonized  with  the  ECG  were  ineffective  in 
inducing  detectable  changes  in  the  heart  rate. 

Hamrick  and  McRee  [1980]  assessed  the  effects  of  body  temperature  and  pulsed  and  CW 
microwaves  on  the  heart  rate  of  embryonic  quail.  They  exposed  the  embryos  to  2.45  GHz  CW 
microwaves  for  5-10  min  (SARs=  3,  6, 15,  and  30  W/kg)  at  incubation  temperatures  from  35  to 
38  °C,  and  to  pulsed  microwaves  (6  kW/kg  peak  SAR,  10  fxs  pulse  duration,  10-50  pps,  0.5  * 
10‘3  duty  factor,  and  0.3, 1.5  and  3  W/kg  average  SAR)  at  incubation  temperatures  of  35  to  39 
°C.  There  were  no  significant  differences  between  heart  rates  of  the  exposed  and  control 
embryos  in  any  of  the  groups  at  any  of  the  temperatures  used.  They  did  observe  that  embryonic 
heart  rate  increased  approximately  23  beats/min  for  each  1  °C  rise  in  incubation  temperature 
between  36  and  39  °C. 

Birenbaum  etal.  [1975]  evaluated  the  effects  of  2.8  GHz  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on 
heart  rates,  respiration  rate  and  subcutaneous  temperature  in  rabbits.  Four  power  densities  (200, 
400, 600  and  800  W/m2)  were  used  for  CW  exposures  but  only  200  W/m2  was  used  in  the  pulsed 
microwave  exposure.  The  pulse  characteristics  were  1 .3  fis  pulse  duration,  1,000  pps,  1.3  x  10'3 
duty  factor,  and  154  kW/m2  peak  power  density.  Dose  dependent  increases  in  heart  rate, 
respiration  rate  and  subcutaneous  temperature  were  noted  in  rabbits  exposed  to  CW.  Between 
200  W/m2  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves,  no  differences  in  any  of  three  endpoints  were  found. 

Frei  et  al.  [1988]  compared  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  2.8  GHz  pulsed  and  CW 
microwave  in  ketamine  anesthetized  rats.  Power  densities  in  CW  exposures  were  300,  450,  and 
600  W/m2  (8.4,  12.6,  and  16.8  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR).  Microwave  pulses  were  2  /is 
pulse  duration,  500  pps,  and  10'3  duty  factor  at  average  power  densities  similar  to  those  used  in 
CW  exposures  and  an  additional  average  power  density  at  750  W/m2  (21  W/kg).  Significant 
increases  in  heart  rate  were  observed  under  the  pulsed  conditions  except  at  300  W/m2  (8.4 
W/kg).  The  results  of  this  initial  study  and  a  follow-up  study  [Frei  et  al.  1989a]  are  compared 
in  Fig.  3.  Frei  et  al.  [1989a]  re-examined  cardiovascular  effects  with  far-field  whole-body 
exposure  at  2.8  GHz  and  whole  body  average  SAR  at  14  W/kg  for  CW  and  pulsed  microwave 
exposures.  Both  E-  and  H-orientations  were  used,  510  W/m2  was  used  for  both  CW  and  pulsed 
microwaves  (1  MW/m2  peak,  1,000  pps,  0.5  n s  pulse  duration,  0.5  x  10'3  duty  factor,  SA=  14 
mJ/kg)  in  E-orientation,  and  730  W/m2  for  both  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  in  H-orientation 
(1.46  MW/m2,  1,000  pps,  0.5  fx s  pulse  duration,  0.5  x  10‘3  duty  factor,  SA=  14  mJ/kg).  The 
cardiovascular  endpoints  of  this  study  were  heart  rate  and  mean  arterial  blood  pressure  in  the 
exposed  animals  when  their  colonic  temperature  reached  38.5,  39.0  and  39.5  °C  and  when 
colonic  temperature  returned  to  39.0  °C  after  exposure.  Sham  exposure  or  hyperthermia  induced 
by  other  modalities  was  not  investigated.  Although  the  time  needed  to  increase  colonic 
temperature  from  38.5  to  39.5  °C  differed  between  E-  or  H-orientation,  being  shorter  in  H- 
orientation,  both  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  increased  significantly  from  38.5  to  39.5  °C  (Fig. 
3)  [Frei  et  al.  1989a].  The  magnitude  of  changes  in  heart  rate  (30  to  41  beats  per  minute)  and 
blood  pressure  (9  to  14  mm  Hg)  were  statistically  significant  and  robust.  Differences  between 


221 


CW  or  pulsed  exposure  in  both  orientations  were  not  evident.  In  the  earlier  report,  Frei  et  al. 
[1988]  showed  a  significant  but  lower  degree  of  hyperthermic  tachycardia  by  pulsed  microwave 
exposure  when  the  rectal  temperature  was  increased  from  38.5  to  39.5  °C  by  12.6, 16.8  and  21 
W/kg  (Fig.  3).  On  the  other  hand,  heart  rate  did  not  increase  significantly  even  when  the  rectal 
temperature  was  increased  from  38.5  to  39.5  °C  by  8.4  W/kg  pulsed  microwave  or  by  8.4, 12.6 
and  16.8  W/kg  CW  microwaves.  The  only  change  of  mean  arterial  blood  pressure  in  this  earlier 


50 

4-0 

30 

20 

lO 

o 


—  io 


Data  from  Frei  et  <xl.  1988,  1989a,  2.8  GHz 


1960 

r  i  cw 
V7Z\  PW 


I  ^ 


B.4  12.6  E— 14.0  H  —  1 4.0  16.6  21.0 


E 

20 

1  5 

1  O 

°s 

cn 

cn 

LaJ 

5 

oz 

CL. 

ZZL 

O 

LlI 

cs> 
^ : 

-5 

<_> 

—  IO 

; - 1 - 1 - 

i  aaao 

H  cw 
reggg  pw 

1 

♦I* 

' ' 

:  |  § 
1  :  V 
■ ' 

$ 

■!t,s5s 

— i — 

* 

- 1 - 1 - - 

!  i  Li 

J  “  - 

* 

— i - 1 _ i _ 

8.4  12.6  E —  1 4.0  H— 14.0  16.6  21.0 


AVERAGE  SAR  (W/KG) 


Figure  3.  Comparison  of  cardiovascular  effects  between  CW  and  pulsed  2.8  GHz  microwaves  This 
figure  was  ploted  from  data  presented  by  Frei  et  al.  1 988, 1989a. 


report  was  a  decreased  blood  pressure  (hypotension)  when  the  rectal  temperature  was  increased 
from  38.5  to  39.5  °C  by  a  16.8  W/kg  CW  exposure.  Differences  between  pulsed  and  CW 
microwaves  on  heart  rate  and  arterial  blood  pressure  were  also  not  significant  [Frei  et  al.  1988], 
Further  comparisons  between  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  cardiovascular  endpoints  were  made 
by  Frei  et  al.  [1989]  in  anesthetized  rats  exposed  to  9.3  GHz  radiation.  Two  average  power 
densities  (300  and  600  W/m2,  SAR=  9.3  and  18.6  W/kg)  were  used.  A  fixed  duty  factor  (10  3 
from  2  ns  pulse  duration  and  500  pps)  was  used.  Thus,  peak  power  densities  were  300  and  600 
kW/m1.  Heart  rate  and  mean  arterial  blood  pressure  were  again  evaluated  from  38.5  to  39.5  and 
back  to  39.0  °C  at  0.5  °C  intervals.  A  significant  increase  in  heart  rate  (1 7  to  23  bpm)  was  noted 
when  rectal  temperature  was  raised  from  38.5  to  39.5  #C.  Differences  among  pulsed  and  CW 
microwaves  at  300  and  600  W/m2  were  not  noted.  None  of  these  four  exposures  altered  the  mean 
arterial  blood  pressure  significantly.  Reconciling  these  different  effects  under  similar 
circumstances  is  difficult. 


222 


The  difference  in  cardiovascular  responses  to  microwave  exposure  at  different  frequencies 
was  interpreted  as  a  result  of  difference  in  depth  of  penetration  causing  a  different  degree  of  skin 
heating  [Frei  etal.  1989],  On  the  other  hand,  the  inconsistencies  of  the  cardiovascular  response 
among  microwaves  operated  at  various  carrier  frequencies  could  be  caused  by  the  instability  of 
the  preparation  and  the  central  depressant  effect  of  the  anesthetic  agent  used.  Depressed 
responses  of  the  cardiovascular  system  to  microwave  induced  hyperthermia  were  clearly  shown 
by  the  same  group  of  investigators  [Frei  and  Jauchem  1989]  in  unanesthetized  and  anesthetized 
rats  exposed  to  2.8  GHz  CW  microwaves.  Significant  increases  in  heart  rate  (-50  bpm)  and 
blood  pressure  (~  16  mm  Hg)  were  observed  in  the  unanesthetized  rats  while  no  changes  (~  1  to 
2  bpm  and  -1  mm  Hg)  were  noted  in  the  anesthetized  rats  when  their  rectal  temperatures  were 
increased  from  38.5  to  39.5  °C  by  a  similar  microwave  exposure.  In  fact,  significant  increases 
in  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  were  noted  in  unanesthetized  rats  but  not  in  the  anesthetized  rats 
when  their  rectal  temperatures  were  increased  from  38.5  to  39.0  °C,  a  mere  0.5  °C  increase  by 
CW  microwave  exposure. 

Lu  et  al.  [1992]  used  dorsal  head-and-neck  exposure  (1.25  GHz  CW  and  pulsed)  in  a 
waveguide  exposure  system.  Three  different  whole  body  average  SARs  (0, 3.0,  and  9.7  W/kg) 
were  used  for  CW  and  pulsed  exposures.  T  .oral  brain  SARs  were  0,  9.5,  30.4  W/kg,  and  local 
neck  SARs  were  0, 34.3  and  1 10  W/kg.  Peak  power  of  the  microwave  pulses  were  capable  of 
producing  a  peak  absorption  rate  at  0.60  MW/kg  whole-body  average,  1 .9  MW/kg  brain,  and  6.9 
MW/kg  neck.  Two  pulse  repetition  rates  and  two  pulse  durations  were  used  to  match  the  low 
and  high  CW  exposures.  They  were  0.5  pps,  10  /is  (duty  factor*  5  *  10's,  SA=  6.0  J/kg  whole- 
body  average,  19  J/kg  brain  and  69  J/kg  neck),  and  16  pps,  1  /is  (duty  factor*  1.6  x  Iff5,  SA= 
0.6  J/kg  whole-body  average,  1.9  J/kg  brain  and  6.9  J/kg  neck).  Endpoints  of  the  study  were 
heart  rate,  systolic,  diastolic  and  mean  arterial  blood  pressures.  Pulse  pressure  (difference 
between  systolic  and  diastolic  pressures)  was  also  included.  Pre-exposure  baseline  and  sham- 
exp  OSUre  were  used  for  individual  and  treatment  controls.  They  noted  an  abnormal  decrease  in 
heart  rate  (bradycardia)  while  body  temperature  was  increasing  during  1.5  to  6  minutes  of 
exposure,  and  an  incomplete  recovery  in  6  min  after  exposure.  This  bradycardia  effect  was 
dependent  on  SAR  in  terms  of  number  of  animals  afflicted  with  the  change  and  the  magnitude  of 
change.  The  pulse  pressure  also  decreased  in  high  SAR  groups.  At  the  appearance  of 
bradycardia  (2  min  into  exposure),  the  increase  in  colonic  temperature  could  be  as  little  as  0.14 
°C  while  neck  temperature  increased  by  0.59  °C.  The  difference  between  potencies  of  CW  and 
pulsed  microwaves  in  inducing  these  cardiovascular  effects  was  inconclusive  due  to  the  large 
variability  in  individual  animals. 

Using  an  open-end  coaxial  exposure  system,  Seaman  and  DeHaan  [1993]  compared  the 
effects  of  190  s  exposures  to  2.45  GHz  CW,  pulsed,  and  square-wave-modulated  microwaves  on 
inter-beat  intervals  of  aggregated  cardiac  cells  from  a  chicken  embryo.  The  four  SARs  used  in 
CW  microwave  exposures  were  1 .2-2.1,  8.4-12.2,  42.6-48.3  and  72.0-89.9  W/kg.  The  pulsed 
microwaves  (10.9  /is  pulse  duration,  10,000  pps,  0. 109  duty  factor)  were  administered  at  two 
SARs  only,  I.2-2.1  (peak  SAR=  1 1-19  W/kg)  and  R.4-12.2  W/kg  ( peak  SAR=  77-1 12  W/kg). 
The  gated  CW  microwaves  were  modulated  at  16  and  0.8-1.7  Hz  with  a  0.50  duty  factor  at  two 
higher  SARs,  12.0-12.2  and  42.0-43.5  W/kg  (24.0-24.4  and  84.0-87  W/kg  peak  SAR).  Results 
of  the  study  indicated  that  the  inter-beat  intervals  decreased  (i.e.,  increased  heart  rate)  during  CW 
or  gated  CW  exposures  at  42.0  W/kg  or  higher.  The  tachycardia  effect  was  consistent  with  an 
effect  of  elevated  temperature  on  heart  rate.  Alteration  in  sensitivity  to  a  tachycardiac  effect  by 


223 


pulse  modulation  could  not  be  evaluated  because  comparable  SARs  (>  12.2  W/kg)  were  not 
evaluated.  However,  the  authors  noted  a  transient  decrease  in  the  inter-beat  intervals  at  8.4-12.2 
W/kg  during  the  95  s  post  pulsed  exposure  period,  not  the  subsequent  95  s  sampling  period. 
Increase  in  the  inter-beat  intervals  (slowing  of  the  heart  rate)  was  noted  during  CW  exposure  at 
1.2-2. 1  W/kg  between  sampling  time  points  during  the  beginning  and  end  of  exposure  periods, 
but  the  change  was  not  significantly  different  from  the  pre-exposure  baseline.  The  observations 
of  “low  SARs”  (<  8.4-12  2  W/kg)  on  the  heating  rates  were  considered  by  the  authors  to  be 
inconsistent  with  a  thermal  effect.  Because  of  an  unusual  large  standard  error  assocated  with  the 
transient  post-exposure  tachycardia  of  the  8.4-12.2  W/kg  pulsed  exposed  aggregate  and  a  slower 
beating  rate  during  the  pre-exposure  period,  this  isolated  case  of  post-exposure  transient 
tachycardia  could  be  a  chance  error. 

Wolke  etal.  [1996]  measured  the  intracellular  calcium  concentration  of  isolated  cardiac 
myocytes  of  the  guinea  pig  exposed  to  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  used  in  cellular  phones  (GSM 
standard).  A  host  of  exposure  conditions  was  studied.  In  comparison  to  sham  exposed  myocytes, 
decreased  intracellular  calcium  concentration  was  noted  in  myocytes  exposed  to  900  MHz,  50  pps 
pulses  at  30  mW/kg  (peak  SAR=  59  mW/kg,  duty  factor=  0.5).  The  authors  concluded  that  this 
small  difference  (decrease  from  0.011  ±  0.014  to  0.001  ±  0.009,  mean  ±  S.D.)  was  not  regarded 
as  a  relevant  effect  of  the  exposure.  In  comparison  to  other  studies,  the  duty  factors  used  in  this 
study  were  very  high  (0.14-0.80). 

Effects  on  Blood-Brain  Barrier  Integrity 

Frey  et  al.  [1975]  evaluated  the  integrity  of  the  blood-brain  barrier  by  comparing  the 
fluorescein  dye  concentrations  in  brain  slices  in  rats  after  30  minute  exposures  to  1.2  GHz 
microwaves  as  CW  (24  W/m2  2.2  W/kg  whole-body  averaged  SAR)  or  pulsed  (10  W/m2 
average,  1  W/kg  whole-body  averaged  SAR,  21  W/m2  peak,  1,000  pps,  0.5  ms  pulse  duration). 
The  fluorescein  dye  was  found  mostly  in  the  lateral  and  third  ventricles  of  the  brain.  The  dye 
concentration  in  the  brain  slice  was  higher  in  both  CW  or  pulse  exposed  animals  than  in  control 
animals.  Pulsed  microwaves  induced  a  similar  but  more  pronounced  increase  in  dye  concentration 
than  CW  microwaves.  Oscar  and  Hawkins  [1977]  also  compared  the  efficacies  of  20  minute 
exposures  between  CW  and  pulsed  1.3  GHz  microwaves  on  the  disruption  of  the  blood-brain 
barrier.  They  concluded  that  brain  permeability  increased,  depending  on  molecular  weight  (mol 
wt)  ofthe  tracer,  for  mannitol  (mol  wt=  182.2)  and  inulin  (mol  wt=  5,000)  but  not  dextran  (mol 
wt=  60,000  to  75,000)  in  rats  exposed  to  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  at  average  power  densities 
lower  than  30  W/m2.  Increased  permeability  was  observed  immediately  and  4  hours  after 
exposure,  but  not  24  hours  after  exposure.  Dose  response  curves  were  presented  for  CW,  and 
two  different  pulses  on  brain  uptake  of  mannitol  at  average  power  densities  lower  than  30  W/m2 . 
Biphasic  response  curves  were  noted  for  CW  and  one  of  the  pulsed  microwaves  (1,000  pps,  0.5 
pulse  duration,  0.0005  duty  factor)  and  the  pulsed  microwave  was  less  effective  in  increasing 
the  brain  uptake  of  mannitol  than  the  CW.  On  the  other  hand,  wider  pulses  with  a  lower 
repetition  rate  (5  pps,  10  fj.s  pulse  duration,  5  *  10'5  duty  factor)  were  much  more  effective  on 
increasing  the  brain  mannitol  uptake  than  CW  of  equivalent  average  power  densities.  The 
sensitivity  and  time-course  of  blood-brain  barrier  interruption  caused  by  microwaves  was  also 
noted  by  Albert  [1979],  Albert  [1979]  used  Chinese  hamster  and  2  hour  exposures  to  100  W/m2, 
2.8  GHz  CW  microwave.  Gross  and  ultrastructure  observations  of  horseradish  peroxide  in  the 
brain  were  used  to  evaluate  the  blood-brain  barrier  integrity.  Immediately  after  exposure,  leaky 


224 


or  disruption  of  the  blood-brain  barrier  was  indicated  by  the  dark-brown  stain  in  brain  slices  and 
the  electron  dense  horseradish  peroxidase  product  surrounding  the  affected  capillaries  in  the  brain. 
A  different  time-course  was  noted,  i.e.,  impermeability  of  blood-brain  barrier  to  horseradish 
peroxide  was  re-established  in  two  hours  after  exposure.  In  addition,  the  brain  temperature 
increase  was  less  than  0.4  “C  when  blood-brain  barrier  disruption  occurred. 

The  blood-brain  barrier  effect  of  microwave  exposure  was  not  confirmed  by  Preston  et 
al.  [1979]  who  used  the  same  Oldendorf  procedure  [Oldendorf  1970]  as  Oscar  and  Hawkins 
[1977]  and  did  not  find  changes  in  brain  uptake  index  of  mannitol  in  medulla,  cerebellum, 
diencephalon,  and  cortex  in  rats  exposed  to  2.45  GHz  CW  microwaves  at  1  to  300  W/m2  for  30 
minutes.  Menitt  elal.  [1978]  duplicated  some  of  the  pulsed  parameters  (1,000  pps,  0.5  ms  pulse 
duration  and  30  minute  exposure)  but  extended  the  peak  powers  from  20  to  150, 250,  and  750 
W/m2  which  resulted  in  average  power  densities  of  10, 75, 125,  and  375  W/m2.  They  noted  that 
fluorescein  concentration  in  various  areas  of  the  brain  increased  with  power  density.  However, 
none  of  pulsed  exposures  increased  brain  fluorescein  concentration  statistically.  For  positive 
control,  hypertonic  urea  and  ambient  heating  (43  °C  for  30  min.  resulted  in  more  than  a  4  °C 
increase  in  brain  temperature)  were  found  to  be  effective  in  disrupting  the  blood-brain  barrier 
integrity.  An  Oldendorf  [1970]  double  isotope  procedure  for  studying  blood-brain  barrier  was 
also  used  by  Merritt  et  al.  [1978],  Four  different  1.3  GHz  microwave  pulses  were  used.  Their 
average  power  densities  were  20  W/m2  (2  kW/m2,  1,000  pps,  10  /is  pulse  duration),  200  W/m2 
(20  kW/m2,  1,000  pps,  10  y us  pulse  duration),  3  W/m1  (6  kW/m2  peak,  50  pps,  10  /is  pulse 
duration)  and  15  W/m2  (30  kW/m2,  50  pps,  10  /is  pulse  width).  The  comparable  CW  counterparts 
were  not  used.  Neverthless,  CW  exposures  were  1,  10,  100  and  500  W/m2  Sham  exposed 
animals  and  30  minute  ambient  heated  (45  °C)  animals  injected  with  serotonin  (50  mg/kg,  i.p.) 
and  animals  injected  with  hypertonic  urea  were  used  for  control  and  positive  control.  Brain 
uptake  index  of  mannitol  was  used  as  a  measurement  of  the  blood-brain  leakage.  Again,  no  effect 
on  blood-brain  integrity  was  noted  in  rats  after  30  minute  exposures  to  pulsed  microwaves.  The 
exception  was  the  increased  manitol  uptake  index  in  ambient  heated  serotonin  injected  and  urea 
injected  animals.  Fluorescein  leakage  into  the  brain  parachyma  was  also  used  by  Merritt  et  al. 
[1978]  for  evaluation  of  the  blood-brain  barrier  integrity  in  rats  exposed  to  1.2  GHz  pulsed 
microwaves  at  0,  20, 150,  250  and  750  W/m2  average  power  densities  at  fixed  duty  factor  (0.5) 
from  1,000  pps  and  0.5  ms  pulse  duration.  Thus,  the  peak  power  densities  were  0, 40,  300,  500 
and  1,500  W/m2.  The  CW  counterparts  were  not  included.  A  positive  control  was  a  30  minute 
ambient  heating  at  45  °C.  With  the  exception  of  positive  controls,  none  of  exposed  groups 
showed  increased  fluorescence  in  brain  slices.  Gruenau  et  al.  [1982]  also  reported  no  significant 
change  on  the  penetration  of  14C-sucrose  into  the  brain  of  rats  after  a  30  minute  exposure  to  2.8 
GHz  microwaves  either  as  pulsed  radiation  (2  /is  pulse  duration,  500  pps,  10‘3  duty  factor)  of 
various  intensities  (10  to  150  W/m2)  or  as  CW  radiation  of  various  intensities  (100  to  400  W/m2). 

In  contrast  to  these  negative  results  on  the  disruption  of  the  blood  brain  barrier,  several 
studies  report  significant  increases  in  brain  temperature  as  a  result  of  appropriate  microwave 
exposure  with  consistent  blood-brain  barrier  disruption  and  graded  severity  of  the  disruption.  Lin 
and  Lin  [1980,  1982],  Goldman  et  al.  [1984]  and  Williams  et  al.  [1984a]  all  have  demonstrated 
that  increased  dye  or  tracer  leakage  into  the  brain  tissue  would  not  occur  unless  microwave 
exposure  caused  at  least  a  4  to  5  °C  increase  in  brain  temperature.  At  this  brain  temperature  (42 
°C),  the  colonic  temperature  of  the  whole-body  exposed  rat  was  usually  maintained  at  41.5  °C 
which  could  result  in  reduced  renal  excretion  of  tracers  [Kanter  1960],  therefore,  blood 


225 


concentration  of  the  tracer  could  rise  which  increased  brain  uptake  of  the  tracer.  Oscar  et  al. 
[1981]  noted  increased  blood  flow  in  all  17  brain  regions  by  39%  to  more  than  100%  in  rats  after 
60  minute  exposures  to  a  2.8  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  (2  fis  pulse  duration,  100  pps,  150  W/m2 
average).  Therefore,  brain  uptake  of  tracers  could  be  enhanced  by  the  increased  brain  perfusion 
rate.  The  tracer  concentration  in  the  brain  parachyma  caused  by  increased  brain  blood  flow  can 
mimic  changes  in  endpoints  similar  to  those  caused  by  a  low  level  increase  in  blood-brain  barrier 
permeability. 

On  the  other  hand,  localized  brain  exposure  was  used  in  experiments  performed  by  Lin 
and  Lin  [1980, 1982]  and  Goldman  et  al.  [1984]  and  less  than  a  1  °C  change  in  rectal  temperature 
was  noted.  Although  an  indirect  renal  effect  on  blood  tracer  concentration  was  less  important  in 
the  experiments  using  localized  brain  exposure,  the  hyperthermic  enhancement  of  brain  perfusion 
could  not  be  entirely  dismissed.  The  dependency  of  blood-brain  barrier  disruption  on  brain 
hyperthermia  was  further  demonstrated  by  Neilly  and  Lin  [1986].  Graded  doses  of  ethanol  (0, 
0.1,  0,3,  0.5,  and  0.7  g/kg  body  weight)  were  administered  to  reduce  the  magnitude  of  brain 
temperature  increase  in  rats  caused  by  a  constant  local  brain  exposure  (3.15  GHz,  CW,  30 
kW/m2, 15  minutes).  The  graded  reduction  in  severity  of  blood-brain  barrier  disruption  was  found 
to  be  correlated  with  a  reduction  in  brain  hyperthermia  by  graded  doses  of  ethanol.  Sutton  and 
Carroll  [1979]  demonstrated  that  the  mortality  and  severity  of  blood-brain  barrier  disruption  was 
less  if  the  lower  body  of  the  animal  was  precooled  to  30  °C  while  the  brain  temperature  was 
maintained  at  a  threshold  hyperthermic  level  of  40  to  45  °C  by  microwave  exposure. 

Additional  studies  on  effects  of  microwaves  on  the  permeability  of  horseradish  peroxidase, 
and  sucrose  through  the  blood-brain  barrier  were  also  performed  by  Williams  et  al.  [Williams  et 
al.  1984b,  1984c,  1984d].  Microwave  radiation  and  blood-brain  barrier  function  has  been  studied 
extensively  in  the  past.  An  additional  review  on  the  topic  can  be  found  in  an  article  by  Lai  [1994], 
It  was  concluded  that  later  studies  were  not  supportive  of  the  earlier  findings,  the  disruption  of 
blood-brain  barrier  by  low  SAR  microwaves,  by  Frey  et  al.  [1975]  and  Oscar  and  Hawkins 
[1977],  In  fact,  it  was  concluded  that  suppression  of  blood-brain  barrier  permeability  occurs  as 
a  result  of  microwave  exposure,  and  that  this  effect  is  mediated  by  temperature-dependent 
changes  in  endothelial  cell  function,  and  not  by  quantities  unique  to  microwave  energy  [Williams 
etal.  1984c], 

Effects  on  Nervous  System 

Baranski  [1972a]  compared  the  effectiveness  of  3  GHz  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  (400 
pps)  on  brain  histology  and  histochemistry  in  guinea  pigs.  Six  different  microwave  treatments 
were  used.  They  were  35  W/m2  in  CW  and  pulsed  for  3  hours  daily  for  3  months,  one  35  W/m2 
in  CW  and  pulsed  for  3  hours  and  one  250  W/m2  in  CW  and  pulsed  for  3  hours.  No  other  pulse 
characteristics  were  included.  He  concluded  that  chronic  repeated  microwave  exposure  led  to 
a  morphologic  lesion  indicative  of  metabolic  disturbances  in  myelin  sheaths  and  glial  cells  as 
expressed  by  the  appearance  of  peculiar  metachromatic  spherical  bodies.  Glial  cell  proliferation, 
decreased  acetylcholinesterase  activity  and  decreased  acid  dehydrogenase  activity  were  also 
noted.  These  effects  were  more  profound  after  exposure  to  pulsed  microwaves  than  after 
exposure  to  CW  microwaves.  Due  to  lack  of  information,  the  dependence  of  pulse  enhancement 
on  peak  SAR  or  SA  could  not  be  evaluated. 

Seaman  and  Wachtel  [1978]  compared  the  effectiveness  of  1 .5  and  2.45  GHz  pulsed  and 
CW  microwaves  on  the  firing  rate  of  the  Aplysia  pacemakers.  They  found  that  a  few  W/kg 


226 


exposure  for  2  to  3  minutes  could  change  the  firing  rate  of  Aplysia  pacemakers.  While  a 
difference  between  pulsed  and  CW  microwaves  on  the  slow  response  was  not  apparent,  pulsed 
microwaves  could  induce  a  rapid  response  more  readily  than  did  CW  radiation  at  the  same  SAR. 
An  earlier  report  [Watchel  et  al.  1975]  by  the  same  group  of  investigators  indicated  that  they 
were  unable  to  detect  any  significant  differences  in  the  effects  of  pulsed  (10  /^s  pulse  duration,  at 
1,000  and  5,000  pps)  versus  CW  microwaves  on  Aplysia  pacemakers  exposed  at  10  W/kg. 
Details  of  pulse  characteristics  in  both  reports  were  not  provided  by  these  authors  other  than  that 
a  0.5  to  10  pis  pulse  duration  and  1,000  to  5,000  pps  were  used. 

Chou  and  Guy  [1978]  compared  the  effect  of  pulsed  and  CW  2.45  GHz  microwaves  on 
compound  action  potentials  of  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerves,  cat  saphenous  nerves,  rabbit  vagus 
nerves  and  superior  cervical  ganglia,  as  well  as  contractility  of  rat  diaphragm  muscles  in  a 
waveguide  exposure  system  with  circulating  Ringer's  solution  to  maintain  a  constant  bath 
temperature  during  exposure.  Graded  peak  SARs  (0.3,  3,  30  and  220  kW/kg)  were  used.  A 
constant  duty  factor  (Iff3)  was  used  by  combining  two  pulse  repetition  rates  (1,000  pps  and  100 
pps)  and  two  pulse  durations  (1  ps  and  10  ps)  to  obtain  average  SARs  at  0.3,  3,  30,  and  220 
W/kg.  They  concluded  that  there  were  no  significant  changes  in  characteristics  of  nerves 
(compound  action  potentials,  CAP)  and  muscles  exposed  to  CW  at  SARs  of 0.3-1500  W/kg  and 
pulsed  peak  SARs  of 0,3-220  kW/kg  (average  SAR  of 0.3-220  W/kg).  No  direct  stimulation  of 
nerves  by  either  CW  or  pulsed  microwaves  was  observed.  At  the  higher  specific  absorption  rates, 
the  CAP  showed  a  slight  increase  in  conduction  velocity  but  no  change  in  amplitude.  This  result 
was  consistent  with  a  1  °C  increase  in  bathing  solution  temperature  wherein  the  results  were 
replicated  by  increasing  the  bathing  solution  temperature  of  an  unexposed  preparation. 

In  a  series  of  two  reports,  McRee  and  Wachtel  [1980, 1982]  compared  the  effectiveness 
of  pulsed  and  CW  2.45  GHz  microwaves  on  altering  the  “vitality”  of  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerves 
stimulated  with  twin  electric  pulses  separated  by  a  5  ms  interval  at  50  pulse  pairs  per  second. 
“Vitality”  was  defined  as  the  half-decay  time  ratio  of  the  CAPs  between  exposed  and  control 
nerves.  Both  CAPs  were  examined.  Microwave  pulses  used  were  10  W/kg  average  SAR,  20 
kW/kg  peak  SAR,  10  ps  pulse  duration,  50  pps  and  0,5  x  10  J  duty  factor.  The  microwave  pulses 
were  delivered  in  three  different  phases  of  nerve  firing:  (1)  asynchronous,  wherein  the  microwave 
pulse  was  delivered  at  varying  times  in  the  nerve  firing  cycle;  (2)  synchronous,  with  the  peak  of 
the  action  potential;  (3)  synchronous,  with  the  quiescent  period  between  nerve  firings.  A  20  to 
30  minute  exposure  was  used.  In  all  pulsed  microwave  exposures,  the  “vitality”  decreased  in 
comparison  to  the  unexposed  mate  (control).  However,  the  magnitude  of  this  effect  was 
essentially  the  same  in  all  three  cases  and  was  also  comparable  with  the  effect  seen  using  CW 
microwaves  of  equivalent  SAR. 

Arber  and  Lin  [1985a]  noted  that  snail  neurons  exposed  to  CW  microwaves  (12.9  W/kg) 
at  constant  temperatures  (8  and  21  °C)  resulted  in  inhibited  spontaneous  activity  and  reduced 
input  resistance.  On  the  other  hand,  modulated  (amplitude  modulated  at  a  radom-noise 
frequency,  2-20  kHz)  microwaves  at  6.8  and  14.4  W/kg  predominately  caused  excitory  responses 
and  increased  membrane  resistance.  Tt  was  concluded  that  the  microwave  effect  on  snail  neurons 
was  related  to  the  release  of  intracellular  calcium  ions  (Ca^)  [Arber  and  Lin  1985a].  The 
conclusion  was  based  on  the  observation  that  intracellular  injection  of  EDTA,  a  chelating  agent, 
completely  eliminated  the  microwave  responses  in  snail  neurons  [Arber  1981]  and  the 
manipulation  of  extracellular  Ca”  concentration  had  not  influenced  the  fall  of  membrane 
resistance  induced  by  microwaves  [Arber  and  Lin  1985b],  Ginsburg  et  al.  [1992]  re-evaluated 
the  principle  that  weak  microwave  fields  could  perturb  a  nonequilibrium  physiochemicai  process 


227 


in  an  excitable  tissue  at  a  constant  system  temperature.  They  could  not  replicate  the  original 
findings  of  Arber  and  Lin  [1985a]  and  concluded  that  microwave  irradiation  might  enhance 
metabolic  rundown  and/or  loss  of  ion  channel  function  which  occurred  over  time.  In  addition, 
a  specific  target  for  microwave  interaction  with  neurons  was  not  suggested  by  them  [Ginsburg 
etal.  1992]. 

Chou  et  al.  [1982b]  compared  the  effects  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  the 
electroencephalogram  and  visual  and  auditory  evoked  potentials.  The  microwaves  were  2.45 
GHz  at  15  W/m2  average,  2  hours  per  day  for  3  months.  The  pulse  characteristics  were  10  fxs 
pulse  duration,  100  pps  and  10‘3  duty  factor.  Six  rabbits  (3  males  and  3  females)  were  used  in 
sham-,  CW-  and  pulsed-exposure  groups.  Frequency  spectrum  and  amplitude  of  sensory-motor 
cortex  and  occipital  cortex  were  evaluated  over  the  3  month  exposure  period.  Due  to 
considerable  variations  from  animal  to  animal  and  from  recording  session  to  recording  session, 
comparison  was  difficult.  Other  than  a  general  trend  of  decreased  amplitude  during  the  later  part 
of  the  experiment,  no  difference  was  found  in  the  EEG  endpoints.  Similar  variations  also  existed 
in  visual  and  auditory  evoked  potential.  Again,  no  consistent  change  in  amplitude  or  latency  of 
either  evoked  potentials  was  noted. 

Lai  et  al.  [1988]  measured  the  cholinergic  activity  in  the  brain  tissue  by  determining  the 
sodium-dependent  high-affinity  choline  uptake  (HACU)  of  brain  tissue  of  rats  after  45  minutes 
exposure  to  2.45  GHz  at  0.6  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR  in  either  pulsed  radiation  (500  pps, 

2  (J.S  pulse  duration,  10°  duty  factor)  or  CW  radiation  in  a  circularly  polarized  waveguide 
exposure  system  or  in  the  far-field  in  a  miniature  anechoic  chamber.  They  found  a  decreased 
HACU  in  frontal  cortex  regardless  of  pulsed  or  CW  radiations  or  exposure  system  used. 
Decreased  hippocampal  HACU  occurred  only  after  exposure  to  pulsed,  but  not  CW  radiation  in 
both  exposure  systems.  Decreased  striatal  HACU  occurred  in  rats  after  exposure  to  either  pulsed 
or  CW  radiation  in  the  miniature  anechoic  chamber,  but  not  after  exposure  in  the  circularly 
polarized  waveguide.  None  of  four  exposure  conditions  altered  the  hypothalamic  HACU.  No 
significant  pattern  was  found  between  brain  local  SAR  and  decreased  HACU.  This  led  the 
authors  to  conclude  that  the  effect  of  microwaves  on  the  brain  HACU  originated  from  other  sites 
in  the  brain  or  body.  Decreased  frontal  and  hippocampal  choline  uptake,  an  indication  of 
decreased  cholinergic  activity,  was  considered  to  be  the  mechanism  for  decreased  working 
memory  in  pulsed  exposed  rats  who  committed  more  errors  than  sham  exposed  animals  when 
tested  in  a  radial  arm  maze  [Lai  et  al.  1987, 1994],  The  experiment  on  the  pulsed  effect  has  not 
be  been  repeated  independently  by  other  investigators. 

Effects  on  Blood,  Hemopoietic  (Hematopoietic)  System  and  Serum  Chemistry 

Czerski*/ a/.  [1974]  and  Baranski  and  Czerski  [1976]  reported  a  study  aimed  to  compare 
the  effects  of  2.95  GHz  CW  (n=  5)  and  pulsed  (n-  9)  microwaves  on  the  hemopoiesis  of  rabbits 
at  30  W/m2  averaged  power  density,  2  hours  daily  for  74  hours.  Characteristics  of  these 
microwave  pulses  were  1  fxs  pulse  duration,  1,200  pps  and  1.2  *  10'3  duty  factor.  In  comparison 
to  the  control  group  (n=19),  erythrocyte  concentration,  hemoglobin  concentration  and  hematocrit 
did  not  alter  significantly  in  rabbits  exposed  to  CW  or  pulsed  microwaves  [Baranski  and  Czerski 
1976].  On  the  other  hand,  alterations  in  iron  kinetics  were  noted.  These  changes  included 
increased  half  life,  decreased  iron  transport  rate,  decreased  iron  turnover  rate,  decreased  iron 
incorporation  into  erythrocytes  and  decreased  percent  of  erythrocyte  production  [Czerski  et  al. 
1974],  Czerski  et  al.  [1974]  concluded  that  perhaps  the  most  interesting  finding  is  that  74  h  of 


228 


exposure  to  pulsed  microwaves  induced  much  more  pronounced  effects  than  to  CW  of  the  same 
duration,  the  difference  between  these  groups  being  highly  significant.  The  overall  picture  of  the 
alteration  in  iron  kinetics  appears  to  be  consistent  with  a  slower  turnover  of  circulating 
erythrocyte,  perhaps  erythrocytes  lived  longer  in  exposed  than  in  control  rabbits.  However, 
overlapping  of  error  bars  was  noted.  Due  to  the  absence  of  details  in  inferential  statistics  and  the 
nature  of  the  error  bars,  it  is  difficult  to  reconcile  the  validity  of  a  pulsed  effect. 

Chou  et  cd,  [1982b]  in  the  previously  referred  study  also  compared  the  effects  CW  and 
pulsed  microwave  had  on  blood  cellular  elements.  Hematological  endpoints  were  red  blood  cell 
concentration,  white  blood  cell  concentration,  hemoglobin  concentration,  hematocrit,  mean 
corpuscle  volume,  mean  corpuscle  hemoglobin  concentration,  %  of  reticulocyte  and  differential 
leukocyte  (neutrophil,  lymphocyte,  eosinophil,  basophile  and  monocyte)  concentrations.  These 
endpoints  were  evaluated  either  at  monthly  intervals  or  at  the  end  of  the  three  month  exposure. 
Tabulated  data  (mean  and  standard  deviation)  were  presented  along  with  the  “normal  range” 
reported  in  the  literature  for  this  species  of  animal.  It  was  concluded  that  minor  morphological 
alterations  of  red  blood  cells  (poikilocytosis  -  irregular  shape,  polychromasia  -  stained  with  basic 
and  add  dyes,  anisocytosis  -  considerable  variation  in  size)  occurred  in  all  three  groups  of  animals. 
No  statistical  differences  were  found  among  them.  Exaotly  the  same  conclusion  was  presented 
by  Baranski  and  Czerski  [1974],  Because  of  large  biological  variations  and  subtle  differences 
between  the  effects  of  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves,  the  authors  [Chou  etal.  1982b]  concluded 
that  a  larger  number  of  animals  should  be  used  in  future  experiments. 

Baranski  [1971]  compared  the  effects  of  CW  and  pulsed  3  GHz  (10  cm)  microwaves  at 
35  W/m2 3  hours  daily  exposures,  except  Sundays,  for  3  months  on  the  hemopoietic  system.  The 
pulse  characteristics  were  not  specified.  A  relatively  large  number  of  animals  (n=  50),  including 
rabbits  and  guinea  pigs,  were  used  in  each  sham,  CW  and  pulsed  exposure.  At  the  end  of  3 
month  exposures,  red  blood  cell  concentration  did  not  change  significantly  from  those  of  sham 
exposed  animals  in  both  species  of  animals  exposed  to  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  author  reported  alterations  of  erythroblast  maturation  process  in  bone  marrow  of 
guinea  pigs  exposed  to  microwaves.  Immediately  after  3  months  of  pulsed  exposure,  a  marked 
depression  in  the  percentage  of  proerythroblasts  and  basophilic  erythroblasts  was  noted.  This 
depression  was  accompanied  by  increases  in  percentage  of  polychromatic  and  orthochromatic 
erythroblasts  indicating  an  accelerated  maturation  process.  Similar  changes  in  the  erythroblast 
maturation  process  was  noted  but  to  a  lesser  degree  in  guinea  pigs  exposed  to  CW  than  to  those 
exposed  to  pulsed  microwaves.  However,  changes  in  erythroblast  maturation  did  not  result  in  a 
change  of  the  total  erythroblast  percentage  in  bone  marrow  cells.  In  addition,  the  mitotic  index 
of  the  erythroblasts  in  bone  marrow  decreased  after  exposure  for  3  months,  even  more  after  4 
months.  One  month  after  termination  of  exposure  to  CW  the  mitotic  index  returned  to  normal, 
but  overcompensation  was  noted  one  month  after  pulsed  microwave  exposure.  The  mitotic  index 
readied  nearly  twice  the  control  value  in  pulsed  exposed  guinea  pigs.  Since  circulating  red  blood 
cell  concentration  was  not  evaluated  1  month  after  exposure,  the  possibility  of  resultant 
erythropenia  and  erythrocytosis  is  not  known.  Results  of  cytological  examination  indicated 
profound  changes  in  the  nudei  of  erythroblasts.  These  changes  included  karyolysis,  fragmentation 
of  nuclei,  pycnosis,  clumping  of  chromosomes,  chromosomal  bridges  and  splitting  off  of 
chromosomes.  However,  quantitative  or  semiquantitative  data  was  not  presented. 

Baranski  [1971,  1972b]  also  noted  increased  white  blood  cell  concentrations 
(leukocytosis)  hy  approximately  50%  to  more  than  100%  in  both  species  exposed  to  either  CW 
or  pulsed  microwaves.  This  leukocytosis  was  contributed  primarily  by  lymphocytosis  (increased 


229 


lymphocytes).  Lymphocytes  increased  further  during  the  first  2  weeks  and  showed  a  tendency 
to  normalization  from  the  third  week  after  termination  of  the  3  month  exposures  in  guinea  pigs. 
Difference  between  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  leukocyte  concentration  was  not  significant. 
In  fact,  leukocyte  concentration  in  rabbits  exposed  to  pulsed  microwaves  was  consistently  lower 
than  those  exposed  to  CW  microwaves  in  both  species  of  animals.  The  leukocytosis 
(lymphocytosis)  was  not  accompanied  by  significant  changes  in  percent  composition  of  bone 
marrow  cells.  The  stamped  smear  preparation  of  lymph  nodes  and  spleen  showed  a  marked 
increase  in  lymphoblasts  and  reticulum  cells  in  exposed  guinea  pigs  in  comparison  with  controls. 
Abnormality  of  nuclear  structure  and  mitosis  were  analogous  to  those  seen  in  erythroblasts 
[Baranski  1971].  Mitotic  rates  of  lymphopoiesis  were  further  studied  by  the  percentage  of  cells 
labeled  with  tritiated  thymidine.  Several  fold  increases  in  S-phase  labeling  were  noted  in  lymph 
node  and  spleen  of  microwave  exposed  rats.  Again,  CW  appeared  to  be  more  potent  than  pulsed 
microwaves  in  inducing  increases  in  mitotic  rate  of  lymphoblasts.  The  overall  response  of 
lymphocytosis  appears  to  be  an  immuno-stimulation  of  unknown  nature.  In  these  experiments, 
multiple  post  exposure  data  was  compared  to  a  single  control  datum  [Baranski  1971,  1972b], 
Apparently,  the  control  data  were  either  pooled  or  historical  in  nature.  If  concurrent  controls 
were  not  used,  one  has  to  question  the  validity  of  these  results. 

Wangemann  and  Cleary  [1976]  compared  the  effects  of  2  hour  exposures  to  2.45  GHz 
CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  blood  chemistry  of  Dutch  rabbits.  Two  power  densities,  100  and 
250  W/m2  average  were  used.  For  pulsed  microwaves,  a  10  fi s  pulse  duration  and  a  fixed  peak 
power  density  of  4.85  kW/m2  were  used.  Thus,  two  duty  factors  (0.0206  and  0.0485)  and  two 
pulse  repetition  rates  (2.06  x  103  and  5.15  x  10?  pps)  were  used.  Additional  groups  of  rabbits 
were  exposed  to  50  W/m2  and  sham-exposed  controls  (n=  12).  Five  to  six  rabbits  were  used  in 
all  other  groups.  Blood  chemistry  endpoints  were  serum  concentration  of  calcium,  inorganic 
phosphate,  glucose,  blood  urea  nitrogen  (BUN),  uric  add,  cholesterol,  total  protein,  alkaline 
phosphatase  (AP),  lactic  dehydrogenase  (LDH)  and  serum  glutamic  oxalic  transaminase  (SGOT). 
These  endpoints  were  obtained  as  pre-exposure  baselines  and  post-exposure  levels  immediately, 
1,  3,  and  7  days  after  exposure.  A  significant  rise  in  mean  serum  glucose  concentrations  was 
found  in  all  microwave-irradiated  animals  immediately  after  exposure;  and  returned  to  baseline 
levels  1  day  later.  The  magnitude  of  changes  in  scrum  glucose  concentration  was  dose-dependent 
in  CW  exposed  rabbits,  18%  in  50  W/m2  CW,  29%  in  100  W/m2  CW  and  44%  in  250  W/m  2  CW 
exposed  rabbits.  Similar  changes  at  a  lesser  degree  were  noted  in  pulsed  exposed  rabbits.  The 
increase  in  serum  glucose  concentration  was  considered  to  be  a  consequence  of  “thermal  stress” 
because  significant  increases  in  rectal  temperature  were  noted  in  rabbits  exposed  to  250  W/m2 
CW  and  pulsed  microwaves.  In  addition,  significant  increases  in  BUN  (50%)  and  uric  acid 
(150%)  concentrations  were  noted  in  250  W/m2  CW  but  not  pulsed  exposed  rabbits.  Focal 
hemorrhagic  lesion  and  mild  to  moderate  tubular  nephrosis  were  noted  in  representative  rabbits 
24  hours  after  “2-3”  hour  exposure  to  250  W/m2  CW  microwave.  Thus,  gross  and 
histopathological  findings  confirmed  the  observation  of  renal  injury  indicated  by  BUN  and  uric 
acid.  Other  focal  lesions  were  observed  in  the  psoas  muscle,  liver,  kidneys,  pulmonary  tissue. 
However,  no  pathology  was  observed  in  animals  examined  1-2  weeks  after  exposure.  All  other 
serum  chemistry  endpoints  did  not  change  significantly.  The  renal  injury  in  the  250  W/m2  CW 
exposed  rabbits  appeared  to  be  caused  by  a  significant  degree  of  hyperthermia  since  the  rectal 
temperature  of  these  animals  increased  by  an  average  of  2.7  °C  reaching  40.7  °C  at  the  end  of 
a  2  hour  exposure.  The  absence  of  renal  effect  in  the  250  W/m1  pulsed  exposed  rabbits  could  also 
be  explained  by  a  lower  degree  of  hyperthermia  (1.7  °C  increase  and  40. 1  °C)  at  the  end  of  a  2 


230 


hour  exposure.  Because  of  a  large  difference  in  degree  of  hyperthermia  between  CW  and  pulsed 
exposed  rabbits,  it  is  doubtful  that  the  investigators  administered  an  equivalent  SAR  during  the 
CW  and  pulsed  exposures. 

Chou  etal.  [1982b]  also  compared  the  effects  of  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  blood 
chemistry  but  at  a  lower  intensity.  As  stated  previously,  the  microwave  was  2.45  GHz  at  15 
W/m2  average,  2  hours  per  day  for  3  months.  The  blood  chemistry  endpoints  were  sodium  ion 
concentration,  potassium  ion  concentration,  chloride  ion  concentration,  carbon  dioxide 
concentration,  ion  gap,  total  protein  concentration,  blood  urea  nitrogen  concentration,  glucose 
concentration,  total  complement  concentration,  triiodothyronine  resin  uptake,  thyroxine 
concentration,  percentage  of  albumin,  and  cortisol  concentration.  No  change  in  any  of  these 
blood  chemistry  endpoints  was  noted.  These  results  seem  to  support  the  thermal/hyperthermic 
nature  of  the  changes  in  blood  chemistry  of  the  Wangemann  and  Cleary  [1976]  study. 

Lymphoblastoid  Transformation 

A  study  by  Stodolnik-Baranska  [1967]  has  raised  the  possibility  that  the 
immunocompetent  cells  of  humans  are  particularly  susceptible  to  microwave  radiation.  In  fact, 
it  was  claimed  that  microwaves  were  the  only  physical  agent  known  to  cause  stimulation  of 
spontaneous  lymphoblastoid  transformation.  These  studies  were  admitted  by  some  authors  to 
be  poorly  reproducible  and  nonquonthative  [Roberts  at  al.  1983],  Nonetheless,  the  study  is 
frequently  cited,  and  has  provided  the  limited  data  available  on  exposure  of  human  leukocytes, 
for  use  by  individuals  and  agencies  that  develop  environmental  health  standards  [Roberts  et  al. 
1983], 

Stodolnik-Baranska  [1974]  summarized  the  stimulatory  effect  of  pulsed  2.95  GHz 
microwaves  on  spontaneous  lymphoblastoid  transformation  of  human  lymphocytes  in  culture. 
The  mitotic  index  of  human  lymphocytes  in  culture  was  used  for  identifying  the  presence  of 
spontaneous  Lymphoblastoid  transformation.  Pulse  characteristics  were  1  fis  pulse  duration, 
1,200  pps  and  0.83  *  1CTJ  duty  factor  at  70  and  200  W/m*  average  power  densities.  Mitotic  index 
of  cultured  human  lymphocytes  was  found  to  increase  to  approximately  2  times  that  of  controls 
after  20  and  40  minutes  of  exposure  but  not  after  5,  10  and  1 5  minutes  of  exposure  at  200  W/m1. 
Similar  results  were  obtained  in  human  lymphocyte  cultures  after  3  or  4  hours  exposure  at  70 
W/m2,  but  data  were  not  presented.  When  cultured  human  lymphocytes  were  exposed  at  200 
W/m2  for  10  minutes,  the  increased  mitotic  index  became  noticeable  after  59  hours,  became 
pronounced  (approximately  40  %  increase)  after  64  hours,  and  subsided  to  a  normal  rate  after  70 
hours  in  culture.  A  0.5  °C  increase  in  culture  temperature  was  noted  after  a  15  minute  exposure 
at  200  W/m2,  and  1.0  “C  after  20  minutes  at  the  same  intensity.  The  medium  temperature 
remained  constant  during  a  4  hour  exposure  at  70  W/m2.  Increased  medium  temperature  is 
known  to  cause  enhancement  of  the  spontaneous  lymphoblastoid  transformation  [Czerska  etal. 
1992]  as  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Other  changes  noted  by  Stodolnik-Baranska  [1974]  were  increased 
chromosome  abnormalities  (2  to  17  times  that  of  controls)  in  human  lymphocyte  culture  exposed 
at  200  W/m2  for  5  to  20  minutes.  These  chromosome  abnormalities  included  stickiness  and 
chromosome  aberrations  (dicentrics,  hypoploidy,  hyperploidy  and  breaks). 

Using  a  waveguide  exposure  system  [Lu  et  al.  1983],  Roberts  et  al.  [1984]  studied  human 
lymphocytes  exposed  to  2.45  GHz  microwave  pulses  modulated  at  16  and  60  pps  at  0.39  and  4 
W/kg  for  two  hours.  A  relative  high  duty  factor,  0.5  was  used.  Unstimulated  and 
phytohemagglutinin  suboptimally  and  optimally  stimulated  tritiated  thymidine  and  tritiated  leucine 


231 


incorporations  for  DNA  and  total  protein  syntheses  were  used  to  identify  spontaneous 
lymphoblastoid  transformation,  and  activated  lymphoblastoid  transformation.  Viability  of 
lymphocyte  was  also  evaluated.  Lymphocytes  from  individual  donors  were  split  into  two  parts 
for  sham-  and  microwave  exposures  to  limit  the  influence  of  individual  variation  on  the  outcome 
of  the  experiment.  Two  identical  waveguides,  one  energized  and  one  not,  were  mounted  on  a 
platform  connected  to  a  reciprocating  shaker  to  provide  agitation  and  to  prevent  sedimentation 
during  exposures.  Therefore,  the  temperature  distribution  within  the  exposure  vials  was  much 
more  uniform  than  in  those  exposure  systems  without  agitation.  The  same  exposure  system, 
procedure  and  endpoints  were  also  used  to  study  the  CW  effect  on  lymphoblastoid  transformation 
[Roberts  et  at.  1983]  at  0.5, 1.0  and  4.0  W/kg  for  2  hours  with  the  exception  of  an  additional 
endpoint,  tritiated  uridine  incorporation  for  RNA  synthesis.  Roberts  et  at.  [1987]  also  compared 
the  effectiveness  of  CW  and  pulsed  (0.5  duty  factor)  2.45  GHz  microwaves  at  4  W/kg  on  the 
unstimulated  and  mitogen-stimulated  responsiveness  of  lymphoblastoid  transformation  in 
influenza  virus  infected  human  lymphocytes.  None  of  these  studies  showed  any  evidence  of  a 
difference  in  any  of  the  endpoints  either  unstimulated  or  stimulated  between  control  and  exposed 
split  samples.  The  lack  of  a  demonstrable  difference  was  not  originated  from  a  lack  of 
responsiveness  of  human  lymphocytes  used  because  these  lymphocytes  responded  to  mitogen 
stimulation  in  a  dose  dependent  fashion  regardless  of  their  exposure  history.  Using  the  same 
procedure,  Roberts  et  at.  [1985]  demonstrated  a  sensitivity  to  microwave  induced  effects  in 
lymphocytes  exposed  to  2.45  GHz  CW  at  22.5  W/kg  for  2  hours  (culture  temperature^  42.7  °C). 
This  exposure  resulted  in  decreased  unstimulated  RNA  and  total  protein  syntheses,  as  well  as 
delayed  synthesis  of  DNA,  RNA,  and  total  protein  in  response  to  stimulation  with  the  optimal 
concentration  of  mitogen  and  decreased  synthesis  in  response  to  suboptimal  concentrations  of 
mitogen. 

On  the  other  hand,  Czerska  et  at.  [1992]  provided  convincing  evidence  of  a  profound 
stimulatory  effect  of  pulsed  2.45  GHz  on  the  sponntaneous  lymphoblastoid  transformation  of 
cultured  human  lymphocytes  (Fig.  4).  A  shorted  rectangular  waveguide  exposure  system  in  an 
incubator  at  37  °C  was  used  for  this  experiment.  The  CW  exposures  were  a  “non-heating”  level 
(<0.2  °C)  at  0.8-1.3  W/kg,  and  several  “heating”  levels  (0.5, 1.0, 1.5  and  2.0  °C  increase)  at  1.8- 
2.3,  3. 5-4.5,  6.8-8.3  and  9.8-12.3  W/kg.  The  pulsed  microwaves  were  operated  at  1  y s  pulsed 
duration,  100  to  1,000  pps,  and  variable  duty  factors,  1C4  to  10'3.  It  appears  the  peak  SAR  were 
fixed  at  9.8-12.3  kW/kg.  The  exposure  duration  was  5  days  continuously.  Because  the 
lymphoblastoid  tranformation  process  involves  gradual  enlargement  of  the  cell  and  of  the  nucleus, 
the  size  (>200  yx ri2  vs  <100  //mi*)  of  the  cell  was  used  to  identify  lymphoblasts,  lymphocytes  and 
intermediate  cells  at  the  end  of  5  day  experiment  period.  In  addition,  conventional  heating 
controls  were  used  at  0.5  °C  intervals  between  37  and  39  “C  for  5  days.  Figure  4  shows  clearly 
the  optimal  temperature  for  lymphoblastoid  transformation  was  38.0  °C  irrespective  of  the 
exposure.  The  number  of  blastoids  formed  was  not  different  between  lymphocytes  exposed  to 
conventional  (ambient)  heating  or  CW  microwave.  However,  the  lymphoblasts  formed  from  PW 
exposure  were  several  times  greater.  Due  to  the  known  sensitivity  of  lymphocytes  to  increased 
temperature,  inhomogeneous  distribution  of  culture  temperatue  may  have  caused  the  cell 
destruction  in  microwave  exposed  human  lymphocytes  at  temperatures  as  low  as  38.5-39.0  °C. 
The  temperature  inhomogeneity  could  not  fully  explain  the  difference  in  lymphoblastoid 
transformation  rates  between  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves.  Additional  experiments  are  needed 
to  confirm  this  pulse  enhancement  effect. 


232 


25 


H  AMBIENT 

CW,  1,  2.  4.  7.5  *  II  W/k9 

EM  PW,  I  ns,  100-1.000  PPS,  10"  D.F. 


RANGE=  S.D. 


_ i _ j - 1 _ i _ i — 

37.0  37.5  38.0  38.5  39.0 

INCUBATION  TEMPERATURE 


Figure  4.  Effect  of  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  spontaneous  lyrnphoblastoid  transformation 
of  human  lymphocytes  in  vitro.  The  graph  is  ploted  from  data  presented  by  Czerska  et  al. 
[1992].  The  lymphoblasts  were  cells  whose  size  is  larger  than  200  iim*  at  the  end  of  5  day 
experiment  The  incubator  temperature  was  maintained  at  37  °C  durine  5  days  of  CW  and 
pulsed  microwave  exposures.  The  “0”  at  38.5  °C  indicates  that  no  lymphoblast  was  found. 


Other  Studies 

Sanders  et  al.  [19S5]  compared  the  efficacy  of  5  minute  exposures  of  two  591  MHz 
microwaves  (250  and  500  pps,  5  fts  pulse  durations)  on  the  brain  concentration  of  nicotinamide 
adenine  dinucleotide  reduced  form  (NADH)  in  rats.  They  found  a  factor  of  4  increase  in 
thresholds,  from  about  4.5  to  18.5  W/m2,  when  pulse  modulation  frequency  decreased  from  500 
to  250  pps.  The  effect  of  CW  exposure  on  brain  NADU  concentration  was  not  included.  Thus, 
the  specificity  or  modifying  effect  of  pulse  modulation  on  the  studied  endpoint  could  not  be 
evaluated.  In  addition,  they  compared  the  efficacy  among  CW,  16-Hz  sinusoidal-amplitude- 
modulated  and  500  pps  pulse-modulated  (5  its  pulse  duration)  591  MHz  microwaves  on  brain 
adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP)  and  creatine  phosphate  (CP)  concentrations  at  138  W/m2  rms 
average  (2.48  W/kg)  for  0.5,  1  and  5  minutes.  Both  ATP  and  CP  concentrations  were 
significantly  reduced  from  those  of  sham-exposed  rats,  but  the  efficacy  of  modulation  was  not 
evaluated  due  to  large  variations  of  the  ATP  and  CP  concentrations.  Based  on  the  absence  of  a 
brain  temperature  increase,  the  authors  suggested  a  direct  interaction  of  microwave  energy  with 
the  mitochondrial  electron  transport  chain  function  of  ATP  production. 

Rafferty  and  Knutson  [1987]  compared  the  phase  transition  temperature  of  a  liposome 
(dipalmitylphophstidylcholine  and  diapalmitylphosphtidylglycerol  in  4:1  ratio)  while  exposed  to 
0.93  GHz  CW  (300  W/kg  average  SAR)  and  pulsed  (4,000  kW/kg  peak  SAR,  300  W/kg  average 
SAR,  10  (ts  pulse  duration,  7.5  pps,  75  *  10-6  duty  factor).  The  phase  transition  temperature  of 
sham  exposed  liposomes  was  40.1  ±  0.12  °C  (S.D.).  Neither  CW  nor  pulsed  microwave 
exposure  altered  this  phase  transition  temperature. 


233 


Roberti  etal.  [1975]  compared  the  effect  of  3  GHz  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on  the 
spontaneous  activity  of  rats.  The  pulse  characteristics  were  1.3  fis  pulse  duration,  769.23  pps  and 
a  duty  factor  of  10'3.  Sham-exposures  for  185  hours,  CW  at  5-10  W/m2  for  185  hours,  pulses 
at  15-20  W/m1  average  (15-20  kW/m2  peak)  for  185  hours,  and  pulses  at  240-260  W/m2  average 
(240-260  kW/m2  peak)  for  408  hours  were  used.  Spontaneous  activity  was  not  different  between 
the  sham  exposed  group  and  any  of  the  microwave  groups.  This  report  indicates  that 
spontaneous  activity  is  not  a  sensitive  measure  for  comparing  effects  between  CW  and  pulsed 
microwaves. 

McLees  etal,  [1972]  compared  the  effect  of  13.12  MHz  CW  and  pulsed  microwaves  on 
regenerating  hepatic  tissue  of  the  rat.  The  pulses  were  200  ns  pulse  duration,  500  pps,  and  0.01 
duty  factor.  A  thermometric  method  was  used  to  determine  the  whole-body  averaged  SAR.  The 
averaged  SARs  were  1.2  to  1.3  W/kg  for  both  CW  and  pulsed  (120  to  130  W/kg  peak  SAR) 
microwaves.  Power  density  or  electric  field  intensity  was  not  specified.  Rats  were  hepatomized 
under  ether  anesthesia  with  removal  of  60-70%  of  the  original  hepatic  mass.  Exposure  was 
initiated  immediately  following  hepatectomy  for  28-44  hours.  Concurrent  sham-exposed  rats 
were  used  in  conjunction  with  each  of  two  microwave  exposure  protocols.  Endpoints  of  the 
study  were  weight  loss,  mitotic  index  of  the  regenerating  liver,  and  chromosome  aberrations  of 
the  regenerating  liver.  Statistical  differences  between  endpoints  from  either  of  the  microwave 
exposed  groups  and  their  respective  concurrent  shams  were  not  found.  Obviously,  regenerating 
liver  seems  not  to  be  susceptible  to  microwaves  either. 


TEMPO  EXPERIMENTS 

The  Transformer  Energized  Megavolt  Pulsed  Output  (TEMPO)  system  at  the  Walter 
Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  (WRAIR)  is  a  3  GHz  transmitter  capable  of  delivering  pulses 
(Fig.  5)  at  500-700  MW  peak  output  power,  120  ns  wide,  20  ns  rise  time,  and  0. 125  pps.  The 
transmitted  power  varies,  a  characteristic  inherent  in  virtual  cathode  oscillators,  yet  can  be 
represented  as  a  rectangular  pulse  of 200  MW  for  80  ns.  With  a  0. 125  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate, 
the  duty  factor  is  10'*  and  the  average  output  power  is  2  W.  The  TEMPO  antenna  is  a 
longitudinally  slotted  circular  waveguide  which  radiates  a  fan-shaped  (narrow  horizontal,  wide 
vertical)  horizontally  polarized  beam.  Subjects  are  typically  exposed  in  a  dual  comer  reflector 
assembly,  2.25  m  from  the  antenna.  The  comer  reflectors  provide  a  10  dB  enhancement  and 
achieve  10  W/m2  from  a  1  W/m2  free-field  power  density  per  watt  transmitted  power.  Thus,  at 
maximum  transmitted  power  (700  MW),  peak  power  density  is  7  GW/m2  and  the  peak  electric 
field  intensity  is  approximately  at  1,600  kV/m.  Wire  screens  of  varying  mesh  densities  can  be 
placed  over  the  antenna  aperture  to  attenuate  output  of  the  system.  These  screens  produce  power 
outputs  of -20,  -30,  -40,  and  -50  dB.  Calorimetry  results  indicated  that  the  whole-body  average 
SAR  of  an  average  rat  was  0.036  W/kg  per  watt  transmitted  power  or  0.072  W/kg  at  full  power. 
Extensive  local  SAR  of  interest  has  also  been  evaluated  by  a  thermometric  procedure  [Raslear  ei 
al.  1993b],  In  addition  to  microwaves,  TEMPO  produces  the  noise  and  soft  x-rays.  For  200 
pulses,  the  ionizing  radiation  dose  was  less  than  0.3 1  rem,  and  noise  level  was  lower  than  89  dB 
SPL  (57  dB  during  sham  exposure).  The  TEMPO  system  has  been  used  for  studying  the 
behavioral  toxicology  of  high  peak  power  but  low  average  power  microwaves.  A  typical 
exposure  consisted  of  200  pulses  in  approximately  25  minutes.  Several  studies  have  been 
performed  at  WRAIR  with  this  device. 


234 


Figure  5.  Oscilloscope  tracing  of  a  typical  TEMPO  pulse.  Spikes  and  ringing  are  noted. 


Raslear  et  al.  [1993b]  trained  rats  under  a  bisection  paradigm  in  which  the  rats  were 
trained  to  discriminate  between  two  durations  of  light  (0.5  and  5  s,  training  stimuli)  to  obtain  food 
reinforcement  with  a  response  on  the  appropriate  lever  designated  as  short  and  long.  Five  new 
durations  (0.74,  i.l,  1.62,  2.4,  and  3.54  s,  leal  stimuli)  equally  spaced  on  a  lugaridimic  suite 
between  training  stimuli  were  added  for  testing.  All  seven  stimuli  were  presented  in  random  order 
throughout  the  test  session  (320  trials  per  session).  Responses  to  the  test  stimuli  were  never 
reinforced,  but  responses  to  the  training  stimuli  continued  to  be  reinforced.  Psychometric 
functions,  bisection  point,  response  bias,  discriminability,  general  task  performance  and  null 
response  (failure  to  respond  on  a  trial)  were  examined  after  exposure  to  200  TEMPO  pulse3  at 
5  graded  doses  in  a  50  dB  range.  Both  ascending  and  descending  series  of  exposures  were  used. 
In  addition,  a  cage  control  and  a  sham  exposure  were  used.  Measures  of  time  perception, 
response  bias,  total  trials  and  discriminability  (ability  to  distinguish  between  durations)  were  not 
affected  by  TEMPO  exposure.  Significant  dose-dependent  changes  were  noted  in  increased 
session  time,  increased  number  of  null  responses  and  increased  cumulative  null  responses  with 
dose.  It  was  interpreted  that  TEMPO  exposures  at  less  than  0.072  W/kg  whole-body  average 
SAR  were  affecting  cognitive  function  in  the  rats,  particularly  the  decision-making  process. 
However,  post  hoc  analysis  was  not  performed  to  identify  a  threshold  for  each  behavioral 
endpoint. 

Using  a  Y-maze,  Raslear  et  al.  [1991a]  tested  24  hour  memory  consolidation  in  rats 
exposed  to  200  TEMPO  pulses  at  full  power  (0.072  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR),  at  30  dB 
attenuated  power,  and  in  rats  that  served  as  cage  controls.  The  difference  between  the  two 
exposed  groups  was  not  significant,  However,  both  exposed  groups  reliably  made  more  errors 
than  the  cage  control  group.  They  concluded  that  the  memory  deficit  caused  by  TEMPO  pulses 
was  consistent  with  the  results  of  the  bisection  study  [Raslear  et  al.  1993b]  in  which  an  increase 
in  null  responses,  reflected  a  lack  of  confidence  in  making  a  decision. 

Akyd  et  al  [1993b]  studied  the  treadmill  performance  in  rats  immediately  after  sham  or 
full-power  TEMPO  exposure  (0.072  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR,  200  pulses).  Cage  controls 


235 


were  also  used.  The  running  time  of  TEMPO  exposed  rats  was  reduced  (56.44  ±  10.69  s,  mean 
±  S.E.)  from  those  of  cage  control  (150.13  ±  25.65  s)  or  sham-exposed  rats  (152.89  ±  35.18  s). 
The  mechanism  of  this  decreased  endurance  was  not  investigated. 

Raslear  etal.  [1991  b]  also  studied  the  effect  of  TEMPO  pulses  on  motivation  for  food  and 
the  circadian  rhythmicity  of  food  acquisition.  Rats  were  exposed  to  one  of  three  conditions,  fall 
power  TEMPO  pulses  (0.072  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR,  400  pulses,  50  minutes),  pulses 
at  -30  dB  (400  pulses,  50  minutes)  and  sham-exposure for  50  minutes.  Following  exposure,  each 
rat  was  placed  in  one  of  six  similar  home  cages  which  was  equipped  with  a  response  lever  and 
food  pellet  dispenser.  On  the  first  day  in  the  test  apparatus  a  lever  pressing  response  produced 
a  single  45-mg  food  pellet.  On  the  second  day  the  response  requirement  remained  at  1 
response/food  pellet  (FR  1,  Fixed  Ratio  1).  On  subsequent  days  the  response  requirement  was 
increased  to  15, 45, 90, 180  and  360  responses  per  pellet.  The  animals  were  free  to  respond  at 
all  times  of  day.  A  12.12  light:dark  cycle  (light  on  at  0600,  off  at  1800  hours)  was  used.  The 
only  food  was  what  the  rats  earned  in  the  experiment.  The  number  of  food  pellets  consumed  as 
a  function  of  the  price  of  the  food  (response  requirement)  followed  the  typical  pattern  of 
decreasing  consumption  as  price  increased .  There  were  no  apparent  differences  among  groups. 
Circadian  function  was  assessed  by  the  number  of  food  pellets  obtained  during  the  day  and  the 
night.  Typically,  rats  consumed  90-100  %  of  their  food  during  the  night.  With  the  exception  of 
1  pellet  per  response  (FR  l),  TEMPO  exposures  did  not  affect  the  circadian  rhythmicity.  Instead 
of  consuming  90-100  %  of  their  food  during  the  night,  both  TEMPO  exposed  groups  consumed 
only  about  50%  of  their  food  during  the  night  under  the  FR  1  schedule. 

The  Porsolt  swim  test  {Porsolt  et  al.  1978]  in  rats  was  used  to  identify  the  existence  of 
despair  and  depression  after  an  exposure  to  fall  power  TEMPO  pulses  (0.072  W/kg  whole-body 
average,  SAR,  200  pulses)  [Raslear  et  al.  1993a]  There  was  no  difference  in  immobility  time 
between  TEMPO  exposed  and  sham-exposed  rats.  It  appeared  that  exposure  to  TEMPO  pulses 
did  not  cause  despair  and  depression  in  rats  irrespective  of  other  behavioral  alterations  caused  by 
the  same  exposure. 

D'Andrea  et  al.  [1993]  used  the  TEMPO  exposure  system  for  an  operant  behavior  study 
in  rhesus  monkeys.  The  comer  reflector  was  not  used,  therefore,  the  peak  power  density  was  456 
kW/m2  which  resulted  in  a  peak  whole-body  SAR  of  2.21  MW/kg  and  1.3  J/kg  SA  per  pulse. 
Performance  under  a  color  discrimination  task  for  food  was  used  as  the  endpoint.  The  task 
required  monkeys  to  pull  one  plastic  lever  on  a  variable  interval  schedule  (VI-25  s)  and  then 
respond  to  color  signals  and  pull  a  second  lever  to  obtain  food.  Behavioral  performance  on  either 
component  of  the  task  was  not  altered  significantly  by  the  TEMPO  pulses. 

D'Andrea  etal.  [1989]  also  exposed  monkeys  to  high  peak  power  2.37  GHz  pulses  from 
a  different  TEMPO  system.  The  pulse  characteristics  were  70-1 13  kW/m2  peak  power  density 
and  93  ns  pulse  duration.  The  estimated  temporal-peak  spatial-average  whole-body  SAR  was 
583-938  kW/kg  or  54-87  mJ/kg  per  pulse.  The  number  of  pulses  delivered  was  between  28  and 
51  in  20  minutes.  Therefore,  the  whole-body  average  SAR  was  estimated  to  be  less  than  0.1 
W/kg.  The  endpoint  of  the  study  was  performance  of  the  monkey  under  a  vigilance  task.  The 
task  involved  two  components,  responding  on  a  variable  interval  schedule  (VI 20  s,  1-84  s  range) 
on  one  lever  and  responding  on  a  second  lever  to  tones.  Compared  to  sham  irradiation, 
significant  changes  in  performance  were  not  observed.  In  a  subsequent  technical  report,  D'Andrea 
et  al.  [1990]  also  found  no  effect  of  different  TEMPO  pulses  (365-827  kW/kg  peak  SAR,  whole- 
body  average  SAR  <  0. 1  W/kg)  on  the  behavior  of  monkeys  under  the  same  vigilance  task. 

Klauenberg  et  al.  [1988]  exposed  rats  to  TEMPO  vircator  pulses  at  1.26  GHz  with  a  85 


236 


ns  pulse  duration  and  a  peak  power  density  of  5  kW/m2.  Startle,  following  single  and  multiple 
pulses  (1  pps,  for  10  s),  general  activity,  and  rotarod  performance  after  multiple  pulses  were  used 
to  assess  the  effects  of  exposure  to  TEMPO  pulses.  Reliably  more  animals  in  the  exposed  group 
startled  relative  to  the  sham-exposed  group  when  single  pulses  were  used,  but  no  differences 
between  groups  occurred  during  multiple  pulse  exposures.  More  exposed  animals  failed  to 
complete  the  rotarod  task  than  sham-exposed  animals. 

Cordts  et  al.  [1988]  exposed  rats  to  a  Cober  peak  power  simulator  operating  at  2.066 
GHz,  250  ms  pulse  duration,  and  300  W/m2  peak  power  density  and  a  Gypsy  Vircator  pulse 
operating  at  1.64  GHz,  140  ns  pulse  duration  and  80  kW/m2  peak  power  density.  Three 
behavioral  tasks,  one-trial  avoidance,  drinking,  and  rotarod  performance,  were  used  to  evaluate 
the  effects  of  the  Cober  and  Gypsy  pulses.  Only  the  drinking  test  (time  spent  drinking)  was 
reliably  reduced  by  either  source,  and  similar  effects  were  seen  for  both  pulses  despite  the  large 
difference  in  incident  power  densities.  It  was  estimated  that  a  0.7  °C  increase  in  body 
temperature  was  caused  by  exposure  to  Cober  pulses  while  only  0.0084  °C  was  caused  by  Gypsy 
pulses.  Hence  a  conventional  concept  of  heating  (differential  increase  of  body  temperature  of 
either  0.1  or  1  °C  depending  on  endpoints)  fails  to  explain  the  reduced  drinking  effect. 

It  appears  that  some  cognitive  behaviors  are  susceptible  to  the  high  peak  but  low  average 
power  microwave  pulses.  On  the  other  hand,  well  trained  behaviors  appeared  to  be  resistant  to 
alteration  by  this  type  of  microwave  pulse.  Unfortunately,  none  of  these  studies  has  attempted 
to  include  experiments  uring  p  CW  microwave  of  the  same  carrier  frequency  and  equivalent  low 
average  SAR  exposure  thereby  limiting  an  evaluation  of  a  pulse  modification  factor. 


BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS  OF  CARRIERLESS  PULSES 

The  current  IEEE  standard  [IEEE  1999]  recommends  a  100  kV/m  peak  electric  field 
intensity  limit  for  pulsed  fields  of  low  frequencies  and  short  pulses.  This  recommendation  for  a 
peak  E-field  limit  of  100  kV/m  is  based  on  the  necessity  to  cap  the  allowable  field  below  levels 
at  which  air  breakdown  or  spark  discharges  occur.  The  IEEE  Standards  Coordinating  Committee 
28  [FREE  1999]  also  recognizes  the  sparseness  of  studies  for  very  short  high-intensity  exposure. 
This  section  is  intended  to  update  current  knowledge  in  evaluating  the  biological  effects  caused 
by  exposure  to  carrieriess  pulses  in  which  a  center  frequency  is  not  apparent.  This  type  of  RF  is 
usually  produced  by  impulses  instead  of  modulation  of  a  narrow-band  RF. 

Absorption  of  Carrieriess  Pulses 

Guy  [1990]  used  a  Numerical  Electromagnetic  Code  Method  of  Moments  to  calculate 
the  maximum  induced  currents,  SAR  and  absorbed  energy  density  in  human  and  non-human 
primates  exposed  to  EMP.  His  results  are  shown  in  Table  4.  The  induced  current  could  vary  with 
size,  as  high  as  281  amperes  per  leg  for  a  human  male,  to  as  low  as  4.89  amperes  per  leg  for  a 
squirrel  monkey  exposed  to  a  100  kV/m,  10  ns  rise  time  EMP.  However,  the  variation  of 
maximum  current  density  and  SAR  for  the  exposed  subjects  was  small,  ranging  from  a  low  of  1 48 
kA/rri2  and  26.2  MW/kg  for  an  adult  human,  to  a  liigli  of  180  kA/m2  and  38.0  MW/kg  for  a  1- 
year-old  human  child.  Absorbed  energy  per  pulse  and  peak  E-field  in  tissue  were  also  relatively 
independent  of  size.  The  tissue  peak  E-field  was  approximately  twice  the  peak  E-field  intensity 
of  the  ambient  (100  kV/m)  EMP  pulse. 


237 


Table  4.  Comparison  of  maximum  induced  current,  current  density,  SAR,  absorbed  energy  and 
E-Field  in  human  and  non-human  primates  exposed  to  100  kV/m,  10  ns  Rise  time  electromagnetic 

pulses 


Subject 

Height 

(cm) 

Current 
per  leg 
(A) 

Current 

density 

(kA/m*) 

SAR 

(MW/kg) 

Energy 
per  pulse 
(J/kg) 

E-field 
in  tissue 
(kV/m) 

Man 

178 

281 

148 

26.2 

0.186 

177 

10-year-old-child 

138 

185 

162 

31.2 

0.182 

193 

5-year-old-child 

112 

129 

171 

34.6 

0.177 

202 

1 -year-old-child 

74 

59.0 

180 

38.0 

0.164 

211 

Rhesus  monkey 

40 

16.3 

173 

34.4 

0.149 

200 

Squirrel  monkey 

23 

4.89 

155 

28.4 

0.142 

183 

*  Data  adapted  from  Guy  [1 990], 


Additionally,  Lin  [1975,  1976,  Lin  and  Lam  1976,  Lin  et  at.,  1975]  using  frequency 
analytic  techniques  for  various  electromagnetic  pulse  interactions  with  different  biological  models 
explored  the  dependency  of  transmitted  EMP  on  models,  on  pulse  duration  and  on  wave  shape. 
Lin  and  Lam  [1976]  indicated  that  the  coupling  efficiency  for  a  one  /j.s  Gaussion  pulse  is  three 
times  as  big  as  that  for  a  ten  /rs  Gaussion  pulse  in  a  model  composed  of  a  layer  of  soft  tissue  over 
a  semi-infinite  medium  of  bony  structure.  The  maximum  transmitted  pulse  strength  was 
calculated  to  be  about  2.2  kV/m  from  one  ns  pulse  at  100  kV/m.  A  similar  dependency  of 
transmitted  EMP  on  pulse  duration  was  noted  between  1  ns  (221  V/m)  and  50  ns  (188  V/m)  50 
kV/m  Gaussian  EMP  incident  normally  at  the  air-tissue  interface  of  a  semi-infinite  model  [Lin 
1975],  Lin  [1976]  concluded  that  the  transmitted  field  strength  in  homogeneous  spherical  models 
of  human  and  animal  heads  (10,  5,  3  .5  and  1.75  cm  radius)  from  100  kV/m  Gaussian  EMP 
varying  from  1  to  10  ns  pulse  duration  was  quite  small,  less  than  20  V/m  was  coupled  into  a  3.5 
or  10  cm  radius  spherical  head.  On  the  other  hand,  a  triple  exponential  50  kV/m  EMP  could 
produce  735  V/m  in  a  10  cm  radius  spherical  head  and  472  V/m  in  a  3.5  cm  radius  spherical  head. 

Using  the  same  technique,  Guy  [1989]  concluded  that  a  peak  current  level  of  5  A  per 
kV/m  occured  for  exposures  to  EMPs  with  a  10  ns  rise  time.  Hagmann  [1993]  measured  the  peak 
current  induced  in  human  volunteers.  Measured  peak  current  levels  per  leg  were  1.7  A  per  kV/m 
at  the  “ALECS”  EMP  facility  and  0.9  A  per  kV/m  at  the  “EMPRESS  F  EMP  facility.  If  both 
arms  and  opposite  leg  of  volunteers  were  raised,  the  peak  current  was  enhanced  (2.95  A  per 
kV/m)  at  the  “ALECS”  facility  but  less  so  (1.1  A  per  kV/m)  at  the  “EMPRESS  I”  facility. 
Clearly,  the  magnitude  of  current  induced  through  the  human  body  by  EMPs  can  be  greatly 
modified  by  changing  posture  and  limbs  making  ground  contact. 

Chen  and  Gandhi  [1991],  using  the  finite-difference  time-domain  (FDTD)  technique, 
calculated  currents  induced  in  an  anatomically  based  model  of  a  human  with  rubber  sotes  for 
exposure  to  vertically  polarized  electromagnetic  pulses  at  a  peak  electric  field  of  55.4  kV/m. 
They  noted  an  excellent  agreement  of  the  calculated  results  by  FDTD  technique  with  data 
measured  for  a  human  subject.  The  peak  current  induced  in  both  ankles,  both  knees  and  both 


238 


thighs  (220  to  284  A  by  a  55.4  kV/m  peak  EMP)  were  in  agreement  with  Guy's  results  (Table  4). 
On  the  other  hand,  the  whole  body  average  SA  of  two  representative  EMP  pulses  (0.43  mJ/kg 
from  a  53.5  kV/m  peak  EMP  pulse,  and  0.22  mJ/kg  from  a  41.5  kV/m  peak  EMP  pulse)  differed 
from  Guy's  results  (Table  4)  by  3  orders  of  magnitude. 

For  extrapolation  from  results  of  animal  experimentation  to  human  health,  it  is  important 
to  know  which  absorption  metric  is  responsible  for  the  biological  effect.  The  size  dependence  of 
peak  induced  current  by  EMP  pulses  was  also  evident  in  rats,  a  smaller  laboratory  animal.  Mathur 
et  al.  [1990]  measured  the  induced  current  in  a  200  g  rat  (body  length  ~  15  cm)  exposed  to  an 
EMP  pulse  (67  kV/m  peak,  8  ns  rise  time).  The  measured  peak  current  was  1.5  A  (22.4  mA  per 
kV/m)  which  is  2  orders  of  magnitude  lower  than  the  peak  induced  currents  in  humans  (Table  4). 
The  low  peak  induced  currents  by  EMP  pulses  were  confirmed  by  Gao  et  al.  [ 1992]  using  FDTD 
methods  and  a  2/3-muscle-equivalent  model  of  a  rat. 

Potential  Mechanisms  for  Tissue  Damage  from  Carrierless  Pulses 

Albanese  et  al.  [1994]  proposed  four  potential  tissue  damage  mechanisms  for  ultrashort 
electromagnetic  signals.  They  were  molecular  conformation  changes,  alteration  in  chemical 
reaction  rates,  membrane  effects  (electroporation)  and  thermal  damage.  These  proposed  potential 
tissue  damage  mechanisms  apparently  required  relatively  high  peak  electric  field  and  pulse 
duration.  Some  of  these  effects  can  be  induced  by  pulses  with  a  peak  electric  field  intensity  of 
several  hundred  kV/m. 

The  work  of  Neuman  and  Katchalsky  [1972]  was  cited  to  support  the  existence  of 
conformation  changes  (partial  unwinding)  in  which  artificial  poly  A/poly  U  triplets,  destabilized 
in  add  buffer  were  exposed  to  2,000  kV/m,  10  tis  electromagnetic  pulses.  The  peak  electric  field 
intensity  in  this  study  was  higher  and  the  pulse  duration  was  longer  than  those  pulses  typically 
produced  by  impulse  radars  or  EMP  simulators.  In  addition,  Merritt  et  al.  [1995]  countered  that 
several  items  including  that  T)NA  in  situ  is  inherently  stabilized  by  histone,  repressor  and  activator 
proteins,  and  secondary  chromosomal  structures,  and  that  topisomerase  enzyme  activity  is 
required  to  release  the  stabilized  structure  and  allow  normal  DNA  synthesis  to  occur.  Such 
dynamics  may  not  be  relevant  as  potential  damage  mechanisms. 

Albanese  et  al.  [1994]  estimated  the  change  of  chemical  equilibrium  in  the  presence  of  an 
electromagnetic  field  as  1 %  per  1  kV/m  of  electric  field  intensity.  Based  on  the  rate  constant  of 
chemical  reactions  (10Vs/M,  relaxation  time  10  ns  or  longer),  Merritt  et  al.  [1995]  concluded  that 
ultrashort  electromagnetic  pulses  with  ps  rise  time  and  ns  pulse  duration  could  not  alter  the 
chemical  reaction  by  individual  pulses.  In  addition,  Merritt  et  al.  [1995]  considered  that  chemical 
reactions  are  associated  with  the  average  energy  deposition  instead  of  a  transient  electromagnetic 
field. 

Another  damage  mechanism  considered  by  Albanese  et  al.  [1994]  was  the  permeation  of 
cdl  membranes  by  electromagnetic  pulses  of  hundreds  of  kV/m  and  pulse  durations  of  fis  to  ms. 
The  consideration  was  based  on  Tsongfs  review  [Tsong  1991]  of  electroporation,  a  process  which 
describes  collectively  the  effect  of  electromagnetic  pulses  on  cell  membranes  resulting  in  leakage 
of  ions  and  metabolites,  fusion  of  cell  membranes,  and  opening  of  pores.  Reversible  openings  of 
protein  channels  occur  with  ps  pulses,  while  irreversible  channel  openings  are  seen  as  the  results 
of  ms  pulses.  The  process  of  extrapolation  from  a  dilute  in  vitro  cell  suspension  to  a  complex  in 
vivo  system  is  questionable  at  the  present  lime.  Tsong  [1991]  also  concluded  that  the  breakdown 


239 


potential  of  bilayer  lipid  membrane  is  in  the  150  to  500  mV  range  when  the  field  duration  is  in 
microseconds  to  milliseconds.  This  value  translates  into  a  field  strength  of  30  to  100  MV/m  if  the 
tissue  thickness  is  5  nm.  Electroinsertion  of  foreign  materials  into  a  cell  is  known  to  require  a 
lower  critical  field  than  electroporation  [Mouneimne  et  al.  1993).  Furthermore,  the  critical  field 
intensity  routinely  used  in  electroinsertion  depends  on  cell  size.  Neumann  et  al.  [  1 993)  found  that 
in  situ  pulsed  electric  fields  in  the  range  of 200  to  400  kV/m  and  1  fj.s  to  50  ms  could  be  used  in 
the  membrane  electroporation  method  for  transferring  genes,  nucleic  acids  and  proteins  into  a  cell 
interior  as  well  as  electro-release  of  cellular  components  into  the  medium.  Similar  to 
electroinsertion,  the  threshold  for  membrane  breakdown  decreases  with  increasing  cell  size.  The 
irreversible  breakdown  of  cell  membrane  is  about  200  kV/m  for  blood  cells  [Zimmermann  1982, 
Hansson-Mild  et  al.  1982,  Paile  et  al.  1995],  100  kV/m  for  fibroblasts,  and  5  kV/m  for  muscle 
cells  [Lee  et  al.  1988).  With  the  exception  of  muscle  cells,  these  threshold  peak  electric  field 
intensities  are  higher  than  the  current  IEEE  standards  on  peak  electric  field  intensity  [IEEE  1999). 

The  last  tissue  damage  mechanism  proposed  by  Albanese  et  al.  [1994]  was  thermal 
damage  by  bulk  heating.  If  a  threshold  bulk  heating  or  temperature  increase  is  allowed  to 
continue  for  a  sufficient  time,  tissue  damage  will  indeed  occur  and  it  is  not  unique  to  ultrashort 
electromagnetic  pulses.  On  a  molecular  basis,  Albanese  et  al.  [1994]  suggested  that  if  the  rate 
of  energy  removal  from  a  target  molecule  is  slower  than  its  absorption  from  the  electromagnetic 
field,  significant  heating  of  the  individual  molecule  could  occur  during  exposure,  with  little  gross 
temperature  change  In  the  overall  medium,  causing  highly  localized  damage.  The  plausibility  of 
the  proposed  mechanism  is  not  known.  Additionally,  it  was  not  clear  to  what  extent  molecule 
damage  becomes  critical  to  body  homeostasis  and  is  manifested  in  disease.  Based  on  the  results 
of  highly  sensitive  single  pulse  endpoints  (microwave  hearing,  microwave  induced  whole-body 
movements,  and  microwave  induced  thermal  sensation),  the  presence  of  a  critical  duration  is 
clearly  evident.  Although  the  critical  duration  appears  to  vary  with  the  endpoint  or  effect  studied, 
the  effect  threshold  is  dependent  on  the  pulse  energy  (S  A  per  pulse)  when  the  pulse  duration  is 
shorter  than  the  critical  duration.  When  the  exposure  duration  is  longer  than  the  critical  duration, 
effect  threshold  appears  to  depend  on  the  dose  rate  (SAR).  Adair  [1991]  analyzed  the  electric 
and  magnetic  fields  in  the  human  body  generated  upon  exposure  to  external  pulsed  electric  fields. 
He  concluded  that  for  peak  external  field  strengths  as  high  as  100  kV/m,  the  effects  of  the 
consequent  internal  electric  fields  on  sensitive  cell  elements,  such  as  the  membrane,  organelles, 
and  the  macromolecules  that  carry  genetic  information,  are  shown  to  be  small  compared  with  the 
normal  thermal  agitation  of  the  elements.  He  further  concluded  such  pulses  cannot  be  expected 
to  produce  any  biological  effects  at  the  cellular  level. 

On  the  other  hand,  Gailey  and  Easterly  [1993]  reviewed  the  internal  current  densities  and 
electric  fields  induced  in  the  human  body  during  exposure  to  EMP  fields  to  predict  the  resulting 
membrane  potentials.  Using  several  different  approaches,  membrane  potentials  of  about  100  mV 
were  predicted.  These  values  are  comparable  to  the  static  membrane  potentials  maintained  by 
cells.  However,  the  EMP  induced  potential  persisted  for  only  about  10  ns,  a  time  constant  far 
shorter  than  the  latency  of  most  biological  reactions  in  response  to  stimuli.  Based  on  a  theoretical 
model  of  EMP  coupling  on  cables,  Agouridis  and  Easterly  [1989]  had  concluded  earlier  that 
electromagnetic  fields  produced  by  EMPs  and  EMP  simulators,  in  certain  circumstances  could 
be  hazardous  and/or  exceed  the  present  guidelines. 

Gailey  and  Easterly  [1993]  also  pointed  out  that  the  spherical  cell  model  used  in  most 
studies  is  far  from  accurate  Muscle  and  nerve  cells,  for  example,  are  elongated  and  the 
expression  for  limiting  membrane  potential  must  be  modified  by  an  enhancement  factor.  Other 


240 


considerations  are  electrical  length  of  the  structure,  gap  junctions  electrically  connecting  groups 
of  cells,  altered  capacitance  of  cell  membrane,  and  thickness  of  membrane  at  tight  junctions. 

Using  the  Hodgkin  and  Huxley  nonlinear  membrane  model,  Bernardi  and  Dlnzeo  [1984] 
studied  the  current  density  induced  in  the  biological  tissue  on  the  resting  potential  of  an  excitable 
cellular  membrane.  Various  characteristics  of  the  incident  field,  such  as  wave-shape,  pulse 
duration  and  amplitude  were  analyzed.  For  induced  voltage  lower  than  1  mV,  the  membrane's 
behavior  could  be  considered  as  linear  In  this  case,  the  membrane  response  showed  a  maximum 
response  in  the  range  of  1-30  MHz,  where  incident  fields  of  about  20  kV/m  are  necessary  to 
produce  1  mV  on  the  membrane.  Above  1  mV,  the  membrane  showed  a  nonlinear  behavior,  and 
a  CW  incident  field  could  produce  a  dc  voltage  on  the  membrane.  Further  increase  in  the 
amplitude  of  the  incident  field  could  produce  depolarization  or  action  potentials  of  the  membrane. 
For  pulsed  fields,  the  membrane  was  particularly  sensitive  to  pulses  with  a  pulse  duration  of  about 
1  ms,  the  pulse  duration  comparable  with  the  proper  times  of  the  membrane  ionic  channels.  The 
threshold  of  action  potential  excitation  varied  inversely  with  pulse  duration,  i.e.,  the  required 
incident  electric  field  strength  would  be  400  kV/m  at  1  ms  and  2,000  kV/m  at  10  ns  pulse 
duration.  They  further  commented  that  transmembrane  voltages  greater  than  1  mV  were 
produced  by  pulsed  fields  with  100  W/m2  average  power  density.  But  such  pulses  could  not 
produce  adequate  transmembrane  voltage  to  cause  action  potential  excitation.  On  the  other  hand, 
specialized  neuroreceptors  and  pacemakers  might  be  more  susceptible  to  such  a  transmembrane 
voltage.  The  validity  of  this  potential  mechanism  has  not  been  resolved. 

Blair  [1932]  formalized  the  law  of  nerve  excitation  by  deriving  a  mathematical  equation 
based  on  the  known  resistive  and  capacitive  properties  of  cell  membranes.  The  Blair  expression 
for  the  strength-duration  curve  is: 

I  =  b/(l-e*/r) 

Where  I  is  the  peak  current  (or  peak  external  or  tissue  E-field  intensity)  for  a  rectangular  pulse 
of  duration  d;  b  is  the  rheobase  and  r  is  membrane  strength-duration  time  constant  for  the 
particular  tissue.  The  “rheobase"  con  be  described  as  minimum  excitation  threshold  for  long- 
duration  stimuli.  For  pulses  shorter  than  the  strength-duration  time  constant,  the  peak 
current/field  intensity  increases  according  to  the  duty  fector,  i.e.,  ratio  of  pulse  duration  to 
strength-duration  time  constant,  for  nerve  excitation.  The  time  constant  could  be  identified  as  the 
break  point  between  the  minimum  plateau  and  rising  phases  of  the  nerve  excitation  threshold 
curve  in  relation  to  pulse  duration.  The  time  constants  for  various  excitable  membranes  (22  to 
214  ps)  have  been  complied  by  Gedders  and  Baker  [1989],  Reilly  [1998]  proposed  a  strength- 
duration  time  constant  and  “rheobase”  for  nerve  excitation  at  120  ns  and  6.2  V/m  (in  situ  E-field). 
The  Blair  relationship  appears  to  hold  true  for  pulse  durations  down  in  the  1  ps  range.  If  the  Blair 
expression  holds  true  for  EMP  and  UWB  pulses,  the  nerve  excitation  threshold  intensity  is  75 
kV/m  tissue  peak  E-field  intensity  for  a  10  ns  EMP  pulse,  and  750  kV/m  for  1  ns  UWB  pulse. 
Apparently,  the  nerve  excitation  threshold  by  EMP  pulses  estimated  from  the  Blair  expression  is 
about  37  to  42  %  of  the  calculated  tissue  E  field  from  a  100  kV/m  EMP  pulse  (Table  4).  In 
addition,  the  Blair  expression  predicts  that  the  shorter  the  membrane  time  constant,  the  lower  the 
nerve  excitation  threshold.  Thus,  because  of  the  shortest  time  constant,  a  myelinated  A  fiber 
would  be  the  most  sensitive  neural  fiber  to  the  influence  of  ultrashort  pulses.  Jokela  [1997],  using 
a  SENN  (Spatially  Extended  Non-linear  Node)  model  with  folded  axon  with  2  mm  separation  for 


241 


Ranw'er  nodes,  calculated  the  nerve  stimulation  threshold  for  rectangular  pulses.  The  asymptotic 
threshold  level  for  electric  Geld  intensity  was  10  V/in  for  pulse  durations  longer  than  100  j/s,  and 
a  time-integrated  electric  field  intensity  of  1  x  10"J  V/m  s  for  pulses  with  a  pulse  duration  less  than 
100  ^s. 

For  nerve  stimulation  by  sinusoidal  currents,  thresholds  of  excitation  rise  approximately 
in  proportion  to  frequency  beyond  a  critical  frequency,  a  few  kHz  for  neurosensory  or 
neuromuscular  stimulation,  pruvided  that  the  stimulus  consists  of  multiple  sinusoidal  cycles  [Reilly 
1991],  Above  this  critical  frequency,  threshold  current  density  for  nerve  excitation  becomes  so 
great  that  it  will  exceed  the  threshold  for  perception  due  to  heating.  For  sinusoidal  currents  that 
are  at  least  a  significant  fraction  of  1  s  in  duration,  the  crossover  between  electrical  and  thermal 
perception  thresholds  occurs  at  about  100  kHz  [Dalziel  and  Mansfield  1950,  Chatteijee  et  al. 
1986],  An  experiment  with  anesthetized  rats  which  allowed  significant  tissue  heating, 
demonstrated  neuromuscular  stimulation  with  approximate  frequency-proportional  thresholds  to 
1  MHz  [Lacourse  et  al.  1985],  Above  this  frequency,  due  to  membrane  short-circuiting,  the 
heating  of  tissues  by  induced  electric  fields  becomes  increasingly  important  and  tissue  heating 
becomes  predominant  at  frequencies  above  100  MHz.  In  the  frequency  domain,  pulsed  fields  are 
equivalent  to  a  train  of  sinusoidal  fields  consisting  of  harmonic  frequencies.  Due  to  a  very  short 
pulse  duration  and  even  shorter  rise  times,  the  frequency  spectrums  of  carrierless  EMP  and  UWB 
span  both  non-thermal  and  thermal  domains  in  their  interactions  with  biological  tissues. 
Therefore,  entirely  different  modes  of  reaction  may  be  encountered  between  pulses  of  similar  peak 
electric  field  intensity  and  pulse  energy. 

Studies  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Pulses 

There  has  been  widespread  public  concern  over  the  perceived  risk  of  EMP.  During  the 
latter  part  of  the  1980s,  lawsuits  by  several  employees  of  EMP  test  programs  who  had  leukemia 
have  caused  the  prohibition  of  many  outdoor  EMP  simulator  operations  and  increased  public  and 
political  awareness  of  the  EMP  safety  issue.  The  safety  issue  of  EMP  needs  to  be  addressed  in 
a  scientific  manner  since  public  concern  about  the  potential  biological  effects  of  EMP  has  been 
based  on  anecdotal  evidence  from  studies  without  quantitative  dosimetric  data.  Studies  of 
biological  effects  of  electromagnetic  simulator  pulses  were  performed  as  early  as  the  1970s, 
although  defense  contractors  have  been  testing  methods  to  protect  electronic  devices  against 
effects  of  EMPs  since  the  mid-1960s.  However,  only  a  limited  number  of  studies  has  been 
performed. 

The  operation  of  EMP  simulators  is  primarily  in  the  area  of  testing  the  vulnerability  of 
electronic  equipment  to  electromagnetic  pulses  generated  by  nuclear  detonation.  Concern  for 
cardiac  pacemakers  in  EMP  fields  falls  under  the  same  category  of  electronic  vulnerability  to 
EMPs.  Patrick  [1993]  reviewed  scientific  literature  in  this  area  and  concluded  that  there  was  little 
evidence  of  permanent  damage  from  a  single  electromagnetic  pulse  up  to  50  kV/m  peak  electric 
field  intensity  on  cardiac  pacemakers.  A  single  failure  was  reported  at  a  peak  E-field  intensity  at 
500  kV/m,  however  the  Mure  could  not  be  repeated  after  the  damaged  component  was  replaced. 
Cardiac  pacemaker  upset,  induction  of  an  additional  beat  or  skipping  of  a  beat,  was  observed  in 
one  unit  at  1.25  kV/m  for  2  %  of  the  time.  T  wo  recent  analytical  and  experimental  studies  were 
conducted  at  Hany  Diamond  Laboratories  [Bock  1988,  Ellis  1991]  on  three  to  ten  modem 
cardiac  pacemakers  to  “VEMPS  H”  and  “AESOP’'  electromagnetic  puises.  Results  of  these 
studies  indicated  that  a  modem  cardiac  pacemaker  would  not  experience  damage  or  upset  when 


242 


exposed  to  EMP  simulator  pulses  up  to  a  16.5  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  the  typical  field 
intensity  in  the  accessible  areas  of  these  simulators.  Apparently,  the  upper  limit  of  cardiac 
pacemaker  vulnerability  to  EMP  pulses  cannot  be  adequately  tested  prior  to  implantation  in 
patients.  Therefore,  Patrick  [1993]  recommended,  as  a  caution,  restriction  of  cardiac  pacemaker 
wearers  from  EMP  simulator  areas  and  posted  warnings  of  the  presence  of  electromagnetic 
energy. 

In  1985,  the  diagnosis  of  chronic  myelogenic  leukemia  in  one  employee  of  an  EMP  testing 
program  during  a  mandatory  health  surveillance  examination  prompted  Muhm  [1992]  to  perform 
an  epidemiologic  study.  Candidates  for  the  study  were  identified  from  records  indicating 
eligibility  for  undergoing  mandatory  health  surveillance  examinations  because  of  employment  in 
the  EMP  program  between  the  inception  of  the  surveillance  examinations  in  September  1970  and 
an  arbitrarily  selected  cutoff  date,  December  31,  1986.  The  surveillance  examination  was 
typically  required  for  anyone  who  was  expected  to  be  exposed  to  EMP  for  at  least  30  days,  not 
necessarily  continuously,  during  a  6-month  period.  A  total  of 352  candidates  from  15  separate 
company  documents  was  identified,  and  304  men  were  followed  for  a  total  of  3362  person-years. 
Standardized  mortality  ratios  (SMR)  were  ascertained  by  two  methods:  the  World  Health 
Organization's  underlying  cause  of  death  algorithm;  and  the  National  Center  for  Health  Statistics' 
algorithm  to  identity  multiple  listed  causes  of  death.  There  was  one  underlying  cause  of  death  due 
to  leukemia  compared  with  0.2  expected  (SMR=  437,  95%  confidence  interval,  CI=  1 1-2433), 
and  two  multiple  listed  causes  of  death  due  to  leukemia  compared  with  0.3  expected  (SMR=  775, 
CI=  94-2801).  It  was  concluded  that  the  study  seem  to  suggest  an  association  between  death  due 
to  leukemia  and  employment  in  the  EMP  test  program,  but  this  suggestion  was  at  most,  tentative 
because  of  the  absence  of  exposure  data,  the  small  number  of  deaths  due  to  leukemia,  and  lack 
of  statistical  power  and  significance. 

Sandler  et  al.  [1975]  studied  the  effect  of  EMP  on  the  morphology  of  freshly  excised  frog 
spinal  cord  and  medulla  in  vitro.  The  EMP  exposure  duration  was  25  ms  (6  pulses)  of  130  kV/m 
(44.8  MW/m1)  peak  electric  field  intensity  pulses  operated  at  250  pps.  The  half  width  of  the  pulse 
was  30  ns.  No  difference  in  histology  of  large  motor  neurons  between  exposed  and  control  tissue 
was  noted.  It  was  concluded  that  this  EMP  did  not  cause  a  non-thermal  injury  at  a  calculated 
temperature  rise  (0.001  °C)  from  each  pulse.  However,  the  tissue  fixation  occurred  within  5 
minutes  including  dissection  of  tissue  and  exposure.  The  time-frame  of  the  experiment  was  too 
short  for  an  appearance  of  morphological  alterations  in  cells  after  such  an  insult. 

Mattson  and  Oliva  [1976]  exposed  a  monkey  for  one  hour  (a  total  of  18,700  pulses)  to 
EMPs  at  266  kV/m  (188  MW/m2)  peak  E-field  intensity,  1 1  ns  (10-90  %)  rise  time,  550  ns  (1/e) 
fall  time  and  5  pps.  Sidman  avoidance  behavior  and  post-exposure  electroencephalogram  were 
evaluated.  No  difference  in  the  endpoints  between  control  and  exposed  sessions  was  noted. 

A  series  of  chronic  EMP  experiments  using  rats,  mice  and  dogs  was  performed  at  the 
Armed  Forces  Radiobiology  Research  Institute.  Characteristics  of  the  EMP  were  447  kV/m  peak 
electric  field  intensity  (530  MW/m2),  5  ns  rise  time  and  550  ns  (1/e)  fall  time,  and  5  pps.  Initially, 
the  exposure  was  22  hr  per  day  and  5  days  per  week  for  38  weeks  to  a  total  of  10®  pulses  (note: 
7.52  xlO7  pulses  by  calculation)  [Skidmore  and  Baum  1974).  Various  endpoints  were  compared 
between  exposed  and  non-exposed  animals.  It  was  observed  that  the  reticulocyte  count  in  EMP 
exposed  rats  was  nearly  always  greater  than  those  in  the  non-exposed  rats.  However,  there  were 
no  concomitant  differences  in  peripheral  erythrocyte  count  and  in  the  radioactive  iron 

incorporation  between  groups  Platelet  counts  in  the  exposed  rats  were  about  10  °/»  below  those 
in  the  non-exposed  group  most  of  the  time.  Increased  and  decreased  lymphocyte  and  total 


243 


leukocyte  counts  in  EMP  exposed  rats  were  also  found  but  less  frequently  than  changes  in  platelet 
or  erythrocyte  count.  When  the  EMP  exposure  was  continued  to  94  weeks  to  a  total  of  2.5  x  10' 
pulses  (note:  1.86  x  10‘  pulses  by  calculation),  hematological  changes  were  no  longer  evident 
[Baum  et  al.  1976],  In  addition,  bone  marrow  cellularity  was  not  different  between  groups 
[  ktdmore  and  Baum  1974].  Because  of  these  inconsistencies  among  hematological  and 
hemopoietic  endpoints  and  the  absence  of  effect  at  the  end  of  the  94  week  exposure,  it  was 
concluded  that  EMP  effect  was  not  hazardous  to  rodents  [Skidmore  and  Baum  1974,  Baum  et 
al.  1976}.  In  a  later  publication,  Baum  [1979]  did  not  find  any  effects  on  hematological  and 
hemapoiesis  endpoints  in  four  male  and  five  female  beagle  dogs  exposed  to  the  447  kV/m  EMP 
pulses  for  8  hr/day,  for  a  total  45  days  and  5.8  x  105  pulses  (note:  6.48  x  iff  pulses  by 

calculation).  These  endpoints  were  examined  periodically  during  the  45  day  exposure  and  1  year 
after  the  conclusion  of  all  exposures. 

Other  endpoints  studied  were  chromosomal  aberrations  of  bone  marrow  cells,  blood 
chemistry,  histology,  teratogenesis,  incidence  ofmammaiy  tumors  of  rats,  and  leukemia  incidence 
in  leukemia  prone  AKR/J  male  mice.  Differences  between  groups  were  not  noted  in  any  of  these 
endpoints  after  a  38  week  exposure  [Skidmore  and  Baum  1974]  and  after  a  94  week  exposure 
[Baum  etal  1976).  In  addition,  fertility  and  reproductive  capability  were  not  affected  by  EMP 
exposure  [Baum  et  al.  1976],  Teratogenesis  and  disturbance  of  reproductive  capabilities  of  EMP 
exposed  male  dogs  were  not  found  [Baum  1979], 

Cleary  et  al.  [1980]  studied  various  biological  endpoints  in  rabbits  exposed  to  EMPs 
The  characteristics  of  EMP  were  100  to  200  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  0.1  Us  rise  time 
and  an  exponentially  cosine  decay  pulse  with  50  %  pulse  duration  at  0  4  ps  Because  the  spark 
gap  generator  was  free  running,  pulse  repetition  rates  varied.  They  studied  the  sodium 
pentobarbital  induced  sleeping  time  in  rabbits  exposed  to  140  kV/m  at  10  pps,  190  kV/m  at  24 
pps,  90  kV/m  at  10  pps.  In  the  study  of  EMP  effect  on  serum  components  (i.e.,  serum 
chemistry),  150  kV/m  at  38  pps  for  2  hours  was  used.  Serum  components  were  concentrations 
of  alkaline  phosphatase,  lactic  dehydrogenase,  serum  glutamic  oxaloacetic  transaminase,  calcium 
ions,  inorganic  phosphate,  glucose,  blood  urea  nitrogen,  uric  acid,  cholesterol,  total  protein, 
albumin,  and  total  bilirubin,  immediately  and  24  hours  after  EMP  exposure.  For  serum 
concentrations  of  triglyceride  and  creatine  phosphokinase  isoenzymes,  rabbits  were  exposed  to 
200  kV/m  at  50  pps  and  sampled  immediately  after  the  EMP  exposure.  In  all  of  these  biological 

endpoints,  consistent  statistical  differences  between  EMP-  and  sham-exposed  rabbits  were  not 
found. 

Moore  [1993]  studied  the  orientation  behavior  of  captured  migratory  birds  in  response 
to  “EMPRESS  I T  EMP  pulses.  The  orientation  of  migrating  birds  was  studied  for  2.5  hours  after 
exposure  toa  single  50  or  100  kVfin  “EMPRESS”  pulse.  Rise  time,  fell  time  and  pulse  duration 
were  not  specified.  The  distribution  of  heading  was  found  to  be  different  between  exposed  and 
sham-exposed  birds  in  one  of  three  observation  periods  during  the  spring  of '92  but  not  during 
the  spring  or  fall  of  '91 .  The  author  noted  that  some  individual  birds  may  experience  difficulty 
selecting  a  seasonally  appropriate  direction  following  exposure  to  a  single  EMP  pulse  at  peak 
electric  field  intensity  higher  than  50  kV/ra. 

Moore  [1993]  also  studied  the  natural  remanent  magnetization  and  isothermal  remanent 
magnetization  of  heads  of  three  bird  species  exposed  to  an  ascending  series  of  “EMPRESS  IT’ 
pulses  at  2,  5,  10,  19,  41,  72  and  102  kV/m.  Magnetic  field  intensities  and  other  pulse 
charactenst.es  were  again  not  specified  for  the  “EMPRESS  II”  pulses.  No  effect  of  EMP  pulses 
was  noted.  Therefore,  it  was  concluded  that  a  discemable  effect  on  magnetic  orientation  of  bird 


244 


species  due  to  EMP  pulses  was  not  expected  to  occur. 

Akyel  cl  al.  [1990,  1992]  utilized  a  spectrum  of  behavioral  paradigms  (memory 
consolidation,  general  motor  activity,  behavioral  despair  and  preference  of  electromagnetic 
pulses)  in  rats  in  a  study  of  the  behavioral  effects  of  EMPs.  The  EMP  exposures  were  performed 
in  a  parallel  plate  EMP  simulator  which  produced  electromagnetic  pulses  at  100  kV/m  peak 
electric  field  intensity,  7  ns  rise  time,  20  ns  pulse  duration  and  6  pps.  The  exposure  duration  was 
20  or  30  minutes.  Sham-exposed  animals  were  used  as  controls 

In  contrast  to  significantly  more  errors  made  by  the  TEMPO  (1,600  kV/m,  20  ns,  3  GHz 
pulses)  exposed  rats  [Raslear  etal.  1991a],  the  EMP  exposed  rats  were  not  different  from  sham- 
exposed  rats  when  evaluated  under  a  24-hour  memory  consolidation  test  [Akyel  el  al.  1990J. 
However,  visual  observation  and  video  recordings  of  the  animals  in  the  EMP  simulator  revealed 
that  the  EMP-exposed  animals  were  more  active  than  sham-exposed  animals.  In  addition, 
exposed  animals  also  displayed  an  ear  “twitch”  to  most  EMPs.  During  the  Porsolf  s  swim  test, 
the  immobility  time  of  exposed  animals  after  a  20  minute  EMP  exposure  were  not  different  from 
those  of  sham-exposed  animals  [Akyel  etal.  1992].  It  was  concluded  that  this  EMP  exposure  did 
not  affect  the  mood  of  animals  immediately  after  exposure. 

Preference  of  rats  for  exposed  versus  non-exposed  areas  was  also  studied  by  Akyel  et  al. 
[1992].  An  80  cm  long  Plexiglas  tube  was  placed  with  a  40  cm  section  inside  the  EMP  simulator 
and  subjected  to  the  EMP  exposure  and  the  other  joining  40  cm  section  outside  the  EMP 
simulator  out  of  the  EMP  field.  For  sham-exposure,  the  Plexiglas  tube  was  placed  in  Uie  same 
environment  without  the  EMP  field.  A  video  camera  was  used  to  record  the  movement  of 
subjects  within  the  tube.  Total  elapsed  time  that  the  animal  spent  on  either  side  of  the  tube  was 
recorded  for  EMP-  and  sham-exposed  animals  [Akyel  el  al.  1992],  They  observed  that  animals 
preferred  the  simulator  side  of  tube  when  the  simulator  was  active.  The  ear  “twitch”  was 
observed  in  exposed  animals  regardless  of  the  position  in  and  out  of  the  EMP  field  and  the 
“twitch”  was  not  found  in  the  absence  of  the  field  in  sham-exposed  animals.  It  was  concluded 
that  the  “ear  twitch”  was  not  a  field  specific  effect,  rather,  it  was  an  effect  caused  by  the  noise 
associated  with  the  generation  of  EMP  pulses 

From  these  studies,  it  appears  that  EMP  is  not  biologically  active  at  peak  electric  field 
intensities  below  100  kV/m.  However,  evidence  of  a  transient  hematological  disturbance,  startle, 
and  slowing  of  memory  process  due  to  EMPs  at  400-600  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity  have 
also  been  observed.  These  experiments  with  positive  findings  need  to  be  independently  verified. 
In  addition,  extrapolation  from  rodents  to  humans  is  hindered  by  uncertainties  in  mechanisms  of 
action,  and  in  determining  an  appropriate  dosimetric  index. 

Studies  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Ultra-Wide-Band  Pulses 

The  Ultra-Wide-Band  (UWB)  radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation  is  a  new  modality  in  radar 
technology  and  electronic  warfare.  Some  of  these  sources  can  produce  repetitive  ns  pulses  with 
sub-nanosecond  rise  time  and  peak  electric  field  intensity  in  several  hundred  kV/m  [Agee  et  al. 
1995],  At  much  lower  power,  an  example  of  forthcoming  civilian  UWB  radar  application  is  in 
the  automobile  device  for  obstacle  avoidance.  Because  the  primary  military  purpose  of  high  peak 
power  UWB  transmitters  is  to  damage  or  destroy  electronic  equipment  [Fuerer  1991],  the 
laymen’s  concern  of  health  effects  is  multiplied  by  the  apparent  higher  field  intensity  that  may  be 
encountered  in  their  operation  Due  to  a  lack  of  dedicated  exposure  apparatus  for  biological 
experimentation,  studies  on  biological  effects  of  UWB  pulses  are  primarily  limited  to  research 


245 


institutes  affiliated  with  military  organizations.  Only  a  handful  of  research  papers  has  been 
published  due  to  the  novelty  of  the  technology. 

Pakhomova  et  a!.  [1997]  studied  the  mutagenic  effects  of  UWB  pulses  in  yeast, 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae,  strain  D7.  This  strain  of  yeast  carries  specific  gene  markers  a/a,  trp5- 
12/trp5-27,  ade2-40/ade2-139,  and  ilvl-92/ilvl-92  which  make  it  feasible  to  detect  certain 
mutagenic  and  recombinagenic  events  from  appearance  of  the  colony,  reverse  mutation  of  the 
isoleucine  requirement,  and  mitotic  gene  conversion  to  tryptophane.  The  UWB  exposure  was 
performed  in  a  “Sandia”  device,  where  UWB  pulses  generated  by  a  triggered  spark  gap  generator 
were  transmitted  into  a  giga-transverse  electromagnetic  (GTEM)  cell  designed  for  small  animal 
and  in  vitro  exposures.  Three  1  ml  yeast  suspensions  at  107  cells  per  ml  in  a  polystyrene  tube 
(120  nun  height  *  17  mm  outer  diameter,  1  mm  wall  thickness)  were  exposed  simultaneously. 
Three  different  exposures  for  30  minutes  were  used,  i.e.,  sham-exposure,  low  repetition  rate  (16 
pps,  104  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  165  ps  rise  time,  and  1  ns  pulse  duration),  and  high 
repetition  rate  (600  pps,  102  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  165  ps  rise  time,  and  1  ns  pulse 
duration).  Colony  forming  ability,  normal  and  aberrant  colonies,  including  mitotic  crossovers, 
segregant,  revertant  and  convertants,  were  scored.  None  of  endpoints  was  found  to  be  altered 
by  UWB  exposures.  Therefore,  it.  was  concluded  that  T  JWB  exposure  used  in  this  experiment  did 
not  change  the  colony  forming  ability  of  yeast  cells  nor  did  it  cause  mutations  or  gene 
recombination. 

Pakhomova  et  at.  [1998],  in  a  follow-up  study,  used  the  same  D7  strain  yeast,  but  pre¬ 
treated  them  with  254  nm  ultraviolet  light  (UV)  at  100  J/m2  in  2.5  ml  of  5  *  106  cdls/ml  in  a  36 
mm  diameter  Petri  dish.  The  UV-pre-treated  yeast  was  then  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  in  the 
GTEM  cell  for  30  minutes  at  doses  and  techniques  as  in  the  previous  experiment.  There  were 
three  exposure  conditions:  sham-UWB,  16  Hz,  and  600  Hz  exposures.  The  experiment  was 
performed  in  parallel  according  to  UWB  treatments,  Le.,  sham-UWB  exposure  vs  control,  low 
repetition  rate  UWB  exposure  vs  sham-UWB  exposure,  and  high  repetition  rate  UWB  exposure 
vs  sham  UWB  exposure.  Sham  UV  exposure  was  not  included  in  the  experiment.  The  UV  pre¬ 
treatment  was  found  to  be  effective  in  reducing  cell  survival  to  60-70  %  and  the  survival  rate  was 
not  altered  by  UWB  exposures.  The  frequencies  of  segregation,  mutations  to  the  isoleucine 
independence,  and  gene  recombination  events,  such  as  mitotic  cross-over  and  conversion  to 
tryptophan  independence  were  remarkably  similar  between  samples  in  the  parallel  experiments, 
as  well  as  among  sham,  16  Hz  and  600  Hz  exposed  samples.  It  was  therefore  concluded  that 
these  UWB  exposure  did  not  cause  changes  in  UV-induced  mutagenesis  and  gene  recombination. 

Erwin  and  Hurt  [1993]  presented  probably  the  first  summary  of  various  studies  on 
biological  effects  of  UWB  pulses  performed  under  a  collaborative  program  between  Phillips 
Laboratory  (Kirtland  AFB,  NM)  and  Armstrong  Laboratory  (Brooks  AFB,  TX).  Endpoints  of 
studies  were  cardiovascular  response  in  rats,  equilibrium  task  performance  of  monkeys, 
performance  scores  of  the  Functional  Observation  Battery  (29  physiological  and  behavioral 
measures)  in  rats,  serum  enzymes,  plasma  electrolyte  concentration,  hemoglobin  concentration 
in  rats,  brain  C-fos  protein  activation  in  rats,  and  metrazole  seizure  activity  in  rats.  The  exposure 
was  with  a  “Hindenburg-2”  (H-2)  device,  which  was  developed  in  mid- 1992  [Agee  et  al.  1995] 
and  produced  bipolar  pulses  at  250  kV/m  (166  MW/m2)  peak  electric  field  intensity,  318-377  ps 
rise  time  and  5-10  ns  pulse  duration.  Typical  exposure  was  2  min  at  60  pps  except  the  operant 
behavioral  study  in  which  rats  were  tested  immediately  after  an  exposure  to  12,000  pulses  in  a 
“sweep”  pulse  repetition,  starting  at  1  pps  and  increased  continuously  to  400  pps  in  1  min.  They 
concluded  that  none  of  the  endpoints  was  affected  by  UWB  pulses.  Some  of  these  studies  were 


246 


subsequently  published  in  1995  [Sherry  elal.  1995,  Walters  et  al.  1995], 

Sherry  et  al  [1995]  exposed  six  adu/t  male  rhesus  monkeys  (Macaca  mulatta)  to  UWB 
pulses  produced  by  the  “H-2”  device  under  similar  parameters  as  used  previously.  The 
performance  of  monkeys  on  the  “Primate  Equilibrium  Platform”  (PEP)  was  used  as  an  endpoint. 
Hie  estimated  whole-body  average  SAR  was  0.5  W/kg,  A  0.3  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR 
was  estimated  by  Hurt  [1999].  Each  monkey  was  exposed  to  these  UWB  pulses  twice,  separated 
by  6  days  between  exposures.  Performance  on  the  PEP  was  tested  before  exposure,  at  1  hr  after 
exposure  and  at  24-h  intervals  thereafter  for  the  next  5  days.  Sham-exposed  monkeys  were  not 
included.  The  only  significant  effects  were  individual  differences  among  subjects  and  time. 
Therefore,  it  was  concluded  that  UWB  exposure  had  no  effect  on  PEP  performance  of  monkeys. 
In  addition  to  an  absence  of  sham  exposure  or  sham-exposed  animals,  these  monkeys  had  served 
in  experiments  on  the  effects  of  low  doses  of  carbamates  and/or  organophosphates  on  PEP 
performance.  The  authors  assured  that  such  experiments  had  no  detectable  carryover  effects.  It 
is  understandable  that  the  non-human  primate  is  a  precious  research  commodity  and  the  training 
for  PEP  performance  is  difficult  and  time  consuming.  Nevertheless,  the  lack  of  sham-exposed 
controls  and  re-use  of  animals  from  other  experiments  raise  questions  as  to  the  repeatability  of 
these  observations. 

Walters  et  al.  [1995]  reported  the  results  of  rodents  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  produced 
by  the  “H-2”  device.  The  same  pulse  parameters  were  used  at  a  250  kV/m  peak  electric  field 
intensity  (reported  as  17  CrW/rf,  should  be  0.17  GW/nf).  The  estimated  whole-body  average 
SAR  was  20  mW/kg  [Hurt  1999].  Various  endpoints  were  evaluated  including  performance  in 
a  swimming  test  3  h  after  exposure,  scores  in  a  Functional  Observational  Battery  one  day  before 
and  2  h  after  exposure,  serum  enzyme  concentrations  (aspartate  transaminase,  alanine 
transaminase,  creatine  kinase  and  amylase)  at  2  or  48  h  after  exposure,  plasma  electrolyte 
concentration  and  osmolality  at  2  or  48  h  after  exposure,  and  brain  C-fos  protein  2  h  after 
exposure.  No  differences  between  any  of  the  endpoints  from  sham-exposed  and  UWB  exposed 
rats  were  noted. 

Miller  et  al.  [1999]  injected  rats  intraperitoneally  with  a  convulsant,  pentylenetetrazol 
(PT)  at  99  %  effective  dose  (ED„,  89.17  mg/kg)  to  re-evaluate  the  effect  of  UWB  pulses  on 
drug-induced  convulsions.  Four  different  treatment  groups  were  used:  UWB  ©xposed-PT 
injected,  UWB  exposed-saline  injected,  sham-exposed  -  PT  injected,  and  sham-exposed  -  saline 
injected.  The  UWB  and  sham-exposure  were  performed  20  s  after  the  PT  or  saline  injection. 
UWB  pulses  were  produced  by  a  “Kentech  PBG3”  device  into  a  parallel  plate  transmission  line. 
The  UWB  pulses  were  40  kV/m  (4.24  MW/m2)  peak  electric  field  intensity,  176  ps  rise  time,  1.92 
Jis  pulse  duration  and  1,000  pps  for  2  minutes.  The  whole-body  SAR  was  estimated  as  16 
mW/kg.  As  expected,  there  was  a  significant  drug  effect  (PT  vs  saline)  on  mortality,  however, 
exposure  effects  (UWB  or  sham)  and  interaction  between  drug  and  exposure  effects  were  not 
found.  Since  saline  injected  rats  did  not  convulse,  latency  to  first  convulsion  response,  latency 
to  full  tonic-clonic  seizure  and  duration  of  seizure  were  evaluated  in  PT-treated  rats  only.  No 
differences  were  noted  in  any  of  these  three  latencies. 

Seaman  etal.  [ 1998]  tested  the  influence  of  a  “Sandia”  UWB  (100-1 05  kV/m,  165-168 
ps  rise  time,  0.97  ns  pulse  duration)  exposure  on  nociception  and  spontaneous  activity  and 
interaction  ofUWB  exposure  on  morphine  induced  analgesia  and  hyperactivity  of  the  mouse.  A 
complex  experimental  design  with  eight  different  experimental  groups  was  used.  These 
investigators  used  cage  control,  sham  exposure,  low  repetition  rate  UWB  (60  pps,  105  kV/m 
peak,  165  ps  rise  time,  0,97  ns  pulse  duration,  and  3.7  mW/kg  estimated  whole-body  average 


247 


SAR),  and  high  repetition  rate  UWB  exposure  (600  pps,  100  kV/m  peak,  168  ps  rise  time,  0.97 
ns  pulse  duration  and  37  mW/kg  estimated  -whole-body  average  SAR)  for  30  minutes.  Saline-  and 
morphine-injected  male  CF-1  (7.5  mg/kg)  and  male  C57BL/6  (10  mg/kg)  mice  served  as  subjects. 
Nociception  was  evaluated  by  latency  of  front  and  back  paw  licking  and  “first  response”  of  the 
mouse  after  being  placed  on  a  49.5-50.5  °C  metallic  surface.  Other  than  the  effect  of  morphine, 
none  of  the  nociceptive  endpoints  was  found  to  be  influenced  by  the  UWB  exposures.  Interaction 
between  UWB  and  morphine  was  not  significant  in  all  of  the  three  nociceptive  endpoints.  Lack 
of  UWB  effects  on  nociception  and  morphine-induced  analgesia  was  supported  by  additional 
experiments  with  CF-1  mice  with  15, 30,  and  45  minute  exposures  to  the  high  repetition  UWB 
pulses.  Spontaneous  activity  was  measured  in  C57BL/6  by  the  number  of  beam  crossings  in  a 
38.5  cm  square  arena.  Other  than  a  morphine  induced  hyperactivity,  UWB  effect  and  interaction 
between  UWB  and  morphine  were  not  observed.  Due  to  limits  of  the  exposure  system,  higher 
doses  were  not  tested. 

Inhibition  of  nitric  oxide  synthase  (NOS)  has  a  morphine-like  analgesic  effect  and  can 
cause  alteration  in  locomotor  activities.  In  an  extension  of  their  original  study  on  morphine  and 
UWB,  Seaman  et  al.  [1999]  studied  the  effects  of  a  NOS  inhibitor,  N^nitro-L-arginine  methyl 
ester  (L-NAMF.)  on  manifestation  of  UWB  effects  in  CF-l/Plus  mice.  Nociception,  and 
spontaneous  locomotor  activity  were  measured  as  before.  The  sham  and  UWB  exposures  (600 
pps,  102  kV/m  peak,  0.90  ns  pulse  duration,  160  ps  rise  time,  and  37  mW/kg  estimated  whole- 
body  SAR)  were  administered  to  saline-injected  and  L-NAME-inj ected  (50  mg/kg)  rats.  Effects 
of  L-NAME  on  the  “first  response”,  hind  paw  licking  latency  and  spontaneous  activity  were 
clearly  demonstrated  but  no  additional  effects  were  found.  While  L-NAME  was  capable  of 
inducing  increased  spontaneous  activity  in  sham  exposed  mice,  its  effect  was  blocked  entirely  by 
the  UWB  exposure.  In  supporting  the  evidence  that  UWB  pulses  could  affect  nitric  oxide 
production.  Seaman  et  al.  [1999]  referred  to  an  enhanced  nitric  oxide  production  by  41  %  in 
stimulated  murine  macrophages  incubated  with  potassium  nitrate  (GLN  treatment)  after  UWB 
exposure  [Seaman  el  al.  1996].  The  nitric  oxide  produced  was  9.14  mM  in  sham-exposed  and 
12.89  mM  in  UWB-exposed  GLN  treated  macrophages.  The  exposure  of  these  murine 
macrophages,  RAW  264.7,  was  performed  in  a  T75  flask  covered  with  235  ml  of  phosphate 
buffered  saiine  in  the  “Sandia”  system  to  UWB  pulses  operated  at  72-95  kV/m  peak,  198-216  ps 
rise  time,  and  1 .01-1 .07  ns  rise  time  for  30  minutes.  A  dose  estimate  was  not  included. 

The  study  of  cardiovascular  effects  of  UWB  pulses  has  been  performed  in  several  studies. 
However,  two  different  approaches  have  been  used  [Jauchem  et  al.  1998,  1999,  Lu  et  al.  1999]. 
Jauchem's  group  used  ketamine-anesthetized  (150  mg/kg,  a  rather  high  dose)  and  cannulated  rats 
as  a  model  to  evaluate  the  UWB  effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  during  exposure  and 
immediately  after  exposure.  The  UWB  exposure  was  usually  less  than  2  minutes.  An  earlier 
report  was  presented  by  Erwin  and  Hurt  [1993]  and  details  of  the  experiment  were  not  given. 
However,  the  exposure  was  probably  a  2  minute  exposure  by  the  “H-2”  device  which  produced 
bipolar  pulses  at  250  kV/m  (166  MW/m2)  peak  electric  field  intensity,  318-377  ps  rise  time,  5-10 
ns  pulse  duration,  and  60  pps.  Estimated  whole-body  average  SAR  was  20  mW/kg  [Hurt  1999]. 
Jauchem  et  al.  [1999]  exposed  rats  to  UWB  pulses  produced  by  a  “Bournlea”  pulse  generator 
with  pulses  at  a  19-21  kV/m  peak  electric  field  intensity,  327  ps  rise  time  and  6  ns  pulse  duration. 
The  exposure  protocols  were  2,000  pps  for  0.5  s,  2,000  pps  for  5  s,  and  1,000  pps  pulse  train  on 
for  2  s  and  off  for  2  s  for  a  total  of  2  minutes.  The  estimated  whole-body  average  SAR  was  28 
mW/kg  [Hurt  1999],  None  of  these  experiments  included  a  sham-exposed  group.  Jauchem  et 
al.  [1998]  also  utilized  the  “Sandia”  exposure  system  for  rats.  The  experimental  conditions  were 


248 


sham,  50  pps  (104  kV/m  peak,  0.97  ns  pulse  duration,  177  ps  rise  time  and  7.4  mW/kg  estimated 
whole-body  average  SAR),  500  pps  (102  kV/m  peak,  0.97  ns  pulse  duration,  174  ps  rise  time  and 
71  mW/kg  estimated  whole-body  average  SAR)  and  1,000  pps  (87  kV/m  peak,  0.99  ns  pulse 
duration,  218  ps  rise  time  and  1 14  mW/kg  estimated  whole-body  average  SAR).  Results  of  these 
experiments  revealed  a  stable  heart  rate  and  mean  arterial  pressure  before,  during  and  after  UWB 
or  sham  exposures.  However,  the  average  heart  rates  (less  than  265  beats  per  minute)  of  the 
Sprague-Dawley  rats  in  these  experiments  were  remarkably  low  for  this  species  even  if  the 
cardiovascular  stimulatory  effect  of  the  ketamine  jLippmann  et  al.  1983]  is  ignored.  In  conscious, 
free-roaming  and  cannulated  rats,  the  average  heart  rate  of  Sprague-Dawley  rats  is  between  332 
and  364  beats  per  minute  [Baron  and  Van  Loon  1989,  Ferrari  et  al.  1987,  Houdi  et  al.  1995, 
Sparrow  et  al.  1987],  In  addition,  the  delay  time  for  manifestation  of  cardiovascular  effects 
should  be  considered.  Lu  et  al.  [1992]  demonstrated  that  it  took  2  to  3  minutes  for  a  heart  rate 
change  to  appear  in  rats  exposed  to  high  peak  power  (7  MW/kg  at  the  neck,  1  (J.s  pulse  duration) 
and  high  average  pulsed  microwaves  (110  W/kg  at  the  neck)  or  high  average  CW  microwaves 
(110  W/kg  at  the  neck).  In  addition,  the  acute  alteration  in  heart  rate  began  to  recover 

immediately  after  exposure. 

In  a  non-inYasivc  approach  to  evaluating  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  UWB  exposure,  Lu 
et  al.  [1999]  measured  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  blood  pressures  (systolic,  mean  and  diastolic) 
in  conscious  rats.  Restraint  adapted  rats  were  exposed  to  sham,  500  Hz  (93  kV/m,  180  ps  rise 
time,  1  ns  pulse  duration,  and  70  mW/kg  estimated  whole-body  average  SAR)  and  1,000  Hz  (85 
kV/m,  200  ps  rise  time,  1.03  ns  pulse  width,  and  121  mW/kg  estimated  vriiole-body  average  SAR) 
UWB  pulses  for  6  minutes.  Cardiovascular  endpoints  were  determined  3-4  days  before  exposure 
and  0.75  h,  24  h,  72  h,  1, 2, 3  and  4  weeks  after  exposure.  Significant  changes  in  heart  rate  were 
not  found.  On  the  other  hand,  significant  decreases  in  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures  were 
observed  in  UWB  exposed  animals  and  the  effect  peaked  at  2  weeks  after  UWB  exposure. 
Recovery  was  still  not  complete  by  4  weeks  after  exposure.  In  two  subsequent,  yet  unpublished, 
experiments  (Fig.  6),  UWB  exposures  were  sham,  125  Hz  (91.3  kV/m  peak,  156  ps  rise  time, 
1.02  ns  pulse  duration,  and  17  mW/kg  estimated  SAR),  250  Hz  (94.0  kV/m  peak,  168  ps  rise 
time,  1 .02  ns  pulse  duration,  38  mW/kg  estimated  SAR),  500  Hz  (89.3  kV/m  peak,  160  ps  rise 
time,  0.91  ns  pulse  duration,  and  59  mW/kg  estimated  SAR)  and  1,000  Hz  (85.4  kV/m,  167  ps 
rise  time,  0.94  ns  pulse  duration  and  112  mW/kg  estimated  SAR).  The  UWB-induced 
hypotension  was  robust  (20  mm  Hg),  consistent,  and  persistent.  The  threshold  appeared  to  be 
around  60  mW/kg  estimated  whole-body  SAR. 

In  short,  a  response-SAR-exposure-duration  relationship  began  to  emerge  from  this 
limited  number  of  studies  on  biological  effects  caused  by  UWB  pulses.  None  of  these  average 
SARs  can  induce  significant  temperature  increases.  Additional  characterization  will  be  required 
to  confirm  and  to  elucidate  response-SAR-exposure-duration  relationships  in  other  biological 
models.  Dosimetry  and  mechanisms  of  action,  either  physical  or  biological,  are  still  unresolved. 


CONCLUSION 

Analysis  of  biological  effects  and  health  implications  of  high  peak  power  radio  frequency 
pulses  is  a  complicated  endeavor  by  itself.  The  task  is  further  complicated  by  the  recent 
developments  in  methods  of  generating  RF  pulses  by  shifting  from  narrow-band  pulses  to 
carrierless  pulses.  Conventional  radar  is  operated  in  a  narrow  band  mode  in  which  the  fractional 


249 


□USHAM  (15)  E22J125  Hz  (5)  BS3250  Hz  (5)  E53$0O  Hz  (10)  MU  1,000  Hz  (10) 


Figure  6.  Development  of  hypotension  in  rats  exposed  to  UWB  pulses.  Results  of  ANOVA  at  each  sampling  time 
point  are  shown  at  upper  abscissa.  Significant  Fs  ore  indicated  by  an  asterisk.  Significant  differences  between  sham 
and  exposed  are  shown  by  solid  triangles. 


bandwidth  is  less  than  1%  of  the  center  (carrier)  frequency.  In  carrieriess  RF  pulses,  the 
frequency  domain  of  the  pulse  can  span  from  DC  to  GHz  which  creates  new  challenges  in 
dosimetry  and  in  the  potential  mode  of  interactions  between  carrierless  pulses  and  biological 
materials.  The  present  review  attempts  to  evaluate  the  progress  in  theoretical  and  experimental 
results  of  carrier  and  carrierless  pulses. 

A  single  RF  pulse  lasting  from  microseconds  to  seconds  with  adequate  pulse  energy  is 
known  to  cause  drastic  acute  biological  effects.  Examples  in  descending  order  of  pulse  energy 
are  brain  enzyme  denaturation,  stun  and  seizure,  pain,  decreased  spontaneous  activity  and  brain 

acetylcholine  concentration,  microwave  induced  whole-body  movements,  thermal  sensation, 
startle  modification  and  microwave  hearing.  The  first  four  effects  are  associated  with  significant 
bulk  heating  indicated  by  2  "C  or  more  increase  in  body  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  none 
of  the  last  four  effects  requires  a  significant  bulk  heating.  They  can  be  caused  by  a  single  pulse 
which  is  incapable  of  imparting  adequate  energy  to  cause  an  elevation  in  core  temperature  of 
animals.  However,  microwave  induced  whole-body  movements  are  caused  by  a  single  pulse 
which  results  in  0.2  to  2  °C  increase  in  subcutaneous  temperature.  On  the  other  hand,  a  thermal 
sensation  is  elicited  by  partial  body  exposure  in  which  less  than  0.1  °C  increase  in  cutaneous 
temperature  is  noted.  Startle  modification  and  microwave  hearing  are  produced  by  a  pulse  that 
is  barely  capable  of  transferring  enough  energy  to  cause  less  than  a  10J  or  1CT4  °C  increase  in 
tissue  temperature  of  animals.  The  mechanism  of  action  is  not  clear  in  startle  modification  and 
microwave  induced  whole-body  movements.  However,  the  mechanism  of  action  is  well 
established  in  the  microwave  auditory  effect  in  which  the  cranial  pressure  wave  created  by 
thermoelastic  expansion  associated  with  an  RF  pulse  is  sensed  by  hair  cells  of  the  cochlear.  The 
activation  of  thermoreceptors  is  undoubtedly  involved  in  thermosensation.  Roth  startle 


250 


modification  and  microwave  induced  whole  body  movements  appears  to  be  reflexive  reactions 
which  require  receptor,  reflex  center  and  effectors.  In  other  words,  these  last  four  effects  are 
originated  from  activation  of  specialized  nerve  endings,  mechanisms  of  which  have  not  yet  been 
adequately  investigated. 

The  threshold  of  a  single  pulse  effect  appears  to  have  a  critical  duration.  For  an  exposure 
period  shorter  than  the  critical  duration,  the  threshold  must  be  dependent  on  specific  absorption 
and  the  threshold  depends  on  specific,  absorption  rate  if  the  exposure  duration  is  longer  than  the 
critical  duration.  Examples  can  be  found  in  microwave  hearing  and  microwave  induced  whole 
body  movements.  However,  the  critical  duration  can  vary  with  endpoint.  This  critical  pulse 
duration  appears  to  be  around  30  ps  for  microwave  hearing  and  1  s  for  microwave  induced 
whole-body  movements.  The  critical  duration  for  a  single  pulse  effect  is  not  clear  for  other 
endpoints. 

It  has  been  proposed  that  high  peak  power  RF  pulses  may  have  specific  effects  differing 
from  those  caused  by  a  CW  radiation.  In  addition,  pulse  modulation  has  been  suspected  to  cause 
more  enhancement  of  a  given  biological  effect  than  the  same  one  caused  by  CW  radiation  of 
equivalent  average  SAR.  Microwave  hearing  can  be  considered  to  be  specific  to  pulse  modulation 
since  it  would  not  occur  without  the  RF  modulated  pulse  or  pulses.  On  the  other  hand,  pulse 
enhancement  is  not  established  reliably  since  many  studies  have  failed  to  demonstrate  its 
importance.  Later  studies  aimed  at  comparing  effectiveness  of  an  induced  biological  effect 
between  pulsed  and  CW  RFs  (duty  factors  >  10“*  or  peak  to  average  power  ratio  <  104)  usually 
failed  to  confirm  the  earlier  reports  that  indicated  the  existence  of  pulse  enhancement.  However, 
studies  have  not  been  done  to  confirm  or  deny  the  enhancement  effect  of  pulse  modulation  on 
injury  of  corneal  endothelium,  on  brain  cholinergic  activity,  and  possibly  on  consolidation  of 
working  memory.  A  variety  of  behavioral  effects  have  been  observed  in  experiments  employing 
“TEMPO”  pulses.  On  the  other  hand,  well-trained  behaviors  arc  resistant  to  alteration  by 
‘TEMPO”  pulses.  Due  to  the  uniqueness  of  the  “TEMPO”  pulses  (10*1  duty  factor,  0.072  W/kg 
whole-body  average  SAR,  noise,  and  x-ray)  and  the  cost  of  maintaining  such  a  system,  it  is  highly 
recommended,  by  using  the  process  of  elimination,  to  experiment  with  3 .0  GHz  CW  at  equivalent 
SARs  to  eliminate  the  existence  of  unsuspected  low  dose  effects  from  CW  microwaves. 

A  concrete  conclusion  regarding  biological  effects  of  carrierless  RF  is,  at  most,  tentative 
because  of  the  limited  number  of  studies.  The  carrierless  RF  includes  electromagnetic  pulse 
(EMP)  and  ultra-wide-band  (UWB)  pulses.  Although  unconfirmed,  a  single  EMP  pulse  with  a 
peak  electric  field  of  several  hundred  kV/m  might  interfere  with  the  ability  of  animals  to  run  a 
maze.  Other  than  that  report  [Hirsh  et  al.  1968],  most  studies  indicate  no  observable  effect  with 
EMP  pulses  with  peak  electric  fields  less  than  100  kV/m.  Studies  of  biological  effects  of  UWB 
pulses  have  begun  to  reveal  the  existence  of  UWB  bioactivity  at  a  peak  electric  field  intensity 
around  100  kV/m.  Because  of  health  and  medical  implications,  UWB-induced  hypotension  needs 
to  be  independently  confirmed  and  the  dose-response  characteristics  further  explored. 

Acknowledgment:  The  authors  are  in  part  supported  by  the  US.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  under  contract  No.  DAMD-17-94-C-4069  with  McKessonHBOC 
BioServices.  The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those  of  the 
authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy  or 
decision  unless  so  designated  by  other  documentation.  Approved  for  public  release,  distribution 
is  unlimited. 


251 


REFERENCES 


Adair,  R.K.,  1991,  Biological  effects  on  the  cellular  level  of  electric  field  pulses,  Health 
Phys.  61:  395-399. 

Adair,  R.K.,  1995,  Ultrashort  microwave  signals:  a  didactic  discussion,  Aviat.  Space 
Environ.  Med.  66: 792-794. 

Agee,  F.J.,  Schlfield,  D.W.,  Prather  W.,  and  Burger,  J.W.,  1995,  Powerful  ultra-wide  band 

RF  emitters:  status  and  challenges,  In:  Intense  Microwave  Pulses  III ,  H.E.  Brandt,  ed.. 
Proceeding  of  the  Int.  Soc.  Optical  Eng.  vol  2557,  pp  98-109. 

Agouridis,  D.C.,  and  Easterly,  C.E.,  1989,  EMP  simulators  and  public  safety:  an  analysis, 
Bioelctromagnetics  10:  355-360. 

Akyel,  Y.,  Raslear,  T.G.,  and  Serfini,  R.,  1990,  Exposure  of  rodents  in  a  parallel  plate  EMP 
simulator.  Part  II:  behavioral  effects,  Proc.  Ann.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  12: 1551-1152. 

Akyel,  Y.,  Raslear,  T.G.,  Bates,  F.,  and  DeAngelis,  M.,  1992,  Behavioral  responses  of  rats 
to  acute  EMP  fields,  Proc.  Ann.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  14: 287-288. 

Akyel,  Y.,  and  Raslear,  T.G.,  1993,  The  effects  of  acute  EMP  fields  on  the  behavior  of  rats. 
In:  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel  Proceedings,  J.  de  Lorge  and 
W.  Mick,  eds.,  U.S.  Navy  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program  and  Operational 
Medicine  and  Fleet  Support,  Washington,  D.C.,  pp  45-57. 

Akyel,  Y.,  Akyel,  B.,  and  Raslear,  T.G.,  1993a,  Further  characterization  of  microwave- 
evoked  whole-body  movement.  Proc.  Ann.  Conf.  IEEEEMBS15: 1451-1452. 

Akyel,  Y.,  Belt,  M„  Raslear,  T.G.,  and  Hammer,  R.M.,  1993b,  The  effects  of  high-peak 
power  pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  rat.  In:  Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  M.  Blank,  ed.,  San  Francisco  Press,  San 
Francisco,  CA,  pp  668-670. 

Albanese,  R.,  Blaschak,  J.,  Medina,  R.,  and  Penn  J.,  1994,  Ultrashort  electromagnetic 

signals:  biophysical  questions,  safety  issues,  and  medical  opportunities,  Aviat.  Space 
Environ.  Med.  65/Supplement:  A1 16-A120. 

Albert,  E.N.,  1979,  Reversibility  of  microwave-induced  blood-brain-barrier  permeability, 
Radio  Sci.  14/6  Supplement:  323-327. 

Arber,  S.L.,  1981,  The  effect  of  microwave  radiation  on  passive  membrane  properties  of 
snail  neurons,  J.  Microwave  Power  16: 15-20. 

Arber,  S.L.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1985a,  Microwave-induced  changes  in  nerve  cells:  effects  of 
modulation  and  temperature.  Bioelectromagnetics  6: 257-270. 

Arber,  S.L.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1985b,  Extracellular  calcium  and  microwave  enhancement  of 
membrane  conductance  in  snail  neurons,  Radiat.  Environ.  Biophys.  24: 149-156. 

Baranski,  S.,  1971,  Effect  of  chronic  microwave  irradiation  on  the  blood  forming  system  of 
guinea  pigs  and  rabbits.  Aerospace  Med.  42: 1196-1199. 

Baranski,  S.,  1972a,  Histological  and  histochemical  effect  of  microwave  irradiation  on  the 
central  nervous  system  of  rabbits  and  guinea  pig,  Am.  J.  Phys.  Med.  51:  182-191 . 

Baranski,  S.,  1972b,  Effect  of  microwaves  on  the  reactions  of  white  blood  cells  system, 

Acta  Physiol.  Pol.  23:  687-695. 

Baranski,  S.,  and  Czerski,  P.,  1976,  Microwave  effects  on  blood  and  the  blood-forming 
system.  In:  Biological  Effects  of  Microwaves,  Dowden,  Hutchinson  &  Ross,  Inc., 
Stroudsburg,  PA  PP  137-146. 


252 


Barron,  B.A.,  and  Van  Loon,  G.R.,  1989,  Role  of  sympathoadrenomeduliary  system  in 

cardiovascular  response  to  stress  in  rats,  J.  Autonomic  Nervous  System  28:  179-188. 

Baum,  S.J.,  1979,  Tests  of  biological  integrity  in  dogs  exposed  to  an  electromagnetic  pulse 
environment,  Health  Phys.  36:  159-165. 

Baum,  S .J.,  Ekstrom,  M.E.,  Skidmore,  W.D.,  Wyant,  D.E.,  and  Atkinson,  JX.,  1976, 

Biological  measurements  in  rodents  exposed  continuously  throughout  their  adult  life  to 
pulsed  electromagnetic  radiation.  Health  Phys.  30: 161-166. 

Bemardi,  P.,  and  D'Inzeo,  G.,  1984,  A  nonlinear  analysis  of  the  effects  of  transient 

electromagnetic  fields  on  excitable  membrane,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech. 
32:  670-679. 

Birenbaum,  L.,  Grosof  G.M.,  Rosenthal,  S.W.,  and  Zaret,  M.M.,  1969,  Effect  of 
microwaves  on  the  eye,  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  16: 7-14. 

Birenbaum,  L.,  Kaplan,  I.T.,  Metlay,  W.,  Rosenthal,  S.W.,  and  Zaret,  M.M.,  1975, 

Microwave  and  Infra-red  effects  on  heart  rate,  respiration  rate  and  subcutaneous 
temperature  of  the  rabbit,  J.  Microwave  Power  10:  3-18. 

Blair,  H.  A.,  1932,  On  the  intensity-time  relations  for  stimulation  by  electric  current,  J. 

Gen.  Physiol.  15:177-185,  709-729,  731-755. 

Blick,  D.W.,  Adair,  E.R.,  Hurt,  W.D.,  Sherry,  C.J.,  Walters,  T.J.,  and  Merritt,  J.H.,  1997, 
Thresholds  of  microwave-evoked  warmth  sensations  in  human  skin, 
Bioclectromagnctics  18:  -403-409. 

Bock,  T.  J.,  1988,  EMP  test  of  implantable  cardiac  pacemakers ,  U.S.  Army  Laboratory 
Command,  Harry  Diamond  Laboratories,  Adelphi,  MD,  Report  HDL-TR-2197. 

Brown,  D.O.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  and  Elson,  E.C.,  1994,  Characteristics  of  microwave  evoked  body 
movements  in  mice.  Bioelectromagnetics  15: 143-161. 

Brown,  P.V.K.,  and  Wyeth,  N.C.,  1983,  Laser  interferometer  for  measuring  microwave- 
induced  motion  in  eye  lens  in  vitro.  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  54:  85-89. 

Cain,  C.A.,  and  Rissman,  W.J.,  1978,  Mammalian  auditory  responses  to  3.0  GHz 
microwave  pulses,  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  25: 288-293. 

Chatterjee,  ID.,  Wu,  D.,  and  Gandhi,  O.P.,  1986,  Human  body  impedance  and  threshold 
currents  for  perception  and  pain  for  contact  hazard  analysis  in  the  VLF-MF  band, 
IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  33:  486-494. 

Chen,  J.-Y.,  and  Gandhi,  O.P.,  1991,  Currents  induced  in  an  anatomically  based  model  of 
human  for  exposure  to  vertically  polarized  electromagnetic  pulses,  IEEE  Trans. 
Microwave  Theory  Tech.  30:  31-39. 

Chou,  C.-K.,  and  Guy,  A.W.,  1978,  Effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  isolated  nerve  and 
muscle  preparations,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  26:  141-147. 

Chou,  C.K.,  Guy,  A.W.,  Galambos,  R.,  and  Lovely,  R.H.,  1975,  Cochlea  microphonics 
generated  by  microwave  pulses,  J.  Microwave  Power  10: 361-367. 

Chou,  C.K.,  Guy,  A.W.,  and  Galambos,  R.,  1976,  Microwave-induced  auditory  response: 
cochlear  microphonics,  In:  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Waves.  Vol.  I,  C.C. 
Johnson  and  M.L.  Shore,  eds.,  FDA/BRH,  Rockville,  MD.,  HEW  Publication  (FDA) 
77-8010,  pp  291-296. 

Chou,  C.K.,  Guy,  A.W.,  and  Galambos,  R.,  1982a,  Auditory  perception  of  radio-frequency 
electromagnetic  fields.  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  71: 1321-1334. 

Chou,  C.-K.,  Guy,  A.W.,  McDougall,  J.A.  and  Han,  L.-F.,  1982b,  Effects  of  continuous  and 
pulsed  chronic  microwave  exposure  on  rabbits,  Radio  Sci.  17/5  Supplement:  185-193. 


253 


Chou,  C.K.,  Han,  L.F.,  and  Guy,  A.W.,  1980,  Microwave  radiation  and  heart-beat  rate  of 
rabbits,  J.  Microwave  Power  15:  87-93. 

Clapman,  R.M.,  and  Cain,  C.A.,  1975,  Absence  of  heart  rate  effects  in  isolated  frog  heart 

irradiated  with  pulse  modulated  microwave  energy,  J.  Microwave  Power  10:  411-419. 

Cleary,  S.F.,  Nicldess,  F.,  Liu,  L.M.,  and  Hoffman,  R.,  1980,  Studies  of  exposure  of  rabbits 
to  electromagnetic  pulsed  fields,  Bioelectromagnetics  1:  345-352.. 

Cordts,  R.E.,  Merritt,  J.H.,  Erwin,  D.N.,  Hardy,  K.A.,  and  Yochmowitz,  M.G.,  1988, 

Behavioral  Response  of  Rats  Exposed  to  High-Power  Microwave  Radiation,  US  AF 
School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX,  USAF  SAM-TR-87-30 
pTIC  ADA192199). 

Creighton,  M.O.,  Larsen,  L.E.,  Stewart-DeHaan,  P.J.,  Jacobi,  J.H.,  Sanwal,  M.,  Baskerville, 
J.C.,  Bassen,  H.E.,  Brown,  D.O  ,  and  Trevithick,  J.R.,  1987,  In  vitro  studies  of 
microwave-induced  cataract,  Q.  comparison  of  damage  observed  for  continuous  wave 
and  pulsed  microwaves.  Exp.  Eye  Res.  45:  233-246. 

Czerska,  EM.,  Elson,  E.C.,  Davis,  C.C.,  Swicord,  M.L.,  and  Czerski,  P.,  1992,  Effects  of 
continuous  and  pulsed  2450-MHz  radiation  on  spontaneous  lymphoblastoid 
transformation  of  human  lymphocytes  in  vitro,  Bioelectromagnetics  13: 247-259. 

Czerski,  P.,  Paprocka-Stonka,  E.,  Siekierzynski,  M.,  and  Stolarska,  A.,  1974,  Influence 
of  microwave  radiation  on  the  hematopoietic  system.  In:  Biological  Effects  and 
Health  Hazards  of  Microwave  Radiation,  P.  Czerski,  Ch.  Silverman,  K.  Ostrowski, 
M.J.  Suess,  M.L.  Shore,  and  B.  Waldeskog,  eds.,  Polish  Medical  Publishers,  Warsaw, 
Poland,  pp  67-74. 

Dalziel,  C.F.,  and  Mansfield,  T.H.,  1950,  Effects  of  frequency  on  perception  currents,  AIEE 
Trans.  69: 1162-1168. 

Davis,  M.,  1980,  Neurochemical  modulation  of  sensory-motor  reactivity:  acoustic  and  tactil 
startle  reflexes,  Neurosci.  Beh.  Rev.  4:  241-263. 

D' Andrea,  J.A.,  Knepton,  J.,  Cobb,  B.L.,  Klauenberg,  B.,  and  Merritt,  J.H.,  1989,  High 

Peak  PowerMicrowave  Pulses  at  2.37  GH:  no  effects  on  vigilance  performance  in 
monkeys,  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research  Laboratoiy,  Pensacola,  EL,  and  USAF 
School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  Brooks  AFB,  TX,  NAMRL-1348,  and  USAFSAM 
TR-89-2I  (DTIC  ADA219570). 

D'Andrea,  J.A.,  Cobb,  Bl.,  Knepton,  J.,  Shull,  R.N.,  and  Klauenberg,  B.J.,  1990,  No 
Effects  of  High-Peak-Power  Microwave  Pulses  at  2.36  GHz  on  Behavioral 
Performance  in  Monkeys,  Naval  Aerospce  Medical  Research  Laboratoiy,  Pensacola, 
FL,  and  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicne,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  NMRL-1358  and 
USAF  SAM  TR-90-14  pTIC  ADA283667). 

D'Andrea,  J.A.,  Cobb,  B.L.,  Knepton,  J.,  and  Bates,  F.,  1993,  Behavioral  Performance  in 
Monkeys  Exposed  to  TEMPO  Htgh-Pedk-Power  Microwave  Pulses  at  3  GHz,  Naval 
Medical  Research  Laboratory,  Pensacola,  FL,  NAMRL-1389,  pTIC  ADA280551). 

D'Andrea,  J.A.,  Thomas,  A.,  and  Hatcher,  D.J.,  1994,  Rhesus  monkey  behavior  during 

exposure  to  high-peak-power  5.62-GHz  microwave  pulses,  Bioelectromagnetics  15: 
163-176. 

deLorge,  J.O.,  1984,  Operant  behavior  and  colonic  temperature  of  Macaca  mulatta  exposed 
to  radiofrequency  fields  at  and  above  resonant  frequency,  Bioelectromagnetics  5:  233- 
246. 


254 


Eijkman,  E.,  and  Vendrik,  A.J.H.,  1961,  Dynamic  behavior  of  the  warm  sense  organ,  J. 

Exp.  Psychol.  62:  403-408. 

Ellis,  V.J.,  1991,  The  effects  of  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  on  cardiac  pacemakers, 

U.S.  Army  Laboratory  Command,  Harry  Diamond  Laboratories,  Adelphi,  MD,  Report 
HDL-TR-2197  (DTIC  ADA242990). 

Erwin,  D.N.,  and  Hurt,  W.,  Biological  effects  of  ultrawideband  emmissions,  In:  EMP 

Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel  Proceedings,  J.  de  Lorge  and  W.  Miclr, 
eds.,  U.S.  Navy  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program  and  Operational  Medicine  and  Fleet 
Support,  Washington,  D.C.,  pp  91-95. 

Ferrari,  AU.,  Daffonchio,  A.,  Albergati,  F.,  and  Mancia,  G.,  1987,  Inverse  relationship 

between  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  variability  in  rats,  Hypertension  10:  533-537. 

Fleshier,  M.,  1965,  Adequate  acoustic  stimulus  for  startle  reaction  in  the  rat,  J.  Com. 

Physiol.  Psychol.  60:  200-207. 

Foster,  K.R.,  and  Finch,  E.D.,  1974,  Microwave  hearing:  evidence  for  thermoacoustical 
auditory  stimulation  by  pulsed  microwave.  Science  185:  246-248. 

Foster,  P.R.,  1995,  Special  antenna  requirements  for  UWB  Radar  Systems,  Introduction,  In: 
Introduction  to  Ultra-Wideband  Radar  System,  J.D.  Taylor,  ed.,  CRC  Press,  Boca 
Raton,  FL,  pp  107-149. 

Frei,  M.R.,  and  Jauchem,  J.R.,  1989,  Effects  of  2.8-GHz  Microwaves  on  restrained  and 
ketamine-anesthetized  rats.  Radial.  Environ.  Biopliys.  23:  155-164. 

Frei,  M.,  Jauchem,  J.,  and  Heinmets,  F.,  1988,  Physiological  effects  of  2.8  GHz  radio¬ 
frequency  radiation:  a  comparison  of  pulsed  and  continuous-wave  radiation,  J. 
Microwave  Power  23:  85-93. 

Frei,  M.,  Jauchem,  J.,  and  Heinmets,  F.,  1989,  Thermoregulatory  responses  of  rats  exposed 
to  9.3-GHz  radiofrequency  radiation,  Radiat.  Environ.  Biophys.  28:  67-77. 

Frei,  M.R.,  Jauchem,  J.R.,  and  Padilla,  J.M.,  1989a,  Thermal  and  physiological  changes  in 
rats  exposed  to  CW  and  pulsed  2.8  GHz  radiofrequency  radiation  in  E  and  H 
orientation,  Int.  J.  Radiat.  Biol.  56:  1033-1044. 

Frey,  AH.,  1961,  Auditory  system  response  to  radio  frequency  energy,  Aerospace  Med.  32: 
1140-1142. 

Frey,  A.H.,  and  Feld,  S.R.,  1975,  Avoidance  by  rats  of  illumination  with  low  power 
nonionizing  electromagnetic  energy,  J.  Comp.  Physiol.  Psychol.  89:  183-188. 

Frey,  AH.,  Feld,  S.R.,  and  Frey,  B.,  1975,  Neural  function  and  behavior:  defining  the 
relationship.  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  247: 433-439. 

Frey  AH.,  and  Seifert,  E.,  1968,  Pulse  modulated  XJHF  energy  illumination  of  the  heart 
associated  with  change  in  heart  rate.  Life  Sci.  7:  505-5 12. 

Fuerer,  D.,  1991,  Electronic  countermeasures  in  wideband  spectrum  systems,  In: 

Propagation  Limitations  for  Systems  Using  Band  Spreading ,  Advisory  Group  for 
Aerospace  Research  and  Development,  AGARD-LS-172,  pp  1-1 1. 

Gailey,  P.C.,  and  Easterly,  C.E.,  1993,  Cell  membrane  potentials  induced  during  exposure 

to  EMP  fields,  In:  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel  Proceedings,  J. 
de  Lorge  and  W.  Mick,  eds.,  U.S.  Navy  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program  and 
Operational  Medicine  and  Fleet  Support,  Washington,  D.C.,  pp  133-139. 

Gao,  B.-Q.,  Gandhi,  O.P.,  Mathur,  S.,  Bates,  F.,  and  Bassen,  H.,  1992,  Currents  induced  in 
a  model  of  a  rat  exposed  to  F.MP  in  a  parallel-plate  line:  calculations  and  experimental 
results,  Bioelectromagnetics  13:  439-443. 


255 


Geddes,  L.A.,  and  Baker,  L.E.,  1 989,  Principles  of Applied  Biomedical  Instrumentation, , 

3rd  edition,  John  Wiley,  New  York,  NY,  p.  961. 

Ginsburg,  K.S.,  Lin,  J.C.,  and  O'  Neill,  W.D.,  1992,  Microwave  effects  on  input  resistance 
and  action  potential  firing  of  snail  neuron,  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  39:  1011-1021. 

Goldman,  H.,  Lin,  J.C.,  Murphy,  S.,  and  Lin,  M.F.,  1984,  Cerebrovascular  permeability  to 
**Rb  in  the  rat  after  exposure  to  pulsed  microwaves,  Bioelectromagnetics  5:  323-330. 

Gruenau,  S.P.,  Oscar,  K  J.,  Folker,  M.T.,  and  Rapoport,  S.I.,  1982,  Absence  of  microwave 
effect  on  blood-brain  barrier  permeability  to  14C-sucrose  in  the  conscious  rat,  Exp. 
Neurobiol.  75: 299-307. 

Guy,  A.W.,  1989,  Analysis  of  EMP  induced  currents  in  human  body  by  NEC  method  of 
moments,  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEBEEMBS  11: 1132-1133. 

Guy,  A.W.,  1990,  Maximum  induced  currents,  SAR  and  absorbed  energy  density  in  human 
and  non-human  primates  exposed  to  EMP,  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  12: 
1547-1548. 

Guy,  A.W.,  and  Chou,  C.-K.,  1982,  Effects  of  high-intensity  microwave  pulse  exposure  of 
rat  brain.  Radio  Sci.  17/5  Supplement:  169-178. 

Guy,  W.,  Chou,  C.K.,  Lin,  J.C.,  and  Christense,  D.,  1975,  Microwave-induced  acoustic 

effects  in  mammalian  auditory  systems  and  physical  materials,  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  247: 
194-218. 

Hagmann,  M.J.,  1993,  Human  dosimetry  in  EMP  exposures  with  minimally-perturbing 

current  probes,  In:  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel  Proceedings,  J. 
de  Lorge  and  W.  Mick,  ed$„  U.S.  Navy  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program  and 
Operational  Medicine  and  Fleet  Support,  Washington,  D.C.,  pp  59-78. 

Hamrick,  P.,  and  McRee,  D.I.,  1980,  The  effect  of 2450  MHz  microwave  irradiaiton  on  the 
heart  rate  of  embryonic  quail.  Health  Phys.  38:  261-268. 

Hanson-Mild,  K.,  Lovdahl,  L„  Lovstrand,  K.-G.,  and  Lovtrup,  S.,  1982,  Effect  of  high- 
voltage  pulses  on  the  viability  of  human  leukocytes  in  vitro.  Bioelectromagnetics  3: 
213-218. 

Hendler,  E.,  1968,  Cutaneous  receptor  response  to  microwave  irradiation.  In:  Thermal 

Problems  in  Aerospace  Medicine,  J.D.  Ilardy,  cd.,  Unwin  Ltd.,  Suny,  pp  149-161. 

Hendler,  E.,  Hardy,  J.D.,  and  Murgatroyd,  D.,  1963,  Skin  heating  and  temperature 

sensation  produced  by  microwave  irradiaiton.  In:  Temperature:  Its  Measurement  and 
Control  in  Science  and  Industry,  C.M.  Herzfeld,  ed.,  Reinhold,  New  York,  NY,  pp 
211-230. 

IErsh,  F.G.,  McGiboncy,  D.R.,  and  Hamish,  T.D.,  1968,  The  psychologic  consequences  of 
exposure  to  high  density  pulsed  electromagnetic  energy,  Int.  J.  Biometeror.  12:  263- 
270. 

Hjeresen,  D.L.,  Doctor,  S.R.,  and  Sheldon,  R.L.,  1978,  Shuttle  side  preference  as  mediated 
by  pulsed  microwave  and  conventional  auditory  cues,  In:  Electromagnetic  Fields  in 
Biological  Systems,  S.S.  Stuchly,  ed.,  IMPI,  Edmonton,  Canada,  pp  194-214. 

Houdi,  A.  A.,  Dowell,  R.T.,  and  Diana,  J.N.,  1995,  Cardiovascular  responses  to  cigarette 
smoke  exposure  in  restrained  conscious  rats,  J.  Pharmacol.  Exp.  Therap.  275: 646- 
653. 

Hurt,  W.D.,  1999,  Dosimetry  in  animals  exposed  to  ultra-wide-band  pulses  produced  by 
various  Air  Force  devices,  personal  communication. 


256 


ICNIRP  1998,  Guidelines  for  limiting  exposure  to  time-varying  electric,  magnetic,  and 
electromagnetic  fields  (up  to  300  GHz),  Health  Pliys.  74:  494-522. 

IEEE,  1 999,  IEEE  Standard  for  Safety  Levels  with  Respect  to  Human  Exposure  to  Radio 
Frequency  Electromagnetic  Fields,  3  kHz  to  300  GHz,  Institute  of  Electrical  and 
Electronics  Engineers,  New  York,  NY. 

Jauchem,  J.R.,  Seaman,  R.L.,  Lehnert,  H.M.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Ryan,  K.L.,  Frei,  M.R.,  and 

Hurt,  W.D.,  1998,  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses:  lack  of  effects  on  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressure  during  two-minute  exposures  of  rats,  Bioelectromagnetics  19: 330- 
333. 

Jauchem,  J.R.,  Frei,  M.R.,  Ryan,  K.L.,  Merritt,  J.H.,  and  Murphy,  M.R.,  1999,  Lack  of 

effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  ketamine-anesthetized  rats  briefly  exposed 
to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses,  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  46: 1 17-120. 

Johnson,  R.B.,  Meyers,  D.E.,  Guy,  AW.,  Lovely,  R.H.,  and  Galambos,  R.,  1976, 

Discrimininative  control  of  appetitive  behavior  by  pulsed  microwave  radiation  in  rats. 
In:  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Waves,  C.C.  Johnson,  and  M.L.  Shore,  eds., 
FDA,  Rockville,  MD,  HEW  Publication  (FDA)  77-8010,  pp  238-247. 

Jokela,  K.,  1997,  ElectropHysioiogical  considerations  relevant  to  the  limiting  of  pulsed 
electric  and  magnetic  fields.  Health  Phys.  72:  408-417. 

Justesen  D.R.,  Adair,  E.R.,  Stevens,  J.C.,  Bruce-Wolfe,  V.,  1982,  A  comparative  study  of 
human  sensory  thresholds:  2450-MHz  microwaves  vs  far-infrared  radiation. 
Bioelectromagnetics  3:  117-125. 

Kanter,  G.S.,  1960,  Glomerular  filtration  and  renal  plasma  flow  during  hyperthermia.  Am.  J. 
Physiol.  198:  1044-1048. 

Klauenberg,  B.J.,  Merritt,  J.H.,  and  Erwin,  D.N.,  1988,  Behavioral  Effects  of  Exposure  to 
the  TEMPO  High-Power  Microwave  System,  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX,  USAFSAM-TR-87-35  (D1TC  ADA193305). 

Kues,  H.A..  Hirst,  L.W.,  Lutty,  G.A.,  D’Anna,  S.A.,  and  Dunkelberger,  G.R.,  1985,  Effects 

of  2.45  GHz  microwaves  on  primate  corneal  endothelium.  Bioelectromagnetics  6:  177- 
188. 

Lacourse,  J.R.,  Vogt,  M.C.,  Miller,  M.T.,  and  Selikowitz,  S.M.,  1985,  Effect  of  high- 

frequency  current  on  nerve  and  muscle  tissue,  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  32:  82-86. 

Lai,  H.,  1994,  Neurological  effects  of  radiofrequency  electromagnetic  radiation.  In: 

Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  J.C.  Lin  ed..  Plenum  Press, 
New  York,  NY,  pp.  27-80. 

Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  Chou,  C.K.,  and  Guy,  A.W.,  1987,  Low-level  microwave  irradiaiton 
affects  central  cholinergic  activity  in  the  rat,  J.  Biochem.  48: 40-45. 

Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  and  Guy,  A.W.,  1988,  Acute  low-level  microwave  exposure  and  central 
cholinergic  activity:  studies  on  irradiation  parameters,  Bioelectromagnetics  9: 355-362. 

Lai,  H,,  Horita,  A,  and  Guy,  A.W.,  1994,  Microwave  irradiation  affects  radial-arm  maze 
performance  in  the  rat,  Bioelectromagnetics  15:  95-104. 

Lebovitz,  R.M.,  1983,  Pulse  modulated  and  continuous  wave  microwave  radiation  yield 
equivalent  changes  in  operant  behavior  of  rodents.  Physiol.  Beh.  30:  891-898. 

Lebovitz,  R.M.,  and  Seaman,  R.L.,  1977,  Microwave  hearing:  the  response  of  single 

auditory  neurons  in  cat  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation.  Radio  Sci.  12/6  Supplement: 
229-236. 


257 


Lee,  R.C.,  Gaylor,  D.C.,  Bhatt,  D.,  Israel,  D.A.,  1988,  Role  of  cell  membrane  rupture  in  the 
pathogenesis  of  electrical  trauma,  J.  Surg.  Res.  44:  709-719. 

Lenox,  R.H.,  Meyerhoff,  J.L.,  Gandhi,  O.P.,  and  Wray,  H.L.,  1977,  Regional  levels  of 

cyclic  AMP  in  rat  brain;  pitfalls  of  microwave  interaction.  J.  Clyclic  Nucleotide  Res. 

3:  367-379. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1975,  Interaction  of  electromagnetic  transient  radiation  with  biological  materials, 
IEEE  Trans.  Electromagnetic  Compatibility  17:  93-97. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1976,  Electromagnetic  pulse  interaction  with  mammalian  cranial  structures,  IEEE 
Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  23: 61-65. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1976a,  Microwave  auditory  effect  -  a  comparison  of  some  possible  transduction 
mechanisms,  J.  Microwave  Power  1 1 :  77-81. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1976b,  Microwave  induced  hearing  sensation:  some  preliminary  theoretical 
observations,  J.  Microwave  Power  11:  295-298. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1976c,  Theoretical  analysis  of  microwave-generated  auditory  effects  in  animals 
and  man.  In:  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Waves ,  C.C.  Johnson  and  M.L. 
Shore,  eds.,  FDA/BRH,  Rockville,  MD,  HEW  Publication  (FDA)  77-8010,  pp  36-48. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1977,  On  microwave-induced  hearing  sensation,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory 
Tech,,  25:  605-613. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1 978,  Microwave  Auditory  Effects  and  Applications,  Charles  C.  Thomas, 
Springfield,  IL. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1980,  Microwave  auditory  phenomenon,  Proc.  IEEE  68:  67-73. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1989,  Pulsed  radiofrequency  field  effects  in  biological  systems,  In: 

Electromagnetic  Interaction  with  Biological  Systems,”  J.C.  Lin  ed..  Plenum  Press, 
New  York,  NY,  pp  165-177. 

Lin,  J.C.,  1990,  Auditory  perception  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation.  In:  Biological  Effects 

and  Medical  Applications  of  Electromagnetic  Energy,  O.P.  Gandhi,  ed.,  Prentice  Hall, 
Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ,  pp  277-318. 

Lin,  J.C.,  and  Lam,  C.K.,  1976,  Coupling  of  Gaussian  electromagnetic  pulse  into  a  muscle- 
bone  model  of  biological  structure,  J.  Microwave  Power  1 1:  67-75. 

Lin,  J.C.,  and  T  .in,  M.F.,  1 980,  Studies  on  microwave  and  blood-brain  barrier  interaction. 
Bioelectromagnetics  1:  313-323. 

Lin,  J.C.,  and  Lin,  M.F.,  1982,  Microwave  hyperthermia-induced  blood-brain  barrier 
alteration.  Radial  Res.  89:  77-87 

Lin,  J.C.,  Meltzer,  R.J.,  and  Redding,  F.K.,  1979,  Microwave-evoked  brainstem  potentials 
in  cats,  J.  Microwave  Power  14:  291-296. 

Lin,  J.C.,  Meltzer,  R.J.,  and  Redding  F.K.,  1982,  Microwave-evoked  brainstem  auditory 
responses,  Proc.  San  Diego  Biomed.  Symp.  17:  461-465. 

Lin,  J.C.,  Su,  J.-L.,  and  Wang,  Y.,  1988,  Microwave-induced  thermoelastic  pressure 
propagation  in  the  cat  brain.  Bioelectromagnetics  9: 141-147. 

Lin,  J.C.,  Wu,  C.-L.,  and  Lam,  C.K.,  1975,  Transmission  of  electromagnetic  pulse  into  the 
head,  Proc.  IEEE  63:  1726-1727. 

Lippmann,  M.,  Appel,  P.L.,  Mok,  M.S.,  and  Shoemaker,  W.C.,  1983,  Sequential 

cardiorespiratory  patterns  of  anesthetic  induction  with  ketamine  in  critically  ill  patients, 
Critical  Care  Med.  11 : 730-733. 

Liu,  L.M.,  Rosenbaum,  F.J.,  and  Pickard,  W.F.,  1976,  The  insensitivity  of  frog  heart  rate  to 
pulse  modulated  microwave  energy,  J.  Microwave  Power  11:  225-232. 


258 


Lu,  S.-T.,  Brown,  D.O.,  Johnson,  C.E.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  and  Elson,  E.C.,  1992,  Abnormal 

cardiovascular  responses  induced  by  localized  high  power  microwave  exposure,  IEEE 
Trans.  Biom.  Eng.  39:  484-492. 

Lu,  S.-T.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Lee,  J.,  1999,  Ultrawide-band  electromagnetic 
pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats,  Physiol.  Beh.  65:  753-761. 

Lu,  S.-T.,  Roberts,  N.J.,  Jr.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1983,  A  dual  vial  waveguide  exposure 
facility  for  examining  microwave  effect  in  vitro,  J.  Microwave  Power  18:  121-131. 

Mathur,  S.,  Bates,  F.,  and  Bassen,  H.,  1990,  Exposure  of  rodents  in  a  parallel  plate  EMP 
simulator,  Part  I:  Engineering  and  dosimetry,  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  12: 
1549-1550. 

Mattsson,  J.L.,  and  Oliva,  S.A.,  1976,  Effect  of  electromagnetic  pulse  on  avoidance 

behavior  and  electroencephalogram  of  a  rhesus  monkey,  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med. 
47:  644-648. 

McRee,  D.I.,  and  Wachtel,  H.,  1980,  The  effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  the  vitality  of 
isolated  frog  sciatic  nerves,  Radiat.  Res.  82: 536-546. 

McRee,  D.I.,  and  Wachtel,  H.,  1982,  Pulse  microwave  effects  on  nerve  vitality,  Radiat.  Res. 
91:212-218. 

McLees,  B.D.,  Finch,  E.D.,  and  Albright,  M.L.,  1972,  An  examination  of  regenerating 

hepatic  tissue  subjected  to  radio-frequency  irradiation,  J.  Appl.  Physiol.  32: 78-85. 

Merritt,  J.H.,  Chamness,  A.F.,  and  Allen,  S.J.,  1978,  Studies  on  blood-brain  barrier 

permeability  after  microwave-radiation,  Radiat.  Environ.  Biophy.  15: 367-377. 

Merritt,  J.H.,  Kiel,  J.L.,  and  Hurt,  W.D.,  1995,  Considerations  for  human  exposure 

standards  for  fast-rise-time  high-peak-power  electromagnetic  pulses,  Aviat.  Space 
Environ.  Med.  66:  586-589. 

Michaelson,  S.M.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1987,  Personnel  protection,  protection  guides,  and 
standards.  In:  Biological  Effects  and  Health  Implications  of  Radiofrequency 
Radiation,  ch.  20,  Plenum  Press,  New  York,  NY,  pp  637-658. 

Michaelson,  S.M.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1987a,  The  common  integument  (skin).  In:  Biological 

Effects  and  Health  Implications  of  Radiofrequency  Radiation,  ch.  17,  Plenum  Press, 
New  York,  NY,  pp  S39-S58. 

Miller,  S.  A.,  Bronson,  M.E.,  and  Murphy,  M.R.,  1999,  Ultrawideband  radiation  and 

pentylenetetrazol-induced  convulsions  in  rats.  Bioelectromagnetics  20:  327-329. 

Modak,  A.T.,  Stavinoha,  W.B.,  and  Deam,  A.P.,  1981,  Effect  of  short  electromagnetic 
pulses  on  brain  acetylcholine  content  and  spontaneous  motor  activity  of  mice. 
Bioelectromagnetics  2:  89-92. 

Moore,  F.R.,  and  Simons,  T.,  1993,  Orientation  behavior  of  migratory  birds  in  response  to 
EMPRESS  II-simulated  EMP,  In:  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel 
Proceedings,  J.  de  Lorge  and  W.  Mick,  eds.,  U.S.  Navy  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare 
Program  and  Operational  Medicine  and  Fleet  Support,  Washington,  D.C.,  pp  97 -1 12. 

Mouneimne.  Y.,  Tosi.  P.-F.,  and  Nicolau,  C„  1993,  Electroinsertion  of  proteins  into 

membranes:  a  novel  approach  to  the  study  of  membrane  receptors.  In:  Electricity  and 
Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  M.  Blank,  ed.,  San  Francisco  Press,  San 
Francisco,  CA,  pp  112-114. 

Muhm,  J.M.,  1992,  Mortality  investigation  of  workers  in  an  electromagnetic  pulse  test 
program,  J.  Occup.  Med.  34:  287-292. 


259 


Neilly,  J.P.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1986,  Interaction  of  ethanol  and  microwaves  on  the  blood-brain 
barrier  of  rat3.  Bioclcctromagnctics  7:  405-414. 

Neshev,  N.N.,  and  Kirilova,  E.I.,  1996,  Environmental-health  aspects  of  pulse-modulated 
microwaves.  Rev.  Environ.  Health  11:  85-88. 

Neumann,  E.,  Werner,  E.,  Sprafke,  A.,  and  Kruger,  K.,  1993,  Membrane  electroporation: 
two  are  a  molecular  mechanism,  In:  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and 
Medicine,  M.  Blank,  ed.,  San  Francisco  Press,  San  Francisco,  CA,  pp  109-1 1 1. 

Newman,  E.,  and  Katchalsky,  A.,  1972,  Long-lived  conformation  changes  induced  by 
electric  impulses  in  biopolymers,  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  69:  993-997. 

NCRP  Report  86, 1986,  Perception  of  PFEM  fields,  In:  Biological  Effects  and  Exposure 
Criteria  for  Radiofrequency  Fields,  National  Research  Council  on  Radiation 
Protection  and  Measurements,  Rethesda,  MD,  pp  175-180. 

Oldendorf  W.H.,  1970,  Measurement  of  brain  uptake  of  radiolabeled  substances  using 
tritiated  water  internal  standard,  Brain  Res.  24:  372-376. 

Olsen,  K.G.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1981,  Microwave  pulse-induced  acoustic  resonances  in  spherical 
head  models,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  29: 1 1 14-1 1 17. 

Olsen,  R.G.,  and  Lin,  J.C.,  1983,  Microwave-induced  pressure  waves  in  mammalian  brains, 
IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  30:  289-294. 

Oscar,  K.J.,  Gruenau,  S.P.,  Folker,  M.T.,  and  Rapoport,  S.I.,  1981,  Local  cerebral  blood 
flow  after  microwave  exposure.  Brain  Res.  204;  220-225. 

Oscar,  K.J.,  and  Hawkins,  T.D.,  1977,  Microwave  alteration  of  the  blood-brain  barrier 
system  of  rats,  Brain  Res.  126:  281-293. 

Paile,  W.,  Jokela,  K.,  Koivistoinen,  S.,  and  Salomaa,  S.,  1995,  Effect  of  50  Hz  magnetic 

fields  and  spark  discharges  on  human  lymphocytes  in  vitro,  Bioelectrochem.  Bioenergy 
36:  15-22. 

Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Dubovick,  B.V.,  Degtyariov,  I.G.,  and  Pronkevick,  A.N.,  1995, 

Microwave  influence  on  the  isolated  heart  function:  I.  effect  of  modulation. 
Bioelectromagnetics  16:  241-249. 

Pakhomova,  O.N.,  Belt,  M.L.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Lee,  J.C.,  and  Akyel,  Y,  1997,  Lack  of  genetic 
effects  of  ultrawide-band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  yeast,  Electro-Magnetobiol.  16: 
195-201. 

Pakhomova,  O.N.,  Belt,  M.L.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Lee,  J.C.,  and  Akyel,  Y,  1998,  Ultra-wide 
band  electromagnetic  radiation  does  not  affect  UV-induced  recombination  and 
mutagenesis  in  yeast,  Bioelectromagnetics  19: 128-130. 

Patrick,  EX.,  [1993],  Human  health  issues  of  woodbridge  research  facility's  electromagnetic 
pulse  simulators.  In:  EMP  Human  Health  Effects  Science  Review  Panel  Proceedings, 
J.  de  Lorge  and  W.  Mick,  eds.,  U.S.  Navy  Theater  Nuclear  Warfare  Program  and 
Operational  Medicine  and  Fleet  Support,  Washington,  D.C.,  pp  23-37. 

Porsolt,  R.D.,  Anton,  G.,  Blavet,  N.,  and  Jalfre,  M.,  1978,  Behavioral  despair  in  rats:  a  new 
model  sensitive  to  antidepressant  treatments,  Eur.  J.  Pharmacol.  47: 379-391. 

Postow,  E.,  and  Swicord,  M.L.,  1996,  Modulated  fields  and  “window”  effects.  In:  CRC 
Handbook  of  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields ,  C.  Polk  and  E.  Postow, 
eds,,  CRC  Press,  Boca  Raton,  FL,  pp  535-580. 

Presraan,  A.S.,  and  Levitina,  N.  A.,  1963,  Nonthermal  action  of  microwaves  on  the  rhythm 
of  cardiac  contractions  in  animals,  Bull.  Exp.  BioL  Med.  53: 154-157. 


260 


Preston,  E.,  Vavasour,  E.J.,  and  Assenheim,  H.M.,  1979,  Permeability  of  the  blood-brain 

barrier  to  mannitol  in  the  rat  following  2450  MHz  microwave  irradiation.  Brain  Res. 
174:  109-117. 

Rafferty,  C.N.,  and  Knutson,  J.R.,  1987,  Effects  of  pulsed  microwave  fields  on  soluble 
proteins  and  liposomes,  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  9: 701-702. 

Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Bates,  F.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  andElson,  E.C.,  1993a,  The  Behavioral 
Toxicology  of  High-Peak,  Low  Average  Power,  Pulsed  Microwave  Irradiation, 
USAMRDC,  Washington,  D.C.  (DTIC  ADA268392). 

Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Bates,  F.,  Belt,  M.,  and  Lu,  S.-T.,  1993b,  Temporal  bisection  in 
rats:  The  effects  of  high-peak-power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation. 
Bioelectromagnetics  14: 459-478. 

Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  Swearengen,  J.R.,  Varle,  D.,  DeAngelis,  M.L.,  and 
Seaman,  R.L.,  1992,  CW  microwave  fields  evoke  body  movements  in  bilaterally 
cochleotomized  rats,  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  14: 295-296. 

Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Serafini,  R.,  Bates,  F.,  and  Belt,  M.,  1991a,  Memory  consolidation 
in  the  rat  following  high-peak  power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation.  Proc.  Ann.  Int, 
Conf  TREE  EMBS  13:  958-959. 

Raslear,  T.G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Serafini,  R.,  Bates,  F.,  and  Belt,  M,,  1991b,  Food  demand  and 

circadian  rhythmicity  following  high-peak  power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation.  Proc. 
Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  13:  962-963. 

Reilly,  J.P.,  1991,  Magnetic  field  exdtaton  of  peripheral  nerves  and  the  heart:  a  comparison 
of  thresholds,  Med.  Biol.  Eng.  Comput.  29:  571-579. 

Reilly,  J.P.,  1998,  Maximum  pulsed  electromagnetic  field  limits  based  on  peripheral  nerve 
stimulation:  Application  to  IEEE/ANSI  C95.1  electromagnitic  field  standards,  IEEE 
Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  45:  137-141. 

Riu,  P.J.,  Foster,  K.R.,  Blick,  D.W.,  and  Adair,  E.R.,1997,  A  thermal  model  for  human 

threshold  of  microwave-evoked  warmth  sensations.  Bioelectromagnetics  18:  578-583. 

Roberti,  B.,  Heebels,  G.H.,  Hendricx,  J.C.M.,  de  Greef,  A.H.A.M.,  and  Wolthuis,  O.L., 

1975,  Preliminary  investigations  of  the  effects  of  low-level  microwave  radiation  on 
spontaneous  motor  activity  in  rats.  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sd.,  247: 416-424. 

Roberts,  N.J.,  Jr.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1983,  Human  leukocyte  functions  and 
the  U.S.  Safety  standard  for  exposure  to  radio-frequency  radiation.  Science  220: 318- 
320. 

Roberts,  N.J.,  Jr.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1985,  Hyperthermia  and  human 

leukocyte  functions:  DMA  RNA,  and  total  protein  synthesis  after  exposure  to  <41  °  or 
>42. 5°  hyperthermia,  Cancer  Res.  45: 307 6-3082. 

Roberts,  N.J.,  Jr.,  Michaelson,  S.M.,  and  Lu,  S.-T.,  1984,  Exposure  of  human  mononuclear 
leukocytes  to  microwave  energy  pulse  modulated  at  16  and  60  Hz,  IEEE  Trans. 
Microwave  Theory  Tech.  32:  803-807. 

Roberts,  N.  J.,  Jr.,  Michaelson,  S.M.,  and  Lu,  S.-T.,  1987,  Mitogen  responsiveness  after 

exposure  of  influenza  virus-infected  human  mononuclear  leukocytes  to  continuous  or 
pulse-modulated  radiofrequency  radiation,  Radiat.  Res.  110: 353-361. 

Sanders,  AP.,  Joines,  W.T.,  and  Allis,  J.W.,  1985,  Effects  of  continuous-wave,  pulsed,  and 
sinusoidal-amplitude-modulated  microwaves  on  brain  energy  metabolism, 
Bioelectromagnetics  6:  89-97. 


261 


Sandler,  S.S.,  Smith,  G.S.,  and  Albert,  E.N.,  1975,  Electromagnetic  field  effects  in  nerve 
tissue,  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  46:  1414-1417. 

Schwartz,  D.C.,  and  Koval,  M.,  1989,  Conformational  dynamics  of  individual  DNA 
molecules  during  gel  electrophoresis ,  Nature  338:  520-522. 

Schneider,  D.R.,  Fell,  B.T.,  and  Goldman,  H.,  1982,  On  the  use  of  microwave  radiation 
energy  for  brain  tissue  fixation,  J.  Neurochem.  38: 749-752. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  1993,  Modification  of  acoustic  startle  amplitude  by  microwave  pulses,  In: 
Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  andMedicine,  M.  Blank,  ed.,  San  Francisco 
Press,  San  Francisco,  CA,  pp  662-664. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  and  Beblo,  D.A.,  1992,  Modification  of  acoustic  startle  by  microwave  pulses 
in  the  rat:  a  preliminary  report,  Bioelectromagnetics  13: 323-328. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  Beblo,  D.  A,  and  Raslear,  T.G.,  1994,  Modification  of  acoustic  and  tactile 
startle  by  single  microwave  pulses,  Physiol.  Behav.  55: 587-595. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  and  DeHaan,  R.L.,  1993,  Inter-beat  intervals  of  cardiac-cell  aggregates 

during  exposure  to  2.45  GHz  CW,  pulsed,  and  square-wave-modulated  microwaves, 
Bioelectromagnetics  14:  41-55. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  and  Wachtel.  H.,  1978,  Slow  and  rapid  responses  to  CW  and  pulsed 

microwave  radiation  by  individual  Aplysia  pacemakers,  J.  Microwave  Power  13:  77- 
86. 

Seaman  R.L.,  Belt,  M.L.,  Doyle,  J.M.,  and  Mathur,  S.P.,  1998,  Ultra-wideband 

Electromagnetic  pulses  and  morphine-induced  changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in 
mice.  Physiol.  Beh.  65:  263-270. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  Kiel,  R.L.,  Parker,  J.E.,  Grubbs,  T.R.,  and  Prol,  H.K.,  1996,  Effects  of  ultra- 
wide-band  pulses  on  nitric  oxide  production  in  murine  macrophages.  In:  Abstracts  of 
the  Bioclectromagnctics  Society  18th  Annual  Meeting,  Bioclcctromagnetics  Society, 
Frederick,  MD,  p  213. 

Seaman,  R.L.,  Belt,  M.L.,  Doyle,  J.M.,  and  Mathur,  S.P.,  Hyperactivity  caused  by  a  nitric 
oxide  synthase  inhibitor  is  countered  by  ultra-wideband  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics 
20:  431-439. 

Sherry,  C.  J.,  Blick,  D.W.,  Walters,  T.J.,  Brown,  G.C.,  and  Murphy,  M.R.,  1995,  Lack  of 
behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after  exposure  to  ultrawideband 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave  frequency  range,  Radiat.  Res.  143: 93-97. 

Skidmore,  W.D.,  and  Baum,  S.J.,  1974,  Biological  effects  in  rodents  exposed  to  10*  pulses 
of  electromagnetic  radiation.  Health  Phys.  26;  391-398. 

Sparrow,  M.G.,  Roggendorf,  H.,  and  Vogel,  WJH.,  1987,  Effect  of  ethanol  on  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressure  in  nonstressed  and  stressed  rats,  Life  Sci.  40:  2551-2559. 

Stevens,  J.C.,  1983,  Thermal  sensation:  infrared  and  microwaves,  In:  Microwaves  and 

Thermoregulation,  E.R.  Adair,  ed.,  Academic  Press,  New  York,  NY,  pp  191-201. 

Stewart-DeHaan,  P.J.,  Creighton,  M.O.,  Jacobi,  J.H.,  Ross,  W.M.,  SanwalM.,  Guo,  T.C., 
Guo,  W.W.,  and  Trevithick,  J.R.,  1983,  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced 
cataract:  separation  of  field  and  heating  effects,  Exp.  Eye  Res.  36:  75-90. 

Stewart-DeHaan,  P.J.,  Creighton,  M.O.,  Larsen,  L.E.,  Jacobi,  J.H.,  Sanwal,  M.,  Baskerville, 
J.C.,  and  Trevithick,  J.R.,  1985,  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract: 
reciprocity  between  exposure  duration  and  dose  rate  for  pulsed  microwaves,  Exp.  Eye 
Res.  40: 1-13. 


262 


Stodolnik-Baranska,  W.,  1974,  The  effect  of  microwaves  on  human  lymphocyte  cultures, 

In:  Biological  Effects  and  Health  Hazards  of  Microwave  Radiation ,  P.  Czerski,  Ch. 
Silverman,  K.  Ostrowski,  M.J.  Suess,  M.L.  Shore,  and  B.  Waldeskog,  eds.,  Polish 
Medical  Publishers,  Warsaw,  Poland,  pp  189-195. 

Sutton,  C.H.,  and  Carroll,  F.B.,  Effects  of  microwave-induced  hyperthermia  on  the  blood- 
brain  barrier  of  the  rat,  Radio  ScL  14/6  Supplement:  329-334. 

Taylor,  E.M.,  and  Ashleman,  B.T.,  1974,  Analysis  of  central  nervous  system  involvement  in 
the  microwave  auditory  effect.  Brain  Res.  74:  201-208. 

Taylor,  J.D.,  1995,  Ultra-wideband  radar  overview,  In:  Introduction  to  Ultra-wideband 
Radar  System,  J.C.  Taylor,  ed.,  CRC  Press,  Boca  Raton,  FL,  pp  1-10. 

Thomas,  J.R.,  Finch,  E.D.,  Fulk,  D.W.,  and  Burch,  L.S.,  1975,  Effects  of  low-level 

microwave  radiation  on  behavioral  baselines,  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  247:  424-432. 

Thomas,  J.R.,  Schrot,  I,  and  Banvard,  R.A.,  1982,  Comparative  effects  of  pulsed  and 
continuous-wave  2.8-GHz  microwaves  on  temporally  defined  behavior. 
Bioelectromagnetics  3:  227-235. 

Tsong,  T.Y.,  1991,  Electroporation  of  cell  membranes,  Biophys.  J.  60:297-306. 

Trevithick,  J.R.,  Creighton,  M.O.,  Sanwal,  M.,  Brown,  D.O.,  and  Bassen,  H.I.,  1987, 

Histo-pathological  studies  of  rabbit  cornea  exposed  to  millimeter  waves,  Proc.  Ann. 
Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  9:  695-697. 

Wachtel,  H.,  Beblo,  D.,  Vargas,  C.,  Bassen,  H.,  and  Brown,  D.,  1988,  Single  microwave 
pulses  can  suppress  startle  reflexes  in  mice,  Proc.  Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  10; 
911-912. 

Wachtel,  H.,  Beblo,  D.,  Vargas,  C.,  Bassen,  H.,  and  Brown,  D.,  1989,  Comparison  of  the 
efficiency  of  pulsed  versus  CW  microwave  fields  in  evoking  body  movements,  Proc. 
Ann.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  EMBS  11:  1136-1137. 

Wachtel,  H.,  Seaman,  R.,  and  Joines,  W.,  1975,  Effects  of  low-intensity  microwaves  on 
isolated  neurons,  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  245:  47-62. 

Walters,  T.J.,  Mason,  P.A.,  Sherry,  C.J.,  Steffen,  C.,  and  Merritt,  J.H.,  1995,  No  detectable 
bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high  peak  power  uhra-wide  band 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats,  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:  562-567. 

Wangemann,  R.T.,  and  Cleary,  S.F.,  1976,  The  in  vivo  effects  of  2.45  GHz  Microwave 

radiation  on  rabbit  serum  components  and  steeping  times,  Rad.  Environ.  Biophys.  13: 
89-103. 

Williams,  W.M.,  Hoss,  W.,  Formaniak,  M.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1984a,  Effect  of 2450 

MHz  microwave  energy  on  the  blood-brain  barrier  to  hydrophilic  molecules.  A.  Effect 
on  the  permeability  to  sodium  fluorescein,  Brain  Res.  Rev.  7: 165-170. 

Williams,  W.M.,  del  Cerro,  M.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1984b,  Effect  of 2450  MHz 

microwave  energy  on  the  blood-brain  barrier  to  hydrophilic  molecules.  B.  Effect  on  the 
permeability  to  HRP,  Brain  Res.  Rev.  7: 171-1 81. 

Williams,  W.M ,  Platner,  J.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1984c,  Effect  of 2450  MHz  microwave 
energy  on  the  blood-brain  barrier  to  hydrophilic  molecules.  C.  Effect  on  the 
permeability  to  [14CJsucrose,  Brain  Res.  Rev.  7: 183-190. 

Williams,  W.M.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  del  Cerro,  M.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1984d,  Effect  of  2450 
MHz  energy  on  the  blood-brain  barrier  to  hydrophilic  molecules.  D.  Brain 
temperature  and  blood-brain  barrier  permeability  to  hydrophilic  tracers.  Brain  Res. 

Rev.  7:  191-212. 


263 


Williams,  W.M.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  del  Cerro,  M.,  Hoss,  W.,  and  Michaelson,  S.M.,  1984e,  Effects 
of  2450  MHz  microwave  energy  on  the  blood-brain  barrier:  an  overview  and  critique 
of  past  and  present  research,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  32:  808-818. 

Wolke,  S.,  Neibig,  U.,  Eisner,  R.,  Gollnick,  F.,  and  Meyer,  R.,  1996,  Calcium  homeostasis 
of  isolated  heart  muscle  cells  exposed  to  pulsed  high-frequency  electromagnetic  fields, 
Bioelectromagnetics  17:  144-153. 

Zimmermann,  U.t  1982,  Electric  field-mediated  fusion  and  related  electrical  phenomena, 
Biophys.  Acta  694: 227-277. 


264 


SEARCH  FOR  TI1E  EFFECT  OF  MILLIMETER  WAVES  ON 
SYNAPTIC  PROCESSES  IN  THE  CENTRAL  NERVOUS  SYSTEM 


Andrei  G.  Pakhomov1.  Kenneth  H.  Prol2,  Satnam  P.  Mathur2,  and  Yahya  Akycl2 

'US  Artny  Medical  Research  Detachment  and  “McKesson  BioServices 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  TX  78235-5324  USA 


INTRODUCTION 

A  number  of  studies  have  demonstrated  that  low-intensity  millimeter  waves  (MMW)  can  affect  the  function  of 
membranes  and  excitable  tissues.  A  short-term  MMW  exposure  activated  Ca++  pump  in  the  sarcoplasmic  reticulum  of 
skeletal  and  heart  muscles',  modified  the  activation  characteristics  of  Ca^-activatcd  K+  channels2,  suppressed  or 
facilitated  transmcmhranc  chloride  current1,  altered  action  potential  conduction  in  isolated  nerves47  and  cardiac 
pacemaker  activity*.  The  present  work  is  the  first  attempt  to  study  MMW  effect  on  key  processes  of  interneuronal 
interaction,  namely  on  mono-  and  polysynaptic  transmission  in  the  central  nervous  system. 

For  this,  we  employed  an  isolated  preparation  of  amphibian  spinal  cord.  This  preparation  offers  a  unique 
combination  of  features  which  are  essential  for  clcctrophysiological  studies  with  electromagnetic  fields.  It  is  particularly 
important  that  the  afferent  input  and  the  efferent  output  of  the  spinal  cord  are  anatomically  separated  (dorsal  and  ventral 
roots,  respectively).  For  analysis  of  synaptic  processes,  recording  and  stimulating  electrodes  can  be  attached  to  distal 
ends  of  the  roots,  at  a  distance  from  the  cord  Itself.  Hence,  when  the  cord  Is  exposed  to  MMW,  the  electrodes  can  be 
shielded  from  the  radiation,  thus  removing  questions  about  possible  artifacts  resulting  from  the  electrode  operation  in 
the  electromagnetic  field.  Most  morphological  and  biochemical  correlates  of  the  spinal  cord  electrical  activity  are  known 
in  great  detail8,  thus  providing  opportunities  for  understanding  physiological  mechanisms  of  MMW  effects,  if  any  arc 
observed. 

As  established  in  our  previous  studies  with  isolated  nerve  preparation7,  the  MMW  effect  depended  on  the 
frequency  ralher  than  on  the  intensity  of  the  radiation.  Within  studied  limits,  the  frequency  of  41.34  GHz  was  the  most 
effective.  A  100-MHz  deviation  from  this  frequency  (to  either  direction)  decreased  the  effect  twofold,  and  a  200-MHz 
deviation  eliminated  the  effect.  Therefore,  in  the  present  study  we  used  either  a  constant  frequency  of  41.34  GHz,  or 
different  frequencies  within  41.1-42.4  GHz  band. 


MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 

Spinal  Cord  Preparation  and  Data  Acquisition 

All  experiments  were  performed  on  isolated  and  hemisected  spinal  cord  of  the  bullfrog  {Rana  cateshiana).  Prior 
lu  expei  in  lent,  animal*  wcic  chilled  fui  15-20  min  uii  ice  and  tiiuiiubili&cd  by  mechanical  destruction  uf  the  biain.  The 
spinal  cord  was  approached  by  dorsal  laminectomy  and  transected  at  the  level  of  the  upper  thoracic  segments.  Dorsal 
and  ventral  roots  (DR  and  VR)  of  the  segments  IX  and/or  X  needed  for  electrophysiological  recording  were  transected 
as  far  from  the  cord  as  possible,  all  other  roots  were  cut  close  to  the  cord.  The  cord  was  gently  removed  from  the 
vertebral  column  and  placed  in  a  chilled  Ringer's  solution  (NaCl  114;  KCi  2.0;  NoHCOj  2.0;  CaClj  1.8;  glucose  5.5 
(mmol/L);  pH  7. 4-7. 6)  supplemented  with  hydrogen  peroxide  (0.004%)  to  improve  tissue  oxygenation  and  the 


Electricity  atul  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine 
F.dited  by  Bersani,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers.  1999 


971 


preparation  viability.  After  a  saggital  hcmiscction,  one  part  of  the  cord  was  transferred  into  (he  exposure  bath  and  laid 
lateral  side  downwards.  The  roots  were  extended  upward  along  the  walls  of  the  bath  and  put  in  contact  with  bipolar 
stimulating  and  recording  electrodes.  The  electrodes  were  made  of  thin  gold  wire  and  permanently  mounted  on  the 
walls.  In  some  experiments,  stimulation  was  applied  to  the  lateral  column  (LC),  a  descending  monosynaptic  pathway  to 
motoneurons  from  the  brain.  LC  was  stimulated  by  a  coaxial  electrode  at  the  level  of  cord  segments  111- VI. 

In  the  exposure  bath,  the  spinal  cord  was  continuously  superfused  with  Ringer's  solution  chilled  to  9-10  °C  at  a 
rate  of  2.7  ml/min.  The  solution  layer  above  the  cord  was  1.5-2  mm.  Distal  parts  of  the  roots  extending  upward  from  the 
solution  to  the  electrodes  were  covered  with  a  mixture  of  petroleum  jelly  and  mineral  oil  to  prevent  them  from  drying. 

MMW  irradiation  of  the  cord  was  performed  from  underneath,  through  the  bottom  of  the  bath  made  of  0.5  nun 
thick  Plexiglas  The  area  of  cord  segments  IX  and  X  was  carefully  pressed  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  bath  with  a  help  of 
a  micromanipulator-driven  plastic  holder,  to  prevent  formation  of  any  saline  gap  between  the  cord  and  the  bottom  of  the 
bath.  The  electrodes  were  shielded  from  the  radiation  by  the  cord  itself  and  the  saline  layer  above  it. 

The  electrodes  were  connected  to  a  Grass  Instruments  Stimulator  S8800  and  BIOPAC  MP100 
elcctrophysiological  data  acquisition  system.  We  used  paired  or  single  rectangular  pulses  of  supramaximal  amplitude 
(0.4-0.9  ms  width,  10-30  V  for  DR,  and  up  to  70  V  for  LC).  Evoked  potentials  were  recorded  from  a  ventral  root  with  or 
without  averaging  and  stored  for  Further  processing.  The  endpoints  measured  were  the  latency,  peak  latency,  amplitude 
and  subtended  area  of  the  conditioning  and  le.sf  responses  The  ratio  of  the  amplitudes  or  areas  of  the  lest  and 
conditioning  responses  was  a  measure  of  facilitation  or  inhibition.  The  data  were  analyzed  by  x2  and  Student's  Mests. 

MMW  Irradiation  and  Dosimetry 

The  MMW  exposure  equipment,  methods  of  dosimetry  and  held  mapping  were  described  in  detail  in  our  previous 
publications6*7.  The  microwave  power  generator  (model  G4-141,  Russia)  was  operated  in  a  CW  regimen.  The  output 
waveguide  line  terminated  in  a  tapered  dielectric  rod  antenna  positioned  vertically  under  the  exposure  bath;  the  bottom 
of  the  bath  was  25  mm  above  the  lip  of  the  rod.  At  this  distance,  the  field  was  virtually  uniform,  with  the  maximum  on 
the  axis  of  the  antenna.  The  field  intensity  decrease  within  5  mm  radius  from  the  axis  of  the  antenna  did  not  exceed  2 
dB,  while  the  exposed  segment  of  the  spinal  cord  was  less  than  2  mm  wide  and  4-6  mm  long.  The  E-lleld  was  aligned 
with  the  long  axis  of  the  cord.  Exact  radiation  frequency  and  net  input  power  to  the  irradiating  antenna  were  monitored 
via  a  bi-directional  coupler  using  an  E1P  model  548A  frequency  counter  and  M3-2I  wattmeter  (Russia).  During  sham 
exposure,  all  equipment  was  turned  on,  but  the  output  MMW  attenuators  >vere  tuned  to  maximum  attenuation  (about  80 
dB).  A  transition  from  sham  to  MMW  exposure  was  not  accompanied  by  any  side  effects  such  as  vibrations  or  changes 
in  low- frequency  fields. 

The  temperature  of  the  Ringer's  solution  at  the  outflow  port  of  the  exposure  bath  was  monitored  by  a  Luxtron 
Instruments  model  850  multichannel  fluoroptic  thermometer.  Within  the  accuracy  of  about  0.2  °C.  these  measurements 
demonstrated  no  temperature  changes  during  MMW  exposures. 


RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION 

Effect  of  MMW  on  synaptic  conduction  was  studied  in  three  separate  series  of  experiments,  using  different 
approaches  and  experimental  protocols. 

Series  1 


This  series  was  focused  on  monosynaptic  conduction  from  LC  to  VR.  LC  was  stimulated  every  2  min  by  a  train 
of  10  paired  pulses  (50  ms  intcrpulsc  interval,  1  pair/2  s).  VR  responses  (DR-VRR)  were  averaged  for  each  train  and 
stored  for  analysis.  The  experiment  continued  for  40  min,  yielding  a  total  of  21  dalapoints:  7  datapoints  before  MMW 
exposure  (0-12  min),  7  during  MMW  exposure  (14-26  min),  and  7  after  it  (28-40  min).  Exposures  were  performed  at 
41.34  GHz,  at  the  incident  power  density  of  1.7  mW/cm2,  2.5  inW/cm2,  or  0  (sham  exposure).  As  a  rule,  each 
successful  spinal  cord  preparation  was  employed  in  three  experiments,  using  different  treatments  in  a  random  sequence. 
The  duration  of  time  interval  between  the  experiments  was  also  random,  but  no  less  than  20  min.  A  total  of  34 
experiments  were  performed. 

LC-VRR  usually  represented  a  smooth  peak,  with  a  latency  of  6-10  ms,  0.5-3  mV  amplitude,  and  10-20  ms 
duration.  The  test  response  (to  the  2nd  stimulus  in  a  pair)  was  facilitated,  although  the  degree  of  facilitation  varied  a  lot 
from  one  preparation  to  another.  Spontaneous  (unforced)  variations  of  latency,  peak  latency,  amplitude  and  subtended 
area  of  LC-VRR  during  an  experiment  were  within  10-30%,  and  in  best  preparations  they  did  not  exceed  a  few  per  cent. 
In  isolated  experiments,  MMW  irradiation  seemed  to  increase  the  amplitude  and  decrease  the  peak  latency  of  LC-VRR. 
However,  these  trends  were  not  consistent  and  not  statistically  significant  for  entire  groups.  It  was  concluded  that 


972 


monosynaptic  conduction,  synchronicity  of  motoneuron  discharge,  and  facilitation  processes  were  not  affected  by 
MMW,  or  their  changes  were  beyond  the  resolution  ability  of  the  methods  employed. 

Series  2 

In  general,  polysynaptic  transmission  is  more  sensitive  than  monosynaptic  to  various  conditions,  such  as  ionic 
composition  of  the  medium,  drugs,  etc.  This  series  was  focused  on  the  conduction  of  excitation  from  DR  to  VR,  which  is 
predominantly  polysynaptic.  DR  was  stimulated  by  single  pulses  every  30  s,  and  VR  responses  (DR-VRR)  were 
recorded  without  averaging.  The  preparation  stabilized  for  0.5-3  hours  before  the  onset  of  the  experiment,  without  any 
alterations  of  the  stimulation  or  other  conditions.  The  experiment  lasted  for  65  min  and  included  two  5-min  exposures 
(at  25  and  50  min,  41 ,340  ±  2  MHz,  2.6  ±0.2  mW/cm2).  The  rest  of  the  time  the  preparation  was  sham  exposed.  Hence, 
130  DR-VRR  records  were  analyzed  for  each  experiment.  Each  preparation  was  used  in  only  one  experiment. 

A  total  of  13  experiments  (26  exposures)  were  performed.  In  most  preparations,  DR-VRR  was  a  complex  and 
variable  polyphasic  wave,  with  a  latency  of  about  10  ms  and  up  to  80-120  ms  duration.  Initial  analysis  included  plotting 
of  DR-VRR  parameters  (latency,  subtended  area,  etc.)  against  the  time  from  the  onset  of  the  experiment.  This  analysis 
was  intended  to  reveal  possible  "visible"  responses  to  irradiation,  particularly  on-  and  off-reactions.  However,  no  such 
reactions  were  observed,  or  they  were  masked  by  "spontaneous"  fluctuations. 

As  a  next  step,  the  DR-VRR  parameters  were  averaged  for  consequent  5-min  intervals  (10  records  per  interval).  It 
was  found  that  in  about  50%  of  the  preparations,  the  1st  MMW  irradiation  decreased  the  area  and  standard  deviation  of 
the  DR-VRR  amplitude  (in  this  context,  the  standard  deviation  is  a  measure  of  the  variation  of  the  signal  amplitude 
during  a  course  of  a  single  DR-VRR,  and  should  not  be  confused  with  a  statistical  variable).  The  effect,  although  small 
(5-15%)  was  highly  significant  compared  with  previous  5-min  intervals  before  irradiation.  One  should  note  that  the  time 
delay  between  isolation,  the  onset  of  DR  stimulation  and  exposure  was  different  for  each  preparation,  so  this  effect  was 
not  just  a  "spontaneous"  change  that  would  have  happened  at  a  certain  time.  The  2nd  MMW  irradiation  did  not  cause 
these  changes. 

These  observations  could  not  be  used  as  a  reliable  proof  of  the  MMW  effect,  because  the  statistically  significant 
changes  occurred  in  only  a  half  of  the  preparations.  Nonetheless,  the  data  suggested  that  it  might  be  more  adequate  to 
consider  somehow  any  changes  in  the  DR-VRR  waveform,  not  just  those  which  arc  reflected  by  its  latency,  amplitude, 
or  other  parameters. 

To  quantify  these  "gross"  changes  in  the  DR-VRR  waveform,  the  biopotential  records  (not  measured  DR-VRR 
parameters,  but  the  waveforms  themselves)  were  summed  for  5-min  intervals,  thus  yielding  13  "accumulated" 
waveforms  for  65  min  of  the  experiment  (W,,  W2,  ....  Wl3).  The  VRR  changes  from  one  5-min  interval  to  another  were 
quantified  by  the  integral  of  the  difference  (ID)  of  sequential  waveforms  (i.e.,  W(l-Wn.|).  The  mean  ID  was  virtually 
stable  for  the  first  5  intervals  (sham)  and  sharply  increased  for  the  6th  interval  (MMW  exposure);  then  it  returned  to  the 
initial  value  and  was  stable  again.  In  fact,  this  ID  increase  due  to  the  1st  exposure  occurred  in  9  out  of  the  13  tested 
preparations.  The  2nd  MMW  exposure  caused  no  ID  changes  in  the  9  preparations  which  reacted  to  the  1st  exposure. 
Most  unexpectedly,  the  ulher  4  preparations  which  did  not  react  to  the  1st  exposure,  demonstrated  a  significant  ID 
increase  in  response  to  the  2nd  irradiation. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  conditions  of  the  1st  and  the  2nd  exposures  for  each  individual  preparation  were 
exactly  the  same.  Even  the  pattern  of  "hot  spots"  (if  any  formed)  remained  unchanged.  If  the  MMW  effect  were  thermal, 
it  would  have  been  practically  identical  under  the  1st  and  the  2nd  exposures.  However,  it  was  not  the  case,  and  this 
indicates  involvement  of  MMW-specific  interaction  mechanisms  which  arc  different  from  mere  healing.  Most  important, 
the  effect  of  MMW  exposure  pruved  to  be  not  limited  to  changes  that  take  place  just  during  the  irradiation:  The 
aftereffect  of  the  1st  MMW  exposure  was  not  detectable  from  DR-VRR  appearance,  but  manifested  itself  as  a  change  of 

the  sensitivity  to  the  2nd  exposure.  Moreover,  this  aftereffect  could  be  either  a  decrease  or  an  increase  of  the  MMW 

sensitivity,  depending  on  whether  the  preparation  had  responded  to  the  1st  exposure  or  not.  From  the  physiological  point 
of  view,  the  observed  MMW  effect  could  be  regarded  as  a  mild  modulation  of  the  polysynaptic  conduction  rather  than 
its  inhibition  or  lacilitation.  More  detail  about  this  effect  and  data  analysis  procedures  can  be  found  in  a  separate  paper 
which  is  scheduled  for  publication  in  "Electro-  and  Magnctobiology". 

Series  3 

This  series  was  aimed  to  reveal  possible  frequency-specific  effects  of  MMW  in  41.1-42.4  GHz  band.  DR-VRR 
were  evoked  by  single  pulses  every  24  s.  Each  preparation  was  used  in  one  100-niin  experiment,  which  began  after  a  30- 
to  90-min  stabilization.  For  convenience  of  data  processing,  the  experiment  was  divided  into  25  intervals,  4-min  each. 
Ten  stimuli  were  applied  during  each  interval,  and  10  DR-VRR  waveforms  were  averaged  and  stored  for  the  same 
analysis  of  waveform  changes  as  described  above.  MMW  irradiation  lasted  from  24  to  80  min  of  the  experiment  (from 
the  7th  till  the  20lh  interval),  otherwise  the  preparation  was  sham  exposed.  During  exposure,  the  frequency  was  changed 


973 


by  0.1  GHz  steps  every  4  min,  either  from  41.1  to  42.4  GHz,  or  in  the  opposite  direction.  The  incident  power  density 
ranged  from  approximately  2  to  3  mW/cm2  for  differenl  frequencies.  Control  preparations  were  sham  exposed  during  the 
entire  experiment. 

Analysis  of  changes  in  the  DR-VRR  waveform  from  29  experiments  performed  did  not  establish  any  MMW 
effect,  either  associated  with  a  certain  frequency,  or  with  the  exposure  as  a  whole. 


CONCLUSIONS 

MMW  irradiation  at  ihe  incident  power  density  of  up  to  3  mW/cm2  produces  either  a  minor  or  no  effect  on 
synaptic  transmission  in  the  frog  spinal  cord.  When  present,  the  MMW  effect  appears  as  a  mild  modulation  of  synaptic 
transmission,  not  as  its  suppression  or  facilitation.  MMW  sensitivity  seems  to  vary  between  individual  preparations 
and/or  depend  on  some  uncontrolled  and  unidentified  factors.  As  of  the  present  data,  synaptic  transmission  cannot  he 
regarded  as  a  target  for  MMW  bioeffects.  However,  there  are  still  many  synaptic  processes  which  have  never  been 
studied  in  experiments  with  MMW  radiation  (pre-  and  postsynaptic  inhibition,  gap  junction  transmission,  modifiability 
phenomena,  etc  ). 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  work  was  supported  by  the  US  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command  under  contract  DAMDI7-94- 
C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices.  The  views,  opinions  and  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those  of  the 
authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  oflhe  Army  position,  policy  or  decision. 


REFERENCES 

1.  V.M  Brovkovich,  N.B.  Kurilo.  and  V.L.  BarishpoTls,  Action  of  millimeter-range  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  Ca  pump  of 
sarcoplasmic  reticulum.  Radiobiologiia  31:268  (1991). 

2.  Gclctyuk,  V.N.  Kazachenko,  N.K.  Chcmcris,  and  E.E.  Fesenko.  Dual  effects  of  microwaves  on  single  Ca2  ^-activated  K4  channels 
in  cultured  kidney  cells  Vero.  FEBS  Ijfu.  359:85  (1995). 

3.  Kataev,  A. A.  Alexandrov,  L.L.  Tikhonova,  and  G.N.  Berestovsky,  Frequency-dependent  effects  ofthc  electromagnetic  millimeter 
waves  on  die  ion  currents  in  the  cell  membrane  of  Nitellopsis  nonthermaf  action.  Biojhika  38:446  ( 1 993). 

4.  B  orach  ns  and  R  Muscoliunns,  Suppression  ol  nerve  action  potential  under  the  effect  uf  iiiilliiuclci  wave*,  in.  Millimeter  Waves 
in  Medicine  and  Biology,  N.D.  Dcvyatkov.  cd„  Radioclcctronica.  Moscow  (1989). 

5.  t  hernyakov,  V.L,  Kurochkin,  A.P.  Babenko,  and  E.V.  Bigdai,  Reactions  of  biological  systems  of  various  complexity  to  the 
action  of  low-lcvcl  F.HF  radiation.  Ibid.  (1989). 

6.  Pakhomov,  II. K  Prol.  S.P.  Mathur,  Y.  AJkyel,  and  C'.B.U.  Campbell,  Search  for  frequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter-wave 
radiation  on  isolated  nerve  function.  Bioclectrnmagnetics  18:324  (1997). 

7.  Pakhomov,  ll.K  Prol,  S.P.  Mathur,  Y.  Akyel,  and  C.B.G.  Campbell,  Frequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter  wavelength 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  isolated  nerve,  Elcctro  Magnctohiol.  1 6:43  ( 1 997) 

8.  Kudo,  The  pharmacology  of  the  amphibian  spinal  cord.  Progress  Neurobiol.  11:1  (  1 978). 


974 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELDS: 

*  BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS  and 

HYGIENIC  STANDARDIZATION 

-  • 

r  .  ■  •  ■'  .  •  ■  ■  v-  • : 

t *  Proceedings  of  the  International  Meeting 
..ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELDS:  BIOLOGICALEFFECTS 
AND  HYGIENIC  StAWDARDIZATION» 
yjMoscow/18-22  May  1998 


Editors: 

M. H.  Repacholi 

N. B.  Rubtsova 
A.M.  Muc 


DOSE  DEPENDENCIES  IN  BIOEFFECTS  OF  EXTREMELY  HIGH  PEAK 

POWER  MICROWAVE  PULSES 

A.G.  Pakhomov1’*,  S.  P.  Mathur1,  M.  Belt1,  and  M.  R.  Murphy* 
McKesson  BioServices,  US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  and  2Directed 
Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate,  Air  Force  Research 
Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas,  78235-5324,  USA. 

Introduction 

Tissue  heating  by  moderate  and  high  microwave  intensities  is  die 
established  mechanism  of  most  known  biological  effects  of  this  radiation. 
"Thermal"  bioeffects  can  usually  be  predicted  from  the  rates  of  energy  absorption 
and  heat  dissipation  in  exposed  specimens.  However,  it  is  not  dear  if  this  dose- 
based  approach  is  valid  for  irradiation  with  brief,  extremely  high  power  pulses 
(EHPP).  At  peak  specific  absorption  rates  (SAR)  as  high  ns  kilowatts  per  gram 
high  instant  values  of  the  electric  field,  thermoelastic  stress,  or  other,  mechanisms 
could  produce  tissue  damage,  even  if  the  time-average  SAR  is  low  and  general 
heating  is  negligible.  Safety  guidelines  based  upon  the  average  absorbed  or 
incident  powers  do  not  necessarily  address  the  potentially  harmful  effects  of  EHPP, 
making  it  imperative  that  the  possibility  of  such  effects  be  investigated. 

The  present  knowledge  of  EHPP  bioeffects  is  limited  and  contradictory.  In 
some  studies,  EHPP  disrupted  cognitive  function  sod  significantly  decreased 
physical  endurance  in  rats  without  increasing  the  body  temperature  (Akyel  et  aL, 
1992;  Raslear  et  aL,  1993).  In  other  studies,  which  employed  somewhat  different 
EHPP  parameters,  all  behavioral  and  physiological  changes  observed  in  exposed 
rats  and  monkeys  could  be  attributed  to  heating  (D' Andrea  et  aL,  1989;  Klauenberg 
et  aL,  1990;  Akyel  et  aL,  1991;  Jauchem  and  Frei,  1995). 

The  present  work  tested  the  applicability  of  the  dose-based  approach  in 
exposure  to  brief  EHPP  trains.  Using  an  isolated  heart  preparation  model,  we 
compared  bioeffects  of  EHPP  trains  with  (1)  a  constant  number  of  pulses  per  train, 
but  different  interpulse  intervals,  and  (2)  different  numbers  of  pulses  per  train,  but 
a  constant  interpulse  interval.  Microwave  heating  was  linearly  proportional  to  die 
number  of  EHPP  per  train,  but  did  not  depend  on  the  interval  between  them 

Methods 

We  employed  an  in-waveguide  exposure  setup  capable  of  creating  peak 
SAR  of  up  to  400  kW/g  in  small  samples  (100-200  pi).  Square  microwave  pulses 


325 


(9.5  GHz,  1  ns  width,  100-115  kW)  were  produced  by  an  EPSCO  Model  MH300 
system  with  an  MF-EM65-01  RF  plug-in  into  a  WR90  waveguide  (22.86  x  10.16 
mm).  Incident  and  reflected  powers  in  the  waveguide  were  measured  via 
directional  couplers  by  HP  438A  and  HP  435B  power  meters  with  HP  8481A 
power  sensors.  Microwave  pulse  trains  were  triggered  externally  from  a  Grass 
Instruments  S8800  stimulator.  The  shape  of  microwave  pulses  was  monitored  via 
an  HP  432  detector  on  a  TEK  2430A  digital  oscilloscope. 

The  exposure  cell  at  die  end  of  the  waveguide  was  separated  by  a  quarter- 
wave  matching  plate  and  filled  with  6  ml  of  Ringer's  solution  containing  (mmol/1): 
NaCl,  103;  KC1, 1.0;  NaHCCfe,  0.6;  CaQ2, 0.9;  pH  7.2-7.4.  The  waveguide  walls 
in  the  exposure  cell  were  covered  with  a  lacquer  to  prevent  its  electrical  contact 
with  the  solution. 

With  this  setup,  SAR  in  die  solution  decreased  exponentially  with 
increasing  the  distance  above  the  matching  plate.  SAR  as  a  function  of  this 
distance  was  calculated  according  to  Chou  and  Guy  (1978)  and  verified  by  direct 
measurements.  At  25°C,  calculated  SAR  equaled  610,  304,  145,  and  69  kW/g  per 
100  kW  of  transmitted  power  at  0,  1,  2,  and  3  mm  above  the  matching  plate, 
respectively.  Within  the  depth  of  the  solution  in  the  exposure  cell  (about  25  mm), 
the  radiation  was  absorbed  almost  completely,  thus  requiring  no  additional 
protection  of  the  personnel  or  laboratory  equipment 

Direct  SAR  measurements  were  performed  with  a  microthermocouple 
(MTC)  made  of  25-pm  copper  and  constantan  wires  (Omega  Engineering,  Inc.) 
The  MTC  was  covered  with  lacquer  for  insulation  and  fixed  in  a  custom-made 
holder  in  a  micromanipulator,  above  the  exposure  cell.  Temperature  readings  by 
the  MTC  were  recorded  on  a  PC  using  a  universal  amplifier  (Gould  5900  frame) 
and  a  BIOPAC  MP100  data  acquisition  system. 

Virtually  instant  response  of  the  MTC  to  temperature  changes  made  it 
possible  to  record  a  temperature  plateau  for  a  period  of  200-600  ms  after  a  single 
EHPP  or  a  brief  EHPP  train.  Within  the  duration  of  this  plateau,  heat  dissipation 
could  be  disregarded.  Therefore,  the  peak  SAR  could  be  calculated  from  the  level 
of  this  plateau  and  known  duration  of  the  microwave  pulses,  despite  EHPP-induced 
recording  artifacts  during  the  train  itself.  More  detail  on  this  method  and  its 
validation  can  be  found  in  a  separate  publication  (Pakhomov  et  al,  1998). 
Calculated  and  MTC-measured  SAR  matched  well  for  various  MTC  positions  in 
the  exposure  cell,  output  powers,  numbers  of  pulses,  etc.  In  all  cases,  measured 
SAR  was  1. 1-1.8  dB  below  the  theoretical  one;  this  small  difference  was  likely  to 


326 


result  from  imperfection  of  power  meters  and/or  of  the  theory,  rather  than  from 
inaccuracy  of  the  temperature  measurements. 

An  important  detail  established  by  the  MTC  thermometry  was  that  the 
maximum  microwave  heating  (i.e.,  the  level  of  the  plateau  on  the  heating  curve) 
was  linearly  proportional  to  the  number  of  EHPPs  in  a  train,  but,  within  certain 
limits,  it  did  not  depend  on  the  interpulse  interval  (Fig.  1). 


Fig.  1.  Heating  dynamics  under  exposure  to  EHPP  trains  (1  jis  pulse  width, 

9.5  GHz,  400  kW/g  peak  SAR).  Spikes  during  the  ascending  portion  of  the  curves 
(artifacts)  correspond  to  EHPP  pulses.  A:  10-pulse  trains  with  different  interpulse 
intervals  (1, 3, 5,  and  13  ms).  Regardless  of  the  interpulse  interval,  maximum 
microwave  heating  (the  plateau  level)  is  0.93  °C.  B:  Trains  including  different 
number  of  pulses,  but  with  a  constant  interpulse  interval  of  5  ms.  Maximum 
microwave  heating  is  linearly  proportional  to  the  number  of  pulses  in  the  train. 
Heating  by  a  single  pulse  is  about  0.09  °C  (not  shown);  each  increase  of  the  train 
by  4  pulses  increases  heating  by  about  0.38  °C.  For  these  temperature 
measurements,  we  used  20-  or  50-ms  averages  of  the  amplified  voltage  from  MTC. 

Dose  dependencies  of  EHPP  effects  were  studied  in  isolated,  spontaneously 
beating  sections  of  the  cardiac  sinoatrial  area  of  the  frog  Rana  catesbiana.  The 
sections  were  of  irregular  shape,  a  few  millimeters  wide  and  long,  and  less  than  1 
mm  thick.  Peak  SAR  measured  in  saline  at  the  position  of  the  geometrical  center  of 
the  preparation  (i.e.,  about  0.5  mm  above  the  matching  plate)  ranged  from  270  to 
310  kW/g.  Maximum  heating  of  the  preparation  was  0.08-0.09  °C  per  one  EHPP; 
for  trains  consisting  of  n  pulses,  the  maximum  heating  was  n  times  greater. 


327 


The  endpoint  in  these  experiments  was  the  immediate  change  in  the 
duration  of  individual  inter-beat  intervals  (IBIs)  after  deliveiy  of  a  single  EHPP 
train.  Local  currents,  induced  in  the  surrounding  solution  by  beats  of  the 
preparation,  were  recorded  by  a  BIOPAC  MP100  data  acquisition  system  using 
artifact-free  electrodes  (glass  capillaries  filled  with  the  same  solution).  After 
positioning  of  the  preparation  at  the  bottom  of  the  exposure  cell,  it  was  allowed  to 
stabilize  for  30-60  min.  While  recording  a  stable  beating  rhythm,  we  applied  a  train 
afnucrowave  pulses  (it  always  fell  within  a  single  IBI).  The  exact  time  when  the 
EHPP  train  was  applied  was  recorded  on  a  separate  marker  trace,  concurrently  with 
the  preparation  beats. 


Ten  IBIs  immediately  preceding  the  exposure  were  assigned  numbers  from 
-10  to  -1;  the  IBI  coinciding  the  exposure  was  No.  0,  and  the  next  ten  intervals 
were  numbered  from  1  to  10.  The  exact  duration  of  each  of  these  21  IBIs  was 
measured  automatically.  A  record  of  21  IBIs  which  included  one  exposure  or  sham 
exposure  was  considered  as  a  single  experiment.  Experiments  with  initially 

unstable  rhythm  (more  than  ±  2%  variation  of  individual  IBIs  before  the  EHPP 
train)  were  noticed  for  analysis  and  discarded 

Though  being  very  stable  in  each  particular  experiment,  the  IBI  duration 
ranged  considerably  (from  1  to  3.5  s)  from  one  preparation  to  another.  Hence,  the 
raw  data  from  different  experiments  had  to  be  normalized  before  averaging,  so  the 
duration  of  the  first  (-10th)  IBI  in  each  experiment  was  taken  as  100%. 

The  same  preparation  was  usually  used  in  several  different  experiments, 
allowing  at  least  a  15-min  interval  between  them  for  function  recovery  and 
stabilisation.  Different  regimens  of  microwave  exposure  were  randomized  with 
sham  exposures.  For  a  sham  exposure,  a  waveguide  switch  was  used  to  block 
microwave  propagation  to  the  exposure  cell,  otherwise  all  conditions  were  kept  the 
same  as  with  actual  exposures.  All  experiments  were  performed  at  a  room 
temperature  of 24-27  °C. 

Results 

Series  1.  In  87  experiments  on  20  preparations,  we  studied  the  effect  of  5- 
pulse  EHPP  trains.  The  interpulse  intervals  were  1,  5,  or  25  ms,  yielding  the  entire 
train  durations  of  4,  20,  and  100  ms,  respectively.  Microwave  heating  did  not 
depend  on  the  interpulse  interval  and  was  the  same  for  all  these  regimens  (0.4-0.45 
C  maximum).  There  was  no  special  synchronization  of  the  train  onset  with  the 
preparation  beats,  but  experiments  with  the  EHPP  train  coming  during  the  first  and 
the  second  halves  of  an  IBI  were  processed  separately. 


328 


Fig.  2.  Changes  in  the  inter-beat  interval  (IBI)  after  exposure  to  a  5-pulse  EHPP 
train  (9.5  GHz,  lps  pulse  width,  270  to  3 10  kW/g  peak  SAR).  The  train  is  applied 
during  the  first  (A)  or  the  second  (B)  half  of  the  interbeat  interval  No.  0.  Sham- 
exposed  group  is  die  same  for  A  and  B;  n  is  number  of  experiments  in  each  group. 
IBI  decrease  immediately  after  exposure  is  significant  in  all  the  groups  (at  p<0.05 
or  p<0.01).  Differences  between  the  exposed  groups  are  not  statistically 
significant 

In  100%  of  the  experiments,  EHPP  irradiation  immediately  decreased  the 
interval  between  beats,  followed  by  a  gradual  recovery  to  the  initial  level.  The 
averaged  data  are  presented  in  Fig.  3,  A  and  B.  Though  maximum  effect  was  only 
1.5-2.5%,  it  was  significant  at  p<0.05  or  p<0.01  (Student's  f-test)  compared  with 
either  the  pre-exposure  level  or  sham  controls.  As  one  could  expect,  the  EHPP- 
induced  changes  in  the  beating  rate  developed  slightly  later  in  preparations  that 
were  exposed  later  within  the  IBI  (namely,  during  the  second  half  of  the  IBI,  Fig  3, 
B).  However,  this  was  the  only  noticeable  difference  between  the  exposed  groups, 
and  the  effect  showed  no  dependence  on  the  interval  between  pulses  in  the  EHPP 
train. 


Some  authors  (Hgranyan,  1986)  reported  that  excitable  tissues  (e.g., 
isolated  nerve  and  heart  of  the  frog)  are  particularly  sensitive  to  microwave  piulses 


329 


within  a  certain  period  during  or  after  exdtatioa  In  our  experiments,  the  EHPP 
tramfell  within  various  intervals  after  excitation  (i.e.,  a  beat),  but  no  "critical 
penods  were  observed.  Furthermore,  in  six  experiments  when  the  EHPP  train 
comcided  with  a  beat  (too  few  cases  for  statistical  analysis,  so  they  were  not 

considered  above),  the  exposure  effect  was  practically  the  same  as  in  other 
experiments. 


3.  Dependence  of  the  inter-beat  interval  change  on  the  number  of  pulses  in  the 
EHPP  tram.  The  data  for  exposure  to  5-pulse  trains  are  imported  from  Series  1,  all 
other  data  are  from  Series  2.  The  interval  between  EHPP  in  the  train  is  1  ms;  see 
Fig.  2  for  more  exposure  detail.  Differences  between  all  the  group  are  significant 
atp<0.01  (for  datapoints  immediately  after  exposure). 

Series  2.  In  this  independent  series  of  65  experiments  (18  preparations)  the 
interval  between  pulses  in  EHPP  train  was  fixed  at  1  ms,  and  the  trains  consisted  of 
10, 30,  or  60  pulses.  The  trains  were  always  applied  within  the  first  half  of  the  IBI 
In  most  cases,  the  exposure  immediately  decreased  the  IBI  proportionally  to  the 
number  of  pulses  in  the  train,  followed  by  a  gradual  recovery  (Fig.  3)  The 
maximum  decrease  (by  15-20%,  p<0.01)  was  caused  by  60-pulse  trains.  The 
maximum  heating  was  linearly  proportional  to  the  number  of  pulses  in  the  train, 
and  so  was  the  response  of  the  preparation  (Fig.  4).  However,  in  the  remaining 
experiments  (about  15%),  irradiation  produced  the  opposite  effect:  it  halted  the 
preparation  contractions,  delaying  the  next  expected  beat  for  a  period  from  0.5  s  to 
more  than  100  s  (Fig.  5).  This  paradoxical  response  occurred  in  2  out  of  17 
exposures  to  10  pulses,  3  out  of  16  exposures  to  30  pulses,  and  in  6  out  of  17 
exposures  to  60  pulses;  it  was  never  caused  by  sham  exposures  or  5-pulse  trying  in 
the  preceding  set  of  experiments. 


330 


r 


number  of  pulses  in  this  train.  (The  same  data  as  in  Fig.  3).  See  Figs.  2  and  3  for 
more  detail. 

Discussion 

A  common  way  to  judge  whether  exposure  effects  are  or  are  not  caused  by 
heating  is  the  comparison  of  reactions  to  microwave  and  equivalent  conventional 
heating  However,  this  comparison  would  only  be  accurate  if  the  dynamics  of 
microwave  and  conventional  heating  are  the  same.  In  EHPP  experiments,  the 
instant  heating  rate  (during  a  microwave  pulse)  reaches  almost  100,000  °C/s,  which 
cannot  be  matched  by  a  conventional  heating  In  this  situation,  dose-response 
curves  can  be  used  for  qualitative  analysis  of  the  role  of  heating  in  biological 
effects  of  EHPPs. 

It  is  well  known  that  a  subtle  or  moderate  heating  increases  the  pacemaker 
rhythm  (shortens  1BI)  in  isolated  frog  heart  preparations  (Yee  et  al.,  1986; 
Chemyakov  et  aL,  1989;  Pakhomov  et  al.,  1995).  Consistently,  in  most  of  the 
experiments  described  above,  EHPP  exposure  produced  an  immediate  decrease  in 
die  IBI  duration.  When  the  EHPP  train  was  varied  in  a  way  that  kept  the  absorbed 
dose  and  microwave  heating  constant,  the  biological  effect  remained  constant  as 
well  (Series  1).  At  the  same  time,  the  IBI  decrease  was  linearly  proportional  to  the 
number  of  EHPPs  per  train,  which  was  the  parameter  that  determined  the  absorbed 
dose  and  heating  (Series  2).  This  pattern  of  reacting  to  EHPPs  is  in  agreement  with 
the  thermal  mechanism  of  EHPP  bioeffects. 

One  should  note  that  beats  in  our  preparation  could  only  be  induced  by 
stimuli  coming  from  pacemaker  structures.  Therefore,  any  IBI  decrease  reflected 


331 


an  increase  in  the  pacemaker  rhythm.  However,  a  temporary  cessation  of  beats  or 
IBI  increase  did  not  necessarily  arise  from  a  change  in  the  pacemaker  rhythm. 
Most  likely,  it  was  caused  by  a  temporary  uncoupling  of  contractile  structures  from 
the  pacemaker,  and  some  experimental  records  prove  that  it  was  the  case  indeed. 
For  example,  in  the  experiment  shown  in  Fig.  6,  we  concurrently  recorded  large 
and  small  beats,  which  were  produced  by  two  groups  of  contractile  fibers.  Before 
exposure,  small  and  large  beats  were  nicety  synchronized,  indicating  that  they  were 
driven  by  the  same  pacemaker,  but  the  large  beats  were  elicited  by  every  other 
stimulus  from  the  pacemaker.  This  omission  of  pacemaker  stimuli  is  not 
uncommon,  and  indicates  somewhat  imperfect  coupling  of  the  respective 
contractile  structures  with  the  pacemaker.  EHPP  exposure  halted  the  large  beats, 
but  the  small  beats  continued  uninterruptedly  and  increased  their  rate.  Hence,  die 
cessation  of  the  large  beats  was  caused  by  uncoupling  and  not  by  deceleration  of 
the  pacemaker.  Though  such  analysis  was  not  possible  for  every  experiment  with 
IBI  increase  alter  exposure,  one  can  reasonably  suppose  that  the  impairment  of 
coupling  was  responsible  for  this  effect  in  other  cases  as  well. 


A  - 

i  in 

44  1  1  1444 

i  i  j.  1 14. 

1  144  My 

1 

n  ‘ 

'  PTH 

Hr  1  1  i  IT 

i 

Til ti* 

ntTtr 

CO 

© 

B 

L,l-4  |  | 

i  Mil  III 

1  1  I  1  1  1  1 

1  1  (III 

Irffl 

1  11 1  1  1 1  1, 

I  1  1  1  1  1  1 

1  1  II  1  1 

E  ! 
u> 

i  1  Hi 

1.  1.1  J.  1  .1  U..1  I—  - 

10s 

> 

Lr  " 

1 1 1 1 

1  I  1  t  1  1  1  1  1, 

1 

CO 

0 

n  J 

1  14-1 

4  1  1  1  11  1 

1  1  1  1  it 

1  J  t  1 _ L 

> 

L/ 

ITT  T 

r  1  1  1  1  It 

rTTTli 

Milt 

E 

Fig.  5.  Cessation  of  beats  caused  by  exposure  to  an  EHPP  train.  A  -  D  -  different 
preparations  of  the  sinoatrial  area  of  the  frog  heart  Upper  traces,  spontaneous  beats 
of  the  preparation.  Lower  traces,  marker  of  microwave  exposure  (9.5  GHz,  1  ps 
pulse  width,  1  ms  interpulse  interval,  270  to  310  kW/g  peak  SAR);  a  single  train  of 
10  pulses  (A),  30  pulses  (B  and  C),  or  60  pulses  (D). 

Though  uncoupling  could  be  caused  by  a  thermal  effect  of  exposure, 
possible  specific  EHPP  effects  could  not  be  discarded  either.  The  temporary 
cessation  of  beats  occurred  only  in  a  small  percent  of  experiments,  and  the  total 
number  of  observations  was  insufficient  to  make  a  prudent  judgement  As 
concerning  the  dose  dependencies  of  EHPP  effects  on  die  pacemaker  rhythm,  they 


332 


were  fully  consistent  with  the  thermal  mechanism  of  microwave  action.  On  th 
whole,  the  present  experimental  data  are  not  suggestive  of  any  mechanisms  c 
EHPP  bioeffects  other  than  ordinary  heating. 


Fig.6.  An  example  of  a  "dual"  response  to  EHPP  irradiation.  Marker  (the  lower 
trace)  indicates  the  moment  of  exposure  to  a  60-pulse  train.  This  exposure 
increased  the  interval  between  large  beats  and  shortened  the  interval  between  sms 
beats.  See  Fig.  5  and  text  for  more  explanation. 


Acknowledgements 

The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  US  Army  Medical  Research  a 
Materiel  Command  and  the  US  Air  Force  Directed  Energy  Bioeffect  Divisi 
under  US  Army  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioSemc 
The  views  expressed  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed 
reflecting  the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  US  Government  or  the  Departme 
of  the  Army  and  the  Air  Force. 

References: 

1.  Akyel,  Y.;  Hunt,  E.  L.;  Gambrill,  C.;  Vargas,  C.,  Jr.  Immediate  p< 
exposure  effects  of  high-peak-power  microwave  pulses  on  operant  beha\ 
ofWistarrats.  Bioelectromagnetics  12(3):  183-195, 1991. 

2.  Akyel,  Y.;  Raslear,  T.  G.;  Hammer,  R.  M.;  Belt,  M.  The  effects  of  hi 
pgflV  power  pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  rat.  F 
World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medici 
14-19  June,  Lake  Buena  Vista,  FL,  p.  60, 1992. 


333 


3.  Chemyakov,  G.  M;  Korochkin,  V.  L.;  Babenko,  A.  P.;  Bigdai,  E.  V. 
Reactions  of  biological  systems  of  various  complexity  to  the  action  of  low- 
level  EHF  radiation.  Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.  N.  D. 
Deyatkov,  ed.,  Moscow:  Radioelectronica,  p.  141-167, 1989. 

4.  Chou,  C-K;  Guy,  A.  W.  Effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  isolated  nerve 
and  muscle  preparations.  IEEE  Trans  Microwave  Theory  Tech  26(3):  141- 
147, 1978. 

5.  D'Andrea,  J.  A.;  Cobb,  B.  L.;  Knepton,  J.;  Bates,  F.  Behavior  in  rhesus 
monkeys  exposed  to  very  high  peak  power  3.0-GHz  microwave  pulses. 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  11th  Annual  Meeting,  18-22  June,  Tucson, 
AZ,  p.38-39, 1989. 

6.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M  R.  High-peak-power  microwave  pulses:  effects  on 
heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  unanesthetized  rats.  Aviat  Space  Environ 
Med  66(10):992-997, 1995. 

7.  Klauenberg,  B.  J.;  Cobb,  B.  L.;  Merritt,  J.  H.  Effects  of  exposure  to  tempo 
pulsed  high-peak  power  microwave  radiation.  Bioelectromagnetics  Society, 
12th  Annual  Meeting,  10-14  June,  San  Antonio,  TX,  p.  91, 1990. 

8.  Pakhomov,  A.  G.;  Dubovick,  B.  V.;  Degtyariov,  I.  G.;  Pronkevich,  A.  N. 
Microwave  influence  on  the  isolated  heart  function:  I.  Effect  of  modulation. 
Bioelectromagnetics  16(4):241-249, 1995. 

9.  Pakhomov,  A.  G.;  Mathur,  S.  P.;  Akyel,  Y.;  J.  L.  Kiel,  J.  L.  Direct 
microdosimetiy  in  media  exposed  to  extremely  high  peak  power 
microwaves.  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  20th  Annual  Meeting,  7-11  June, 
St  Petersburg  Beach,  FL,  1998  (in  press). 

10.  Raslear,  T.  G.;  Akyel,  Y.;  Bates,  F.;  Belt,  M;  Lu,  S-T.  Temporal  bisection 
in  rats:  the  effects  of  high-peak-power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation. 
Bioelectromagnetics  14(5):459-478, 1993. 

11.  Tigranyan,  R.  E.  On  the  mechanism  of  pulsed  microwaves  effects  on 
excitable  structures.  Vopr  Kurortol  Fizioter  Lech  Fiz  Kult  (6): 11-14, 1986. 

12.  Yee,  K-C.;  Chou,  C-K.;  Guy,  A.  W.  Effects  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation 
on  the  contractile  rate  of  isolated  frog  hearts.  J  Microw  Power  Electromagn 
Energy  21(3):159-165, 1986. 


334 


12th  ieee 
International  Pulsed 
Power  Conference 


E!IlEHICEEEI£IBII[llEIIEEDHlEEIIEEEIigDII»EIIIIIiE8EEEillEEEniESEiBIIEIIIlimilIElllinillI 


LOW-INTENSITY  MILLIMETER  WAVES  AS  A  NOVEL  THERAPEUTIC 

MODALITY* 


A.  Pakhomov 1,2  and  M.  Murphy2 

‘McKessonHBOC  BioServices,  US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  and  Air  Force  Research 
Laboratory,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate,  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Radio  Frequency 
Radiation  Branch,  8308  Hawks  Rd.,  Bldg.  1 168,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235-5324,  USA. 


Abstract 

One  of  the  most  significant  events  in  contemporary 
electromagnetic  biology  is  a  surge  in  interest  to 
specific  effects  of  low-intensity  millimeter-band 
radiation  (30-300  GHz).  Bioeffects  of  millimeter 
waves  (MMW)  can  often  occur  without  any 
considerable  heating  of  the  exposed  subject,  and 
biological  responses  are  principally  different  from 
those  caused  by  heating.  The  effects  of  MMW  often 
have  a  sharp,  resonance-like  dependence  on  the 
radiation  frequency,  but  they  depend  relatively  little 
on  the  radiation  intensity.  A  brief,  low-intensity 
MMW  exposure  can  change  cell  growth  and 
proliferation  rates,  activity  of  enzymes,  state  of  cell 
genetic  apparatus,  function  of  excitable  membranes  and 
peripheral  receptors,  it  can  alleviate  stress  reactions, 
stimulate  tissue  repair  and  regeneration,  etc.  In  Eastern 
Europe,  low-intensity  MMW  are  widely  employed  for 
therapeutic  purposes.  The  method  has  gained  official 
recognition,  and  millions  of  people  received  MMW 
therapy  for  various  conditions.  While  the  mechanisms 
of  MMW  efficacy  remain  unclear  and  their  medical 
usage  is  mostly  empirical,  the  knowledge  accumulated 
over  more  than  20  years  of  MMW  therapy  merits 
careful  analysis  and  consideration. 


L  INTRODUCTION 

MMW  are  characterized  by  rather  shallow  penetration 
into  biological  tissues  (<1  mm),  and  one  may  anticipate  that 
MMW  bioeffects  arise  mostly  from  surface  heating.  Indeed, 
this  thermal  mechanism  is  well  known  and  is  essentially  the 
same  as  with  other  methods  of  local  heating  (e.g.,  with 
infrared). 

At  the  same  time,  a  large  number  of  studies  have  reported 
principally  different  MMW  effects,  which  do  not  fit  into  the 
thermal  paradigm.  These  effects  may  occur  at  the  radiation 
intensities  orders  of  magnitude  below  the  thermal  effect 
threshold,  and  often  demonstrate  a  highly  nonlinear, 
resonance-type  dependence  on  the  radiation  frequency. 
Specific  MMW  effects  seem  to  be  of  fairly  universal  nature, 


appearing  at  various  levels  of  biological  organization  (from 
cells  and  subcellular  structures  to  animal  and  human 
organisms)  and  affecting  rather  diverse  biological  functions 
(from  DNA  conformation  and  cell  membrane  permeability 
to  immune  reactions  and  behavior).  While  reasons  for  the 
unusual  MMW  sensitivity  of  living  subjects  and  underlying 
biophysical  mechanisms  have  yet  to  be  identified,  the 
possibility  of  manipulating  biological  functions  by  MMW 
has  already  been  employed  widely  in  biotechnology  and 
medicine. 

The  purpose  of  the  present  paper  is  to  introduce 
professionals  with  mostly  physical  and  engineering 
backgrounds  to  the  exciting  and  potentially  important  area 
of  MMW  bioeffects  and  medical  applications.  Interested 
readers  are  advised  to  see  other  reviews  for  more  detailed 
information  [1-8], 


n.  SPECIFIC  BIOEFFECTS  OF 
MILLIMETER  WAVES 

Resonance  effects  of  MMW  on  cell  growth  rate  have  been 
studied  for  over  20  years  [9-12].  Exposure  of  the  yeast  cells  to 
certain  frequencies  within  a  41.842.0  GHz  band  (8  kHz 
modulation)  either  increased  the  cell  growth  rate  by  up  to  15%, 
or  decreased  it  by  up  to  29%.  The  effect  was  shown  by 
different  methods,  both  in  suspended  cells  and  in  monolayer, 
and  at  radiation  intensities  as  low  as  5  pW/cm2 .  The  position  of 
the  "resonance  frequency"  (at  which  the  growth  rate  increased) 
did  not  depend  on  the  incident  power  density,  while  the 
"resonance  width"  (taken  as  a  distance  between  two 
frequencies  which  decreased  the  growth  rate)  gradually 
increased  from  about  5  MHz  at  5  pW/cm2  to  12-15  MHz  at  1 
mW/cm2.  One  should  note,  however,  that  independent  attempts 
to  replicate  these  observations  were  not  successful  [13,  14], 
suggesting  that  some  other  unknown  and  unidentified  factors 
could  be  essential  for  this  MMW  effect. 

Belyaev  and  co-authors  [15—18]  used  an  anomalous 
viscosity  time  dependence  (AVTD)  technique  to  study  fine 
changes  in  DNA  conformation  and  DNA-protein  bonds  caused 
by  MMW  exposure.  Multiple  frequency  resonances  were 
established  (Fig  1,  A),  and,  at  a  resonance  frequency, 


*  The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  US  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command  and  the  US  Air  Force 
Research  Laboratory  (AFOSR)  under  US  Army  contract  DAMD17-94-C4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices.  The 
views  expressed  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting  the  official  policy  or  position  of  the 
Department  ^f  the  Army,  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  or  the  United  States  Government  The  authors  greatly  appreciate 
interest  in  the  topic  and  support  of  organizers  of  the  12th  IEEE  International  Pulsed  Power  Conference. 


0-7803-54 98-2/99/$1 0.00©1 999  IEEE. 


23 


biological  changes  could  be  produced  by  field  intensities  as 
low  as  10'19  W/cm2.  The  magnitude  of  changes  gradually 
increased  with  the  field  intensity,  reaching  a  plateau  between 
1017  and  10"8  W/cm2.  The  resonance  fiequencies  shilled  when 
the  haploid  genome  length  of  exposed  cells  was  increased,  thus 
suggesting  that  the  chromosomal  DNA  may  be  a  target  for 
resonance  interaction  between  living  cells  and  MMW.  The 
width  of  the  frequency  resonances  increased  from  units  to  tens 
of  MHz  by  increasing  the  incident  power  density  (Fig.  1,  B), 
which  is  in  remarkable  agreement  with  the  above-mentioned 
independent  findings  [12], 


GHz 


Figure  2.  A,  frequency  dependence  of  MMW  effect  on 
genome  conformational  state  at  10‘10  W/cm2.  B,  gradual 
widening  of  a  "resonance  peak"  at  51.756  GHz  with 
increasing  of  the  radiation  intensity.  Genome 
conformational  state  was  determined  in  lysates  of  bacterial 
cells  (Escherichia  coli )  by  an  anomalous  viscosity  time 
dependence  technique.  Reproduced  with  changes  from  [18], 
by  permission  of  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 

Due  to  the  nature  of  the  biological  experiment,  it  becomes 
increasingly  laborious  to  produce  detailed  frequency  and 
intensity  dependences  of  the  bioeffects  when  working  with 
more  complex  biological  subjects  (i.e.,  when  moving  from 
cells  to  isolated  organs  and  whole  organisms).  Most  of  such 
studies  analyzed  a  limited  number  of  isolated  MMW 
frequencies  and/or  intensities,  or  even  employed  a  single 
frequency  at  a  fixed  intensity.  These  studies  were  focused 


not  as  much  on  the  development  of  the  biological  response 
spectra,  but  rather  on  identifying  specific  MMW  effects  and 
examining  physiological  mechanisms  involved. 

Kataev  and  co-authors  [19]  studied  MMW  effects  on 
transmembrane  currents  in  giant  alga  cells  (Nitellopsis  obtusa, 
Characea).  Exposure  for  30-60  min  at  41  GHz,  5  mW/cm2 
suppressed  the  chloride  current  to  zero  with  no  recovery  for 
10-14  hours.  Marked  inhibitory  effects  were  also  found  at  50 
and  71  GHz,  while  most  of  other  tested  frequencies  enhanced 
the  chloride  current  up  to  200400%  (49,  70,  76  GHz).  This 
activation  was  reversible,  and  recovery  to  the  initial  value  took 
3040  min.  MMW  heating  did  not  exceed  1  °C,  and  neither 
activating  nor  inhibitory  effects  were  related  to,  or  could  be 
explained  by  this  temperature  change. 

Pakhomov  and  co-authors  [20-22]  have  repeatedly 
demonstrated  that  MMW  exposure  of  isolated  frog  sciatic 
nerve  increases  its  ability  to  sustain  a  high  rate  of  electrical 
stimulatioa  Tlie  effect  reached  the  maximum  of  20-25%  at 
41.34  GHz  (Figure  3,  A),  which  was  one  of  the  "resonance 
frequencies"  for  genome  conformation  changes  [15],  A  100- 
MHz  deviation  from  41.34  GHz  (to  41.24  or  41.44  GHz) 
reduced  the  effect  about  twofold,  and  a  200-MHz  deviation 
eliminated  the  effect  At  the  "resonance"  frequency  of  41.34 
GHz,  the  magnitude  of  MMW-induced  changes  was  the  samg 
at  the  radiation  intensities  of  0.02, 0. 1,  and  2.6  mW/cm2 . 


41.14  41.34  41.54 


Figure  3.  MMW  effect  on  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve 
tolerance  to  a  high-rate  stimulation,  as  a  function  of  the 
radiation  frequency  at  a  fixed  intensity  (0.26  mW/cm2). 
Control  data  ("sham"  exposure)  are  shown  by  the  empty 
circle.  The  ability  to  tolerate  the  high-rate  stimulation  (20 
paired  stimuli/sec)  was  measured  from  changes  in  the  peak 
amplitude  of  the  test  compound  action  potential  (At). 
Reproduced  with  changes  from  [21] ,  by  permission  of  Marcel 
Dekker,  Inc. 


24 


Modulation  can  be  another  important  parameter  that  affects 
MMW  biological  effectiveness.  An  unusual  "double¬ 
resonance"  effect  was  described  in  a  Protozoan  Paramecium 
caudatum  [23],  Spontaneous  locomotor  activity  of  individual 
protozoan  cells  was  not  affected  by  irradiation  unless  both  the 
radiation  frequency  and  modulation  were  tuned  to  "resonance" 
values.  These  values  were  42.25  GHz  and  0.0956  Hz,  at  0.5 
duty  ratio.  Under  the  "double  resonance"  conditions,  the 
threshold  field  intensity  was  about  0.02  mW/cm2.  The  effect 
reached  maximum  of  about  20%  at  0. 1  mW/cm2,  and  remained 
at  this  plateau  level  at  intensities  up  to  50  mW/cm2,  despite 
increasing  heat  production  (0. 1-0.2  °C  at  5  mW/cm2).  A 
continuous-wave  (CW)  irradiation,  or  modulation  rates  of  16, 
8, 1, 0.5, 0.25,  or  0.05  Hz  produced  no  effect,  regardless  of  the 
field  intensity  or  heating.  At  the  resonance  modulation 
frequency,  a  shift  of  the  carrying  frequency  to  42.0  or  42.5 
GHz  eliminated  the  response.  Infrared  light  modulated  at 
0.0956  Hz  produced  no  biological  effects  either.  The  authors 
were  unable  to  give  any  reasonable  explanation  to  the  sharp 
resonant  dependence  of  the  MMW  effect  upon  both 
modulation  rate  and  radiation  frequency. 

Most  animal  and  human  studies  with  MMW  exposure 
explored  potential  applicability  and  benefits  of  this  factor 
for  disease  treatment.  Beneficial  effects  of  MMW 
irradiation  include,  primarily,  (1)  anti-inflammatory  effect 
and  stimulation  of  tissue  repair  and  regeneration,  (2) 
stimulation  of  the  immune  function,  and  (3)  sedative  and 
analgesic  effects  [7], 

Zemskov  and  co-authors  [24]  assessed  MMW  effects  on 
healing  of  skin  wounds  in  rabbits.  The  animals  were  randomly 
assigned  to  four  groups;  wounds  in  groups  1  and  2  were  kept 
aseptic,  and  in  groups  3  and  4  were  infected  with  a  pathogenic 
Staphylococcus.  Wound  in  groups  1  and  3  were  irradiated  with 
1  mW/cm2,  37  or  46  GHz  CW  MMW  for  30  min  twice  a  day, 
for  5  days.  Two  remaining  groups  served  as  untreated  controls! 
MMW  decreased  swelling  of  wound  edges,  hyperemia  and 
infiltration,  and  rapidly  reduced  the  wound  area  in  the  fust  24 
hours.  Complete  healing  of  aseptic  wounds  in  the  exposed 
group  took  2.9  days  less  than  in  the  control  group.  Infected 
wound  cleaning  and  granulation  took  14-16  days  in  the 
exposed  group,  and  21-23  days  in  the  respective  control. 

A  similar  protocol  was  used  in  a  double-blind  replicative 
study  by  Korpan  et  al.  [25],  Rabbits  with  septic  or  aseptic 
cutaneous  wounds  were  exposed  for  30  min  a  day  (37  GHz 
CW,  1  mW/cm2).  The  treatment  continued  for  5  days  in  the 
aseptic  group,  and  for  7  days  in  the  septic  one;  control  animals 
underwent  same  courses  of  sham  exposures  from  a  non- 
operational  MMW  transmitter.  The  condition  and  size  of  the 
wounds  were  monitored  for  32  days.  Wound  edge  swelling  and 
hyperemia  subsided  fester  in  MMW-irradiated  animals,  and 
granulation  tissue  filled  the  wound  earlier  than  in  the  controls. 
The  mean  daily  decrease  in  wound  surface  area  was 
significantly  greater  in  the  MMW-treated  animals,  namely 
7.9%  and  6.3%  in  the  aseptic  and  septic  exposed  groups  versus 
3.2%  and  2.7%  in  the  respective  controls  (p<0.05).  The  authors 
concluded  that  MMW  irradiation  enhanced  both  septic  and 
aseptic  wound  healing  and  stimulated  immune  function. 

Rather  unexpectedly,  MMW  promoted  regeneration  of  deep 
tissues,  which  are  not  reachable  by  the  radiation  Kolosova  and 


co-authors  [26]  reported  that  MMW  treatment  facilitated 
regeneration  and  functional  recovery  of  a  damaged  peripheral 
nerve.  The  sciatic  nerve  in  40  rats  was  transected  in  the  thigh 
region  and  sutured.  MMW  exposures  of  the  injury  area  were 
performed^  every  third  day  for  7  or  20  days  (10  min  at  a  time, 
4-mW/cm ,  54-GHz);  control  rats  were  sham  irradiated. 
Exposures  did  not  increase  the  skin  temperature  (0.1  °C 
accuracy).  The  7-day  course  of  exposures  had  little  effect  on 
regeneration,  but  after  the  20-day  course  the  regeneration 
distance  was  significantly  greater  in  MMW  -exposed  animals 
(18.4±0.4  mm)  than  in  sham-exposed  controls  (14.0±1.4  mm, 
p<0.01).  In  an  independent  subsequent  study  [27],  the  same 
irradiations  were  performed  for  two  weeks  after  the  injury,  and 
the  nerve  was  isolated  for  examination  in  5  months.  Indices  of 
regeneration  were  the  compound  action  potential  amplitude 
and  conduction  velocity  at  different  distances  distal  from  the 
nerve  suture.  Both  parameters  were  higher  in  the  exposed 
animals:  For  example,  19  mm  from  the  suture,  the  amplitude 
was  313±34  pV  versus  156±15  pV  in  controls  (p<0.001),  and 
the  velocity  was  20.4±0.9  m/s  versus  15.5±0.9  m/s  (p<0.05). 
The  authors  concluded  that  exposures  facilitated  both  the 
growth  and  functional  maturation  of  nerves.  Since  MMW  did 
not  penetrate  to  the  impaired  nerve,  regeneration  was  affected 
via  some  indirect  mechanism,  such  as  stimulation  of  cellular 
and  humoral  immunity  and  activation  of  neurotrophic  factors. 

Sedative  and  analgesic  effects  of  MMW  were  explored  in 
a  series  of  studies  by  Rojavin  and  co-authors  [28,  29],  In 
mice  anesthetized  by  either  ketamine  or  chloral  hydrate, 
MMW  irradiation  of  the  nasal  area  (61.22  GHz,  15  min  at 
15  mW/cm2)  prolonged  the  drug-induced  sleep  by  up  to 
50%.  This  MMW  effect  could  be  blocked  by  naloxone,  an 
opioid  system  antagonist.  Similar  irradiation  of  mice 
injected  with  a  pruritogenic  agent  (compound  48/80) 
significantly  and  consistently  decreased  the  number  of 
scratches  of  the  injected  site  during  90  min  after  injection 
The  scratching  activity  was  inhibited  by  more  than  twofold 
compared  with  sham-exposed  controls.  Again,  pretreatment 
of  animals  with  naloxone  suppressed  the  anti-pruritic  effect 
of  MMW  in  a  dose-dependent  manner. 

A  logical  extension  of  these  findings  was  a  double-blind 
study  of  MMW  effect  on  acute  pain  tolerance  in  human 
volunteers  [30],  The  lower  third  of  the  sternum  was  exposed 
to  42.25  GHz  MMW  at  25±5  mW/cm2  for  30  min,  or  it  was 
sham-exposed  from  a  non-operational  MMW  transmitter 
(neither  volunteer  nor  experimenter  knew  whether  an 
operational  or  non-operational  transmitter  was  used).  The 
volunteer's  hand  was  then  placed  in  a  bath  with  cold  water 
and  melting  ice  mixture  (liO.5  °C).  Pain  sensitivity  range 
and  tolerance  were  evaluated  from  subjective  sensations  of 
the  volunteer,  and  from  the  time  until  the  pain  became 
intolerable  and  the  hand  was  withdrawn.  Overall,  MMW 
exposure  increased  the  pain  tolerance  by  37.7%  (p<().05).  In 
seven  volunteers  (out  of  twelve),  the  individual  gain  in  pain 
tolerance  ranged  from  120  to  315%.  The.  authors  stated  that 
MMW  therapy  can  potentially  be  used  as  a  supplementary 
or  alternative  treatment  for  pain. 


25 


HI.  CLINICAL  TRIALS  OF  THE 
MILLIMETER  WAVE  THERAPY 

The  first  clinical  trials  of  MMW  therapy  began  in  the  USSR 
in  1977.  Nowadays,  the  method  has  been  officially  recognized 
by  the  Russian  Ministry  of  Health  and  is  used  widely.  It  was 
claimed  that  by  1995  over  3  million  people  received  MMW 
therapy  at  more  than  a  thousand  specialized  centers  as  well  as 
at  regular  hospitals  [3 1], 

The  term  "MMW  therapy"  implies  repetitive  local  exposures 
of  certain  body  areas  to  low-intensity  MMW,  which  can  be 
used  as  a  monotherapy  or  combined  with  other  therapeutic 
procedures  and  drugs.  The  body  area  to  be  exposed,  exposure 
schedule,  regimen,  and  radiation  frequency  are  determined  by 
the  physician  based  on  the  disease  and  the  condition  of  the 
particular  patient.  The  radiation  intensity  is  usually  considered 
as  a  less  important  variable.  For  most  diseases,  the  daily 
exposure  varies  from  15  to  60  min,  and  the  therapy  lasts  for  8- 
15  days. 

Publications  on  the  clinical  use  of  MMW  are  counted  by 
hundreds.  While  many  of  these  reports  were  flawed  in  one 
way  or  another,  still  others  were  not  and  involved  all 
necessary  attributes,  such  as  placebo  control  and  double¬ 
blind  protocol,  and  a  lot  of  matching  results  have  been 
provided  by  independent  groups  of  investigators.  Many  authors 
have  claimed  that  MMW  monotherapy  was  more  effective 
than  conventional  drug  therapy.  At  the  same  time,  MMW 
seldom  caused  any  adverse  effects  or  allergies.  MMW  in 
combination  with  drug  therapy  facilitated  favorable  effects 
and/or  reduced  adverse  side  effects  of  drugs. 

The  most  common  applications  of  MMW  are  for  gastric  and 
duodenal  ulcers,  cardiovascular  diseases,  (angina  pectoris, 
hypertension,  ischemic  heart  disease,  infarction)  respiratory 
sicknesses  (tuberculosis,  sarcoidosis,  bronchitis,  asthma),  and 
skin  diseases  (wounds,  trophic  ulcers,  bums,  atopic  dermatitis). 
Isolated  studies  claimed  successful  MMW  treatment  for 
asthenia,  neuralgia,  diabetes,  osteochondrosis,  acute  viral 
hepatitis,  glomerulonephritis,  alcoholism,  etc.  MMW  were  also 
used  for  alleviation  of  toxic  effects  of  chemotherapy  in  cancer 
patients,  and  in  preventive  medicine  and  health  resort  therapy. 

In  most  cases,  physicians  use  specialized  MMW  generators, 
which  are  produced  commercially  by  the  medical  equipment 
industry.  Because  of  the  high  demand,  there  are  now  more  than 
100  models  of  medical  MMW  generators  on  the  market  in  the 
former  USSR  and  some  other  European  countries  [7],  The 
most  commonly  used  frequencies  are  42.19  and  53.53  GHz, 
and  59-63  GHz  band  (7.1-,  5.6-,  and  4.9-mm  wavelengths). 
Alternatively,  the  practitioner  may  select  an  effective 
frequency  for  each  patient  based  on  this  patient's  individual 
sensitivity  (so-called  "microwave  resonance  therapy"  [32]). 
The  radiation  intensity  usually  is  about  10  mW/cm  ,  but  can 
be  as  low  as  several  pW/cm2.  MMW  radiation  can  be  applied 
to  biologically-active  or  acupuncture  points,  sternum  and 
xiphoid  process,  skin  projection  of  a  diseased  organ,  large 
joints  and  tender  zones. 

With  all  the  variety  of  exposure  techniques  and  protocols 
currently  in  use  by  medical  practitioners,  there  is  little  rationale 
or  guidance  why  would  particular  techniques  and  protocols  be 
preferred  over  the  others.  Mechanisms  of  the  MMW  therapy 


are  not  understood,  and  its  use  remains  predominantly 
empirical. 

The  format  of  this  paper  allows  us  to  exemplify  only  several 
clinical  studies  with  MMW  therapy.  More  information  on  the 
subject  can  be  found  in  other  reviews  [7, 8], 

Poslavsky  et  al.  [33]  used  MMW  as  a  monotherapy  in  317 
patients  with  gastric  and  duodenal  ulcers.  The  disease  duration 
was  from  several  months  to  more  than  10  years,  and  the  ulcer 
defect  diameter  ranged  from  0.3  to  3.5  cm.  The  epigastric  area 
was  exposed  at  10  mW/cm2,  53.53  GHz,  for  30  min  daily 
excluding  weekends,  until  complete  ulcer  healing.  A 
comparable  control  group  of  50  patients  received  conventional 
drug  therapy.  The  ulcers  cicatrized  in  95.3%  of  MMW-treated 
patients,  with  mean  healing  duration  of  19.8  ±  0.45  days. 
Results  in  the  control  group  were  substantially  worse,  namely 
78%  and  33.6  ±  1.12  days,  respectively.  The  ulcer  relapse  rate 
was  also  significantly  lower  after  the  MMW  therapy. 

Korpan  and  Saradeth  [34]  used  MMW  therapy  to  assist 
healing  of  postoperative  septic  wounds.  This  double-blind 
controlled  trial  included  141  patients,  31-  to  83-year  old,  with 
purulent  wounds  after  an  abdominal  surgery.  MMW  therapy 
with  1-mW/cm2,  37-GHz  radiation  was  performed  in  71 
patients.  Wound  surface  and  adjacent  tissues  were  exposed  for 
30  min/day  for  7  days.  The  remaining  70  patients  received 
placebo  therapy  from  a  similar  but  defective  MMW  generator 
(neither  patients  nor  physicians  knew  it  was  defective).  Radical 
surgical  cleaning  of  the  wounds  was  performed  regularly  in 
both  groups.  The  MMW-treated  patients  showed  1.8  times 
more  rapid  wound  clearance  (5.6  ±  0.6  versus  10.2  ±  0.5  days 
in  controls),  wound  granulation  and  epithelization  also  began 
substantially  earlier.  The  mean  daily  decrease  of  wound 
surface  area  in  the  treated  patients  was  twice  that  of  the 
controls  (7.1%  versus  3.2%),  and,  on  the  average,  the  MMW- 
treated  patients  were  discharged  from  the  hospital  8.9  days 
earlier. 

Novikova  et  al.  [35]  included  MMW  in  a  complex  therapy 
for  pulmonary  tuberculosis.  Fifty  patients  received  drug 
therapy  only,  and  86  patients  were  additionally  treated  with 
MMW.  Exposures  of  the  thymus  projection  area  at  6.4-  or  7. 1- 
mm  wavelength  lasted  for  40  or  60  min/day  for  10  days. 
MMW  facilitated  recovery,  particularly  in  patients  with  newly 
developed  disease.  Resolution  of  infiltrations  and  closure  of 
caverns  in  70%  of  these  patients  occurred  within  one  month  of 
treatment  In  the  control  group,  infiltrations  resolved  in  about 
two  months  and  caverns  closed  in  3-4  months.  The  clearance 
of  tuberculosis  bacteria  was  achieved  in  two  months  in  50%  of 
the  exposed  group,  but  in  only  29%  of  the  controls. 

In  a  similar  study  [36]  with  54  pulmonary  tuberculosis 
patients,  the  caverns  closed  in  50%  of  the  exposed  group 
during  the  2nd  and  the  3rd  months  of  treatment,  while  in 
controls  it  always  took  more  than  3  months.  Resolution  of 
infiltrations  occurred  within  2  weeks  in  70%  of  the  exposed 
group,  but  always  took  more  than  one  month  in  controls. 
However,  clearance  of  tuberculosis  bacteria  was  apparently 
unaffected  by  the  MMW  course. 

Babov  et  al.  [37]  studied  the  efficacy  of  MMW  (59-63  GHz, 
7  mW/cm2)  in  the  rehabilitation  of  patients  after  myocardial 
infarction.  The  course  of  MMW  therapy  started  15-20  days 
after  the  infarction  and  consisted  of  15  exposures  of  the  cardiac 


26 


area  for  15  min/day.  Eighty  six  patients  were  treated  with 
MMW  and  80  patients  received  placebo.  MMW  significantly 
facilitated  tissue  repair  in  the  group  with  the  eukinetic  type  of 
circulation.  Cardiac  muscle  repolarization  improved  in  100% 
of  the  MMW-treated  patients  and  in  48.8%  of  placebo 
controls;  physical  endurance  increased  by  25.8  ±  2.2  W  and 
18.7  ±  1.8  W,  respectively.  MMW,  but  not  placebo,  improved 
microcirculation  and  ventricular  contraction,  and  stimulated 
cicatrization  and  collagen  formation.  The  MMW  effect  was 
weaker  in  patients  with  hyperkinetic  circulation  and  negligible 
in  those  with  the  hypokinetic  circulation.  Results  of  the  study 
suggested  that,  in  the  case  of  eukinetic  circulation,  MMW  can 
be  employed  even  as  a  monotherapy. 

The  efficacy  of  the  MMW  therapy  is  often  illustrated  by 
individual  clinical  cases,  and  some  of  them  are  quite 
impressive.  Naumcheva  [38]  described  the  disease  history  of  a 
54-year  old  male,  who  had  two  myocardial  infarctions  within  a 
2-year  interval.  He  suffered  severe  attacks  of  angina  both  on 
exertion  and  at  rest  and  took  up  to  80  nitroglycerin  tablets  a 
day  (0.4  mg).  Repeated  courses  of  in-  and  outpatient  therapy 
with  modem  drugs,  physical  therapy,  etc.  had  little  effect. 
Finally,  the  patient  was  taken  to  a  hospital  in  a  grave  condition 
with  a  third  infarction.  Conventional  therapy  methods  have 
proved  to  be  ineffective,  so  it  was  decided  to  try  MMW 
therapy.  MMW  exposures  began  on  day  10  after  admission 
(7.1-mm  wavelength,  for  30  min/day  to  the  left  border  of 
sternum).  Chest  pains  decreased  after  two  exposures  and 
nighttime  pain  attacks  ceased  after  seven  procedures.  The 
nitroglycerin  intake  was  decreased  to  1-2  tablets/day  after  12 
exposures.  After  the  entire  MMW  course,  the  patient  did  not 
have  angina  attacks  for  34  days,  was  able  to  walk  up  to  5  km  a 
day,  and  was  discharged  in  a  satisfactory  condition.  Another 
man,  age  62,  was  hospitalized  with  a  severe  macrofocal 
infarction,  collapse,  extrasystolia,  and  acute  insufficiency  and 
aneurysm  of  the  left  ventricle.  Three  days  of  intensive 
treatment  still  left  the  patient  in  this  critical  condition.  Even  the 
first  MMW  irradiation  of  sternum  (53.53  GHz,  three  10-min 
exposures  with  5-min  intervals)  arrested  pains  and  normalized 
sleep;  hemodynamics  stabilized  within  the  next  5  days.  The 
patient  was  discharged  in  a  satisfactory  condition  and  later  took 
two  additional  MMW  courses  as  a  preventive  measure. 


IV.  SUMMARY 

At  present  time,  development  of  MMW  technologies  is 
driven  predominantly  by  various  industrial  and  military 
applications.  However,  there  is  another  lesser  known,  but 
rapidly  developing  and  promising  area  of  MMW 
biomedical  applications.  Numerous  studies  point  to  the 
specific  ability  of  MMW  to  affect  and  modify  various 
biological  functions,  many  of  those  being  of  great 
importance  for  human  organism  function.  More  than  20- 
year  experience  with  MMW  therapy  in  countries  of  the 
former  Soviet  Union  has  yielded  encouraging  results  in  a 
broad  spectrum  of  diseases.  Today,  MMW  therapy  gains 
recognition  in  Europe  (Bulgaria,  Germany),  and  its  first 
clinical  trials  are  in  progress  in  the  United  States  (Temple 
University,  PA).  A  cooperative  effort  of  biological, 


physical,  and  engineering  communities  in  understanding 
physical  and  physiological  mechanisms  of  MMW  bioeffects 
could  greatly  promote  wider  recognition  and  use  of  the 
MMW  therapy. 


V.  REFERENCES 

[1]  H.  Frohlich,  "The  biological  effects  of  microwaves 
and  related  questions,"  Adv.  Electronics  Electron. 
Phys.,  vol.  53,  pp.  85-152,  1980. 

[2]  H.  Frohlich  (ed),  Biological  coherence  and  response 
to  external  stimuli.  Berlin:  Springer- Verlag,  1988. 

[3]  O.  P.  Gandhi,  "Some  basic  properties  of  biological 
tissues  for  potential  biomedical  applications  of 
millimeter-waves,"  J.  Microwave  Power,  vol.  18,  pp. 
295-304,  1983. 

[4]  W.  Grundler,  "Biological  effects  of  RF  and  MW 
energy  at  molecular  and  cellular  level,"  in  Biological 
Effects  and  Dosimetry  of  Nonionizing  Radiation. 
Radiofrequency  and  Microwave  Energies,  A.  Rindi, 
M.  Grandolfo,  and  S.  M.  Michaelson,  Eds.  New  York: 
Plenum  Press,  1983,  pp  299-318. 

[5]  E.  Postow  and  M.  L  Swicord,  "Modulated  fields  and 
"window"  effects,"  in  Handbook  of  Biological  Effects 
of  Electromagnetic  Fields,  C.  Polk,  and  E.  Postow, 
Eds.  Boca  Raton,  FL:  CRC  Press,  Inc.,  1986,  pp.  425- 
460. 

[6]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  "Some  biophysical  aspects  of  the 
genetic  effect  of  low-intensity  millimeter  waves," 
Bioelectrochem.  Bioenerg.,  vol.  27,  pp.  11-18, 1992. 

[7]  M.  A  Rojavin  and  M  C.  Ziskin,  "Medical  application 
of  millimetre  waves,"  Q.  J.  Med.,  vol.  91,  pp.  57-66, 
1998. 

[8]  A.  G.  Pakhomov,  Y.  Akyel,  O.  N.  Pakhomova,  B.  E. 
Stuck,  and  M.  R  Murphy,  "Current  state  and 
implications  of  research  on  biological  effects  of 
millimeter  waves:  a  review  of  literature," 
Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  19,  pp.  393413, 1998. 

[9]  W.  Grundler,  F.  Keilman,  and  H.  Froehlich,  "Resonant 
growth  rate  response  of  yeast  cells  irradiated  by  weak 
microwaves,"  Phys.  Letters,  vol.  62A,  pp.  463466, 
1977. 

[10]  W.  Grundler,  F.  Keilman,  V.  Putterlik,  and  D  Strube, 
"Resonant-like  dependence  of  yeast  growth  rate  on 
microwave  frequencies,"  Br.  J.  Cancer,  vol.  45,  pp. 
206-208,  1982. 

[11]  W.  Grundler,  U.  Jentzsch,  F.  Keilmann,  and  V. 
Putterlik,  "Resonant  cellular  effects  of  low  intensity 
microwave,"  in  Biological  Coherence  and  Response  to 
External  Stimuli,  H.  Frohlich,  Ed.  Berlin:  Springer- 
Verlagn,  1988,  pp  65-85. 

[12]  W.  Grundler  and  F.  Kaiser,  "Experimental  evidence 
for  coherent  excitations  correlated  with  growth," 
Nanobiology,  vol.  1,  pp.  163-176, 1992. 

[13]  L.  Furia,  D.  W.  Hill,  and  O.  P.  Gandhi,  "Effect  of 
millimeter-wave  irradiation  on  growth  of 
Saccharomyces  cerevisiae,"  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed. 
Eng.,  vol.  33,  pp.  993-999,  1986. 


27 


[14]  P.  Gos,  B.  Eicher,  J.  Kohli,  and  W.-D.  Heyer, 
"Extremely  high  frequency  electromagnetic  fields  at 
low  power  density  do  not  affect  the  division  of 
exponential  phase  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  cells," 
Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  18,  pp.  142-155, 1997. 

[15]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y.  D.  Alipov,  V.  A.  Polunin,  and  V.  S. 
Shcheglov,  "Evidence  for  dependence  of  resonant 
frequency  of  millimeter  wave  interaction  with 
Escherichia  coli  K12  cells  on  haploid  genome  length," 
Electro-  and  Magnetobiol.,  vol.  12,  pp.  3949, 1993. 

[16]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y  .D.  Shcheglov,  V.  A.,  Alipov,  and  S. 

P.  Radko,  "Regularities  of  separate  and  combined 
effects  of  circularly  polarized  millimeter  waves  on  E. 
coli  cells  at  different  phases  of  culture  growth," 
Bioelectrochem.  Bioenerg.,  vol  31,  pp.  49-63, 1993. 

[17]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y  .D.  Shcheglov,  V.  A.,  Alipov,  V.  S. 
Polunin  and  O.  A.  Aizenberg,  "Cooperative  response 
of  Escherichia  coli  to  the  resonance  effect  of 
millimeter  waves  at  super  low  intensity,"  Electro-  and 
Magnetobiol.,  vol.  13,  pp.  53-66, 1994. 

[18]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y  .D.  Shcheglov,  V.  A.,  Alipov,  and 
V.  S.  Polunin,  "Resonance  effect  of  millimeter  waves 
in  the  power  range  from  10'19  to  3  x  10’3  W/cm2  on 
Escherichia  coli  cells  at  different  concentrations," 
Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  17,  pp.  312-321, 19%. 

[19]  A.  A.  Kataev,  A.  A.  Alexandrov,  L.  L.  Tikhonova,  and 
G.  N.  Berestovsky,  "Frequency-dependent  effects  of 
the  electromagnetic  millimeter  waves  on  the  ion 
currents  in  the  cell  membrane  of  Nitellopsis: 
nonthermal  action,"  Biofizika,  vol.  38,  pp.  446-462, 
1993. 

[20]  A.  G.  Pakhomov,  H.  K.  Prol,  S.  P.  Mathur,  Y.  Akyel, 
and  C.  B.  G.  Campbell,  "Search  for  frequency-specific 
effects  of  millimeter-wave  radiation  on  isolated  nerve 
function,"  Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  18,  pp.  324-334, 
1997. 

[21]  A.  G.  Pakhomov,  H.  K.  Prol,  S.  P.  Mathur,  Y.  Akyel, 
and  C.  B.  G.  Campbell,  "Frequency-specific  effects  of 
millimeter  wavelength  electromagnetic  radiation  in 
isolated  nerve,"  Electro-  and  Magnetobiol.,  vol.  16,  pp. 
43-57,  1997. 

[22]  A.  G.  Pakhomov,  H.  K.  Prol,  S.  P.  Mathur,  Y.  Akyel, 
and  C.  B.  G.  Campbell,  "Role  of  field  intensity  in  the 
biological  effectiveness  of  millimeter  waves  at  a 
resonance  frequency,"  Bioelectrochem.  Bioenerg.,  vol. 
43,  pp.  27-33, 1997. 

[23]  A.  B.  Gapeev,  N.  K.  Chemeris,  E.  E.  Fesenko,  and  R. 
N.  Khramov,  "Resonance  effects  of  a  low-intensity 
modulated  EHF  field.  Alteration  of  the  locomotor 
activity  of  the  protozoa  Paramecium  caudatum," 
Biofizika,  vol.  39,  pp.  74-82, 1994. 

[24]  V.  S.  Zemskov,  N.  N.  Korpan,  la.  I.  Khokhlich,  V.  A. 
Pavlenko,  L.  S.  Nazarenko,  A.  I.  Koval'chuk,  and  la  I. 
Stefanishin,  "Effect  of  millimeter-band  low  intensity 
electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  course  of  wound 
healing,"  Klin.  Khir.,  vol.  1,  pp.  31-33, 1988. 

[25]  N.  N.  Korpan,  K.-L.  Resch,  and  P.  Kokoschinegg, 
"Continuous  microwave  enhances  the  healing  process 
of  septic  and  aseptic  wounds  in  rabbits,"  J.  Surg.  Res., 

28 


vol.  57,  pp.  667-671,  1994. 

[26]  L.  I.  Kolosova,  G.  N.  Akoev,  V.  D.  Avelev,  O.  V. 
Riabchikova,  and  K.  S.  Babu,  "Effect  of  low-intensity 
millimeter  wave  electromagnetic  radiation  on 
regeneration  of  the  sciatic  nerve  in  rats," 
Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  17,  pp.  44-47, 1996. 

[27]  L.  I.  Kolosova,  G.  N.  Akoev,.  O.  V.  Riabchikova,  and 
V.  D.  Avelev,  "The  effect  of  low-intensity  millimeter- 
range  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  functional 
recovery  of  the  damaged  sciatic  nerve  in  rat,"  Fiziol. 
Zh.  Im.  I.  M.  Sechenova,  vol.  82,  pp.  85-90, 1996. 

[28]  M.  A  Rojavin  and  M.  C.  Ziskin,  "Anaesthesia  caused 
by  ketamine  and  chloral  hydrate  in  mice,"  Int.  J. 
Radiat  Biol.,  vol.  72,  pp.  475-480, 1997. 

[29]  M.  A.  Rojavin,  A.  Cowan,  A.  A.  Radzievsky,  and  M 
C.  Ziskin,  "Antipruritic  effect  of  millimeter  waves  in 
mice,"  Pharmacol.  Letters,  vol.  63,  pp.  PL  251-257, 
1998. 

[30]  A.  A.  Radzievsky,  M.  A.  Rojavin,  A.  Cowan, ,  and  M. 
C.  Ziskin,  "Suppression  of  pain  sensation  caused  by 
millimeter  waves:  a  double  blind,  crossover, 
prospective  human  volunteer  study,"  Anesthesia  and 
Analgesia,  1999  (in  press). 

[31]  N.  N.  Lebedeva  and  O.  V.  Betskii,  "Application  of  low 
intensity  millimeter  waves  in  medicine,"  in  Abstracts 
of  the  17th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society,  Boston,  MA:  June,  1995,  p.  141. 

[32]  S.  R.  Danilenko,  "Efficacy  of  the  use  of  extremely- 
high-frequency  electromagnetic  field  in  the  complex 
therapy  of  chronic  bronchitis  patients,"  Vopr. 
Kurortol.  Fizioter.  Lech.  Fiz.  Kult.,  vol.  6,  pp.  16-18, 
1997. 

[33]  M.  V.  Poslavsky,  I.  M.  Korochkin,  O.  F.  Zdanovich, 
"Experience  with  application  of  millimeter-range 
radiation  for  treatment  and  prophylactics  of  stomach 
and  duodenal  ulcer,"  Vopr.  Kurortol.  Fizioter.  Lech. 
Fiz.  Kult.,  vol.  4,  pp.  31-36, 1989. 

[34]  N.  N.  Korpan  and  T.  Saradeth,  "Clinical  effects  of 
continuous  microwave  for  postoperative  septic  wound 
treatment:  a  double-blind  controlled  trial,"  Am.  J. 
Surg.,  vol.  170,  pp.  271-276, 1995. 

[35]  L.  N.  Novikova,  G.  O.  Kaminskaia,  and  L.  N. 
Efimova,  "Significance  of  the  functional  state  of  blood 
phagocytes  in  the  choice  of  optimal  regime  of  EHF 
therapy  of  patients  with  pulmonary  tuberculosis," 
Probl.  Tuberk.,  vol.  6,  pp.  17-20, 1995. 

[36]  A.  G.  Khomenko,  V.  I.  Chukanov,  and  L.  N. 
Novikova,  "Effectiveness  of  chemotherapy  combined 
with  ultrahigh-frequency  electromagnetic  radiation  for 
the  treatment  of  patients  with  pulmonary  tuberculosis," 
Probl.  Tuberk.,  vol.  4,  pp.  24, 1994. 

[37]  K  .D.  Babov,  S.  A.  Novikov,  and  L.  E.  Mikhno, 
"Effect  of  electromagnetic  waves  with  59-63  GHz 
frequency  on  myocardial  infarct  patients  in  the 
subacute  stage,"  Vopr.  Kurortol.  Fizioter.  Lech.  Fiz. 
Kult.,  vol.  6,  pp.  10-13,  1993. 

[38]  N.  N.  Naumcheva,  "Effect  of  millimeter  waves  on 
ischemic  heart  disease  patients,"  Millimetrovie  Volni  v 
Biologii  i  Meditcine,  vol.  3,  pp.  62-67,  1994. 


HIGH-RESOLUTION  MICROWAVE  DOSIMETRY  IN  LOSSY  MEDIA 


A.  G.  PAKHOMOV1'2,  S.  P.  MATHUR1,  Y.  AKYEL1,  J.  L.  KIEL2  and 
M.  R.  MURPHY2 

'McKesson  BioServices,  US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment  and 
2 Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate, 
Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio, 
Texas,  78235-5324,  USA 


1.  Introduction 

Measurement  of  the  local  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  in  microwave-exposed 
specimens  is  a  necessary  task  in  a  variety  of  bioelectromagnetic  studies.  Numerical 
techniques,  such  as  finite-difference  time-domain  (FDTD)  modeling,  are  widely  used  to 
evaluate  local  SAR  and  its  distribution  [1].  This  modeling  is  laborious  and  expensive, 
and  involves  certain  approximations  of  the  spatial  organization  of  exposed  subjects  and 
their  dielectric  properties.  Since  these  approximations  introduce  an  error  into  SAR 
predictions,  the  accuracy  of  the  method  may  be  difficult  to  assess. 

A  precise  instrumental  technique  of  local  SAR  measurement  in  absorptive  media  could 
be  an  alternative  to  numerical  modeling  and  could  also  be  employed  to  verify  FDTD 
predictions.  While  measurement  of  local  heating  dynamics  under  microwave  exposure 
is  a  standard  approach  to  establish  SAR,  common  thermometry  techniques  have 
substantial  limitations  [2].  The  accuracy  of  thermometry  relies  on  several  conditions, 
including  possible  field  distortion  by  a  probe,  the  probe's  size,  heat  capacity,  and 
response  time. 

A  few  non-field-perturbing  devices  available  on  the  market  (devices  with  non- 
metallic  probes,  such  as  fluoroptic  thermometers)  tend  to  be  slow  and  noisy.  In  a 
Luxtron  850  fluoroptic  thermometer,  for  example,  the  measurement  rate  is  limited  to  30 
samples/sec,  and,  at  this  rate,  sequential  measurements  of  a  constant  temperature  may 
vary  by  as  much  as  0.5-1  °C.  Averaging  of  sequential  measurements  reduces  the 
"noise”,  but  also  reduces  the  temporal  resolution,  so  a  fast  heating  cannot  be  recorded 
correctly.  Besides,  these  thermometers  cannot  be  used  to  detect  temperature  fluctuations 
over  small  distances  of  1-2  mm,  which  are  comparable  with  the  size  of  the  measuring 
probe  itself. 

The  possibility  of  using  thermometers  with  metal-containing  probes  (e.g.,  thermistors 
and  thermocouples)  for  microwave  dosimetry  remains  in  question.  Such  probes  may 
cause  field  distortion,  and  electric  currents  induced  in  the  probe  and  wires  may  result  in 
erroneous  temperature  readings  and  excessive  heating  of  the  probe  itself.  However, 
these  artifacts  should  decrease  with  decreasing  the  dimensions  of  the  probe  and  wires; 

187 

B.J.  Kiauenberg  and  D.  Miklavcic  (eds.),  Radio  Frequency  Radiation  Dosimetry,  187-197. 

©  2000  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers.  Printed  in  the  Netherlands. 


188 


at  some  point,  the  artifacts  may  become  negligible.  Other  advantages  of  miniaturization 
are  decreasing  of  the  probe’s  heat  capacity  and  improvement  of  its  spatial  and  temporal 
resolution. 

In  this  study,  we  have  analyzed  the  performance  of  a  microthermocouple  (MTC) 
under  most  "unfavorable"  exposure  conditions  (very  steep  field  gradients  produced  by 
extremely-high  peak  power  microwave  pulses).  It  was  shown  that  the  dynamics  of 
microwave  heating  recorded  by  the  MTC  is  qualitatively  different  from  the  dynamics 
recorded  by  larger  probes.  Due  to  its  exceptionally  fast  response  and  high  sensitivity, 
MTC  was  capable  of  recording  a  temperature  plateau  after  a  microwave  pulse  or  a  brief 
train  of  pulses.  The  level  of  this  plateau  was  linearly  proportional  to  the  local  specific 
absorbed  dose  (SAD).  Calculation  of  SAR  from  the  initial  slope  of  the  heating  curve 
was  not  possible  because  of  its  contamination  with  recording  artifacts;  at  the  same  time, 
SAR  could  be  precisely  calculated  from  SAD  and  known  duration  of  microwave 
pulse(s).  The  recording  artifacts  and  possible  field  distortion  by  the  MTC  were  shown 
to  have  no  effect  on  SAD  or  SAR  measurements. 


2.  Exposure  Setup 

Square  microwave  pulses  (9.5  GHz,  1  ps  width,  75-115  kW)  were  produced  by  an 
EPSCO  Model  MH300  system  with  an  MF-IM65-01  RF  plug-in  into  a  WR90 
waveguide  (22.86  x  10.16  mm).  Incident  and  reflected  powers  in  the  waveguide  were 
measured  via  directional  couplers  by  a  dual-channel  HP  43  8 A  power  meter  with  HP 
8481 A  power  sensors.  Microwave  pulses  or  pulse  trains  were  triggered  externally  from 
a  Grass  Instruments  S8800  stimulator.  The  shape  of  microwave  pulses  was  monitored 
via  an  HP  432  detector  on  a  TEK  2430A  digital  oscilloscope. 

The  design  of  the  exposure  cell  was  similar  to  the  one  proposed  by  Chou  and  Guy 
[3].  A  vertical  section  at  the  end  of  the  waveguide  was  separated  by  a  quarter- wave 
matching  plate  and  filled  with  6  ml  of  a  physiological  solution.  The  waveguide  walls  in 
the  cell  were  covered  with  a  lacquer  to  prevent  its  electrical  contact  with  the  solution. 
Complex  dielectric  constant  of  this  solution  at  9.5  GHz  and  at  various  temperatures  was 
calculated  by  equations  given  by  Stogryn  [4].  With  the  solution  normality  of  0.12-0.14, 
its  relative  permittivity  (er)  and  conductivity  (a)  at  25  °C  were  calculated  as  63.4  and 
15.9  S/m,  respectively.  To  verify  the  calculations,  the  dielectric  properties  of  the 
solution  were  also  obtained  experimentally  using  an  HP  8510  measurement  system  (see 
[5]  for  detailed  procedures).  Measured  values  (er  =  63,  a  =  16  S/m)  were  virtually  the 
same  as  the  calculated  ones.  The  respective  linear  loss  coefficient  of  the  solution  was 
3.71  Np/cm. 

SAR  in  the  solution  along  the  axis  of  the  waveguide  decreased  exponentially  with 
increasing  the  distance  above  the  matching  plate,  and  could  be  calculated  according  to 
[3]  as: 


SAR  ■  (1/p)  2  2ae~2otz  (w/g) 


(1) 


189 


where  p  is  the  saline  density  (g/cm3).  P*  and  Pr  are  the  incident  and  reflected  power 
values  (W;  their  difference  will  be  regarded  below  as  a  "transmitted  power"),  S  is  the 
cross-section  of  the  waveguide  (2.32  cm2),  a  is  the  linear  loss  coefficient  in  the  saline 
(Np/cm),  and  z  is  the  distance  above  the  matching  plate  (cm).  Based  on  this  equation,  a 
power  of  100  kW  transmitted  to  the  exposure  cell  would  produce  SAR  values  of  610, 
304,  145,  and  69  kW/g  at  the  distances  of  at  0,  1,  2,  and  3  mm  above  the  plate, 
respectively  (at  9.5  GHz  and  25  °C).  In  other  words,  SAR  in  the  saline  would  decrease 
by  approximately  twofold  per  millimeter.  Obviously,  measurement  of  local  SAR  from 
heating  dynamics  in  such  a  steep  gradient  makes  it  imperative  to  use  temperature  probes 
much  smaller  than  1  mm. 

In  some  experiments,  we  also  used  relatively  low  power,  longer  microwave  pulses 
(10-100  ms,  5-10  W,  9.5  GHz).  These  pulses  were  produced  by  an  HP  8690A  Sweep 
Oscillator  connected  via  a  Hughes  8020H  Traveling  Wave  Tube  Amplifier  to  the  same 
waveguide  exposure  system. 


3,  Microthermocouple  and  Temperature  Recording 

MTCs  made  of  25-p,m  diameter  bare  copper  and  constantan  wires  was  purchased  from 
Omega  Engineering,  Inc.  For  convenient  handling,  MTC  was  fixed  in  a  custom-made 
holder.  Bare  wires  ending  with  the  thermocouple  junction  extended  from  the  holder  by 
about  3  mm;  they  were  covered  with  a  lacquer  for  electrical  insulation  from  saline.  The 
lacquer  coating  was  made  as  thin  as  technically  achievable,  under  a  visual  control  using 
a  microscope. 

The  MTC  was  precisely  positioned  in  the  exposure  cell  by  means  of  a 
micromanipulator.  The  accuracy  of  the  micromanipulator  movement  was  0.05  mm  in 
any  orthogonal  direction. 

MTC  signal  was  recorded  by  a  BIOP  AC  MP100  data  acquisition  system  via  a 
universal  DC  amplifier  (Gould  5900  frame).  The  higher  cutoff  frequency  of  the 
amplifier  in  most  experiments  was  set  at  1  or  10  kHz.  The  entire  system  (MTC  + 
amplifier  +  MP100)  was  calibrated  against  a  precision  mercury  thermometer.  Within 
studied  range  of  temperatures  and  achievable  accuracy,  the  system  response  was 
linearly  proportional  to  the  temperature. 

In  most  experiments,  acquisition  of  the  signal  from  MTC  began  shortly  (10-50  ms) 
before  the  microwave  pulse  train,  and  ended  some  period  after  the  train  was  over. 
Records  of  temperature  changes  produced  by  repeated  pulses  or  pulse  trains  could  be 
averaged,  that  substantially  decreased  the  noise.  The  accuracy  of  temperature  readings 
was  about  0.05  °C  without  signal  averaging  and  better  than  0.01  °C  after  averaging. 
This  accuracy  could  be  further  increased  by  measuring  mean  temperature  over  5-50  ms 
periods  (when  the  temperature  of  the  medium  was  constant). 

One  should  note  that  the  above  numbers  apply  only  to  "relative"  temperatures,  or 
temperature  changes  within  relatively  short  periods  of  time  (10'2-103  s).  The  absolute 


190 


temperature  of  the  medium  could  only  be  measured  using  two  thermocouples,  one  of 
them  rendered  as  a  reference  and  kept  at  a  known  constant  temperature  [6],  For  the 
purpose  of  SAR  measurement,  knowing  the  exact  absolute  temperature  was  not 
essential,  so  the  reference  thermocouple  was  not  used  in  our  experiments. 

In  some  experiments,  temperature  in  the  exposure  cell  was  simultaneously  recorded 
by  the  MTC  and  a  Luxtron  850  Multichannel  Fluoroptic  Thermometer. 

4.  Results  and  Discussion 

In  the  first  series  of  experiments,  we  obtained  simultaneous  records  of  microwave 
heating  by  MTC  and  by  a  "recognized"  artifact-free  thermometer,  Luxtron  850.  MTC 
junction  was  put  either  in  contact  with  the  fluoroptic  probe,  or  0.2-0.4  mm  apart.  A 
sample  record  is  shown  in  the  Figure  1:  At  any  transmitted  power  (which,  in  the  shown 
case,  was  proportional  to  the  pulse  repetition  rate),  both  the  probes  recorded  the  same 
heating  dynamics.  These  data  established  the  general  possibility  of  using  MTC  under 
microwave  irradiation,  and  also  confirmed  MTC  calibration. 


Figure  L  Parallel  recording  of  microwave  heating  by  a  fluoroptic  probe  (Luxtron  850  thermometer,  upper 
trace)  and  by  a  microthermocouple  (MTC,  middle  trace).  The  probes  are  in  contact  with  each  other  at  the 
bottom  of  the  exposure  cell.  The  lower  trace  is  the  average  transmitted  power,  which  is  proportional  to  the 
pulse  repetition  rate  (p.p.s.). 

Such  similarity  of  MTC  and  Luxtron  recordings  as  shown  in  Figure  1  was  only 
possible  at  slow  recording  rates  and  long  exposures  (minutes)  at  a  relatively  low 
average  transmitted  power.  Slow  recording  conceals  much  faster  response  time  of  the 


191 


MTC,  and,  at  a  low  average  power,  allows  enough  time  for  temperature  equilibration 
between  neighboring  spots  with  different  local  SAR.  Additional  peaks  on  the  heating 
curves  (particularly  noticeable  at  20  and  40  p.p.s.)  resulted  from  liquid  convection  in 
the  exposure  cell.  Such  peaks  disappeared  entirely  when  the  saline  was  solidified  with  a 
1%  agar-agar,  and  heating  curves  attained  a  "classic"  appearance. 

If  the  presence  of  the  MTC  in  the  exposed  medium  caused  field  distortion  and 
altered  microwave  heating,  then  the  Luxtron  thermometer  readings  would  depend  on 
the  presence  of  the  MTC  next  to  the  fluoroptic  probe.  Experiments  showed  that  this  was 
not  the  case:  Luxtron-recorded  heating  curves  in  response  to  identical  exposures  were 
the  same  with  MTC  positioned  next  to  the  fluoroptic  probe,  MTC  removed  from  the 
solution,  and  also  after  returning  MTC  back  into  the  original  position. 

However,  the  fluoroptic  probe  might  be  too  slow  and  bulky  to  detect  fine  alterations 
of  the  field  and  heating  pattern  introduced  by  the  MTC.  Therefore,  we  performed  more 
accurate  experiments,  in  which  the  MTC-recorded  heating  curves  served  as  "self- 
control"  (Figure  2).  The  micromanipulator  that  we  used  for  MTC  positioning  had  an 
option  to  lift  the  MTC  and  then  slide  it  momentarily  down  to  the  exact  original  position. 
The  upper  heating  curve  in  Figure  2  was  recorded  when  the  MTC  was  permanently  kept 
at  the  bottom  of  the  exposure  cell  {Position  7).  The  lower  curve  (the  same  exposure 
parameters)  started  when  the  MTC  was  elevated  into  Position  2.  After  the  exposure  was 
over,  the  MTC  was  quickly  slid  into  the  Position  L 


Figure  2.  Microwave  heating  recorded  by  microthermocouple  (MTC).  Upper  trace:  MTC  was  at  the  bottom 
of  the  exposure  cell  ( Position  1)  during  and  after  exposure  (20  high-power  pulses).  Lower  trace:  MTC  was  at 
the  top  of  the  (Position  2)  during  the  exposure,  and  was  slid  into  the  Position  1  after  the  exposure  was  over. 
See  text  for  further  explanation. 

Solution  in  the  cell  was  exposed  to  repeated  trains  of  microwave  pulses  (1  train/ 10 
sec),  which  resulted  in  a  temperature  difference  between  two  MTC  positions  {Position  2 
was  farther  away  from  the  matching  plate  and  therefore  was  cooler).  Microwave  pulses 


192 


produced  large  artifacts  and  pronounced  heating  in  the  Position  7,  and  smaller  artifacts 
and  only  subtle  heating  in  the  Position  2.  Due  to  the  high  field  attenuation  by  the  saline 
(about  40  times  per  5  mm),  the  presence  of  the  MTC  in  the  Position  2  could  have  no 
effect  on  microwave  heating  at  the  bottom  of  the  cell. 

Hence,  the  temperature  recorded  on  the  lower  curve  after  sliding  the  MTC  down  is 
the  real  temperature  of  the  medium  in  the  Position  7,  not  affected  by  the  presence  of  the 
MTC  there  during  exposure.  This  temperature  was  exactly  the  same  as  the  one  recorded 
with  the  MTC  being  in  the  Position  1  throughout  the  exposure  (the  upper  curve).  This 
experiment  was  repeated  numerous  times,  with  various  MTC  positions  and  exposure 
parameters,  and  with  the  same  result  as  illustrated.  Thus,  the  presence  of  MTC  in  the 
medium  during  exposure  produced  no  measurable  field  distortion  and  did  not  affect 
heating  of  the  medium. 


Figure  3 .  The  shape  of  a  heating  curve  recorded  by  MTC.  Heating  is  produced  by  trains  of  10  high-power 
pulses  (110  kW  peak  transmitted  power,  1  ps  width,  1  ms  interpulse  interval,  1  train/12  s).  Note  recording 
artifacts  (they  also  mark  the  time  when  the  train  was  applied)  and  a  long-lasting  temperature  plateau  after  the 
train. 


This  finding  would  be  a  sufficient  grounds  for  local  SAR  measurement  with  the 
MTC  unless  the  initial  slope  of  the  heating  curve  was  contaminated  by  recording 
artifacts.  These  artifacts  can  be  seen  even  better  in  Figure  3,  which  shows  a  heating 
curve  recorded  at  three  different  time  scales.  The  presence  of  microwave  pulse  artifacts 
makes  it  difficult  or  impossible  to  measure  the  initial  slope  of  the  heating  curve.  Hence, 
the  "standard"  approach  to  SAR  measurement  (Figure  4)  may  not  be  used  in  this  case. 

At  the  same  time,  there  is  an  important  difference  between  heating  curves  recorded 
by  MTC  and  by  larger  conventional  probes.  This  difference  is  the  extended  temperature 
plateau  after  a  short  microwave  pulse  or  a  brief  train  of  pulses  (Figure  3).  It  should  be 


193 


emphasized  that  this  is  an  actual  plateau,  and  not  a  part  of  the  declining  slope  that  was 
artificially  expanded  to  make  it  appear  flat. 

The  existence  of  this  plateau  can  be  explained  as  follows.  In  our  set-up,  brief  and 
intensive  microwave  exposure  creates  a  significant  SAR  and  temperature  gradient  in  the 
exposed  medium.  After  the  exposure  is  over,  the  heat  dissipates  from  warmer  to  cooler 
areas  of  the  exposed  medium  and  further  into  the  environment.  Thus,  the  MTC 
submerged  into  the  medium  is  simultaneously  warmed  up  by  the  heat  flow  from  the 
warmer  areas  and  cooled  down  by  the  heat  flow  to  the  cooler  areas.  The  heat  flow  to 
cooler  areas  will  obviously  prevail,  and  the  entire  exposed  medium  will  eventually  cool 
down  to  the  ambient  temperature.  However,  for  a  very  brief  time  interval  after  exposure 
and  within  an  adequately  small  medium  volume  (like  the  volume  in  the  immediate 
vicinity  of  the  MTC),  the  wanning  and  cooling  heat  flows  will  be  virtually  equal.  As  a 
result,  the  MTC  will  record  a  temperature  plateau,  as  if  no  heat  dissipation  takes  place. 


Standard  method: 


Alternative  method: 


SAR  =  C  — 

At 


Figure  4.  "Standard"  and  "alternative"  methods  of  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  measurement  from  heating 
dynamics.  Shown  are  the  microwave  pulse  duration  (lower  traces)  and  sample  heating  curves  (upper  traces), 
The  standard  method  uses  the  initial  slope  of  the  heating  curve  (C  is  the  specific  heat  capacity  of  medium). 
The  alternative  method  calculates  SAR  from  the  level  of  the  after-pulse  plateau  and  the  duration  of  the 
pulse.  Both  methods  can  be  used  with  the  same  result  when  the  plateau  is  present  and  no  artifacts  are 
recorded. 


If  this  is  true,  the  plateau  level  (i.e.,  the  difference  between  the  temperature  before 
the  exposure  and  the  plateau)  will  be  linearly  proportional  to  the  delivered  energy  (e.g., 
the  number  of  pulses  in  a  train)  and,  within  certain  limits,  will  not  depend  on  the  pattern 
of  the  energy  delivery  (e.g.,  interpulse  interval).  Figure  5  shows  that  this  was  the  case 
indeed.  Hence,  the  locally  absorbed  dose  (SAD)  can  be  found  as  a  product  of  the 
plateau  level  and  specific  heat  capacity  of  the  medium. 

Once  we  know  the  SAD,  we  do  not  need  the  initial  slope  of  the  heating  curve  to 
calculate  SAR.  Instead,  SAR  can  be  calculated  as  a  ratio  of  SAD  and  known  duration  of 
microwave  pulse(s),  as  shown  in  Figure  4  as  an  "alternative  method". 


Figure  5.  Heating  dynamics  under  exposure  to  trains  of  high-power  pulses  (1-ps  pulse  width,  400  kW/g 
peak  SAR).  Spikes  during  the  ascending  portion  of  the  curves  (artifacts)  correspond  to  microwave  pulses. 
Temperature  is  measured  as  mean  values  for  40-ms  periods  before  and  after  exposure.  A:  10-pulse  trains 
with  interpulse  intervals  of  1,  3,  5,  and  13  ms.  The  plateau  level  (0.93  °C)  does  not  depend  on  of  the 
interpulse  interval.  B:  Trains  with  a  constant  interpulse  interval  (5  ms)  and  different  number  of  pulses. 
Heating  is  linearly  proportional  to  the  number  of  pulses  per  train.  Heating  by  a  single  pulse  is  about  0.09  °C. 

The  final  step  to  justify  this  alternative  method  was  to  compare  measured  SAR 
values  with  those  predicted  by  the  equation  (1).  This  comparison  is  illustrated  in 
Figures  6  and  7. 

In  Figure  6,  A,  heating  of  0.1  °C  was  produced  by  a  single  high-power  pulse. 
Calculated  and  measured  SAR s  were  585  and  420  kW/g,  respectively.  As  stated  by 
Bassen  and  Babij  [2],  " an  absolute  accuracy  of  ±3  dB  is  the  best  case  measurement 
uncertainty  that  can  be  achieved  when  attempting  to  determine  the  maximum  and 
minimum  SARs  within  an  irradiated  biological  body  ”  In  our  setup  and  with  the  use  of 
MTC,  the  difference  between  calculated  and  measured  SARs  was  only  1.4  dB. 

The  match  was  even  better  for  exposure  to  low-power,  longer  microwave  pulses 
(Figure  6,  B).  Measured  values  were  only  0.4-0.5  dB  apart  from  the  calculated  ones. 
This  small  error  could  easily  be  attributed  to  a  combined  inaccuracy  of  power  meters, 
field  probes  and  other  devices,  or  even  to  some  imperfection  of  the  analytical  equation 
itself  (the  equation  is  developed  for  TE]0  wave  propagation  mode,  while  various  other 
modes  also  arise  in  the  waveguide  after  the  matching  plate).  Figure  6  also  demonstrates 
that  the  presence  of  a  temperature  plateau  after  a  microwave  pulse  is  not  a  specific 
attribute  of  exposure  to  extremely  high-power  pulses.  The  plateau  is  as  well  pronounced 
with  reasonably  low  amplitude  pulses,  and  the  proposed  method  of  SAR  measurement 
with  MTC  can  be  used  as  long  as  the  plateau  can  be  detected. 


195 


A 

(V  _ _ 

O 

N> 

o 

Jo.10  °c 

100  ms 

Calculated  SAR  (25  °C)  =  585  kW/g 

Measured  SAR  =  4.2  x  0.1  / 10'6  =  420  kW/g 

(-1.4  dB) 

0.5  °C 

B 

V— - 

""'‘To.19 

/ 

i  °C 

50  ms 

•  ~  •  , ....  . 

7.4  W  20  ms 

Calculated  SAR  (27  °C)  =  43.9  W/g 

Measured  SAR  =  4.2  x  0.19  /  0.02  =  39.9  W/g 

(-0.41  dB) 

Figure  6.  Comparison  of  calculated  and  microthermocouple-measured  local  SAR  values.  A,  a  high-power 
pulse  (96  kW  transmitted  power,  1  ps  width);  the  moment  of  exposure  coincides  with  the  artifact  on  the 
heating  curve.  B,  a  moderate  power  pulse  (7.4  W,  20  ms  width,  indicated  on  the  lower  trace).  The 
temperature  before  the  pulse  and  during  the  plateau  was  measured  as  a  mean  of  a  25-ms  period.  Calculated 
SAR  values  were  obtained  using  the  equation  (1),  see  text.  The  difference  of  the  measured  and  calculated 
SAR  was  -1.4  dB  (A)  and  -0.41  dB  (B). 

Figure  7  gives  an  example  of  the  field  mapping  with  MTC  and  illustrates  its  spatial 
resolution.  Heating  curves  recorded  in  spots  as  close  as  0.5  mm  to  each  other  were 
substantially  different,  and  measured  SAR  values  were  always  close  to  the  calculated 
ones. 

MTC  was  also  used  for  horizontal  field  mapping  in  a  cross-section  of  the  waveguide. 
Horizontal  field  distribution  was  calculated  according  to  standard  waveguide  equations 
[7]  for  TE10  mode.  Again,  measured  and  calculated  values  were  within  ±1.5  dB  apart. 


5.  Conclusions 

The  experiments  established  that  MTC  is  an  appropriate  tool  to  measure  local  SAR  in 
an  absorptive  medium.  Small  size,  negligible  heat  capacity,  fast  response  time,  and  high 
sensitivity  make  MTC  particularly  useful  in  high-gradient  fields  with  complicated 
patterns  of  SAR  distribution  and  also  at  high  SARs,  when  larger  probes  may  be  too 
slow. 

However,  the  presence  of  recording  artifacts  when  the  radiation  is  on  prompts  that,  in 
general,  the  temperature  of  the  medium  can  be  measured  accurately  only  when  the 


196 


exposure  is  off.  That  is  why  the  standard  method  of  determining  SAR  from  the  initial 
slope  of  the  heating  curve  may  be  essentially  inaccurate,  and  a  different  procedure 
should  be  employed  instead.  This  procedure  is  based  on  the  ability  of  MTC  to  record  a 
temperature  plateau  after  a  short  microwave  pulse  or  a  brief  train  of  pulses.  The  level  of 
this  plateau  is  proportional  to  SAD,  and  local  SAR  can  be  calculated  from  the  SAD  and 
known  duration  of  microwave  pulse(s).  This  method  produced  highly  reproducible  SAR 
measurements,  which  matched  closely  with  theoretical  predictions.  We  can  conjecture 
that  the  proposed  method  of  local  SAR  measurement  with  MTC  will  produce  valid 
results  in  any  situation  when  a  temperature  plateau  after  a  pulsed  exposure  can  be 
reliably  detected  (regardless  of  the  wavelength,  incident  power,  absorptive  media 
properties  or  configuration). 

The  proposed  method  of  local  SAR  measurement  can  be  recommended  for  practical 
dosimetry,  and  can  also  be  employed  to  verify  FDTD  predictions  of  SAR  distribution  in 
animal  and  human  models. 


Figure  7.  Vertical  field  mapping  along  the  axis  of  the  waveguide:  A  comparison  of  microthermocouple- 
measured  and  expected  local  SAR  values.  Heating  curves  (left)  produced  by  a  train  of  10  high-power  pulses 
were  recorded  at  the  heights  from  0  to  3  mm  above  the  matching  plate  (only  four  curves  are  shown).  The 
"expected”  local  SAR  was  calculated  by  the  equation  (1).  The  table  and  the  graph  compare  measured  and 
expected  local  SAR  values. 


197 


6.  Acknowledgments 

The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel 
Command  and  the  U.S.  Force  Research  Laboratory  under  US  Army  contract  DAMD17- 
94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices.  The  views  expressed  are  those  of  the 
authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting  the  official  policy  or  position  of  the 
Department  of  the  Army,  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  or  the  United  States 
Government. 


7.  References 

1.  Gandhi,  O.P.  (1990)  Numerical  methods  for  specific  absorption  rate  calculations,  in  O.P.  Gandhi  (ed.), 
Biological  Effects  and  Medical  Applications  of  Electromagnetic  Energy ,  Prentice  Hall,  Englewood 
Cliffs,  New  Jersey,  pp.  113-140. 

2.  Bassen,  H.I.  and  Babij,  T.  M.  (1990)  Experimental  techniques  and  instrumentation,  Ibid.,  pp.  141-173. 

3.  Chou,  C-K.  and  Guy,  A.  W.  (1978)  Effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  isolated  nerve  and  muscle 
preparations,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  26, 141-147. 

4.  Stogryn,  A.  (1971)  Equations  for  calculating  the  dielectric  constant  of  saline  water,  IEEE  Trans. 
Microwave  Theory  Tech.  19,  733-736. 

5.  Bao,  J.  Z.,  Swicord,  M.,  and  Davis,  C.  Microwave  dielectric  characterization  of  binary  mixtures  of 
water,  methanol,  and  ethanol.  J.  Chem.  Phys.  104,  pp.  4441-4450. 

6.  Benedict  R.  P.,  ed.  (1983)  Manual  on  the  Use  of  Thermocouples  in  Temperature  Measurement,  ASTM 
Special  Technical  Publication  470B,  ASTM,  Baltimore,  MD,  p.  258. 

7.  Paris,  D.T.  and  Hurd,  F.K.  (1969)  Basic  Electromagnetic  Theory ,  McGraw  Hill  Book  Company,  NY, 
pp.  398-451. 


Bioelectromagnetics  21:245-254  (2000) 


Comparative  Effects  of  Extremely  High 
Power  Microwave  Pulses  and  a  Brief  CW 
Irradiation  on  Pacemaker  Function  in 
Isolated  Frog  Heart  Slices 

Andrei  G.  Pakhomov,1,3*  Satnam  P.  Mathur 1  Joanne  Doyle,1  Bruce  E.  Stuck,2 
Jonathan  L.  Kiel,3  and  Michael  R.  Murphy3 

McKesson  BioServices,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio ,  Texas 
2U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment  of  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research, 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 
3 Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate, 

Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 

The  existence  of  specific  bioeffects  due  to  high  peak  power  microwaves  and  their  potential  health 
hazards  are  among  the  most  debated  but  least  explored  problems  in  microwave  biology.  The  present 
study  attempted  to  reveal  such  effects  by  comparing  the  bioeffects  of  short  trains  of  extremely  high 
power  microwave  pulses  (EHPP,  1  \is  width,  250-350  kW/g,  9.2  GHz)  with  those  of  relatively  low 
power  pulses  (LPP,  0.5-10  s  width,  3-30W/g,  9.2  GHz).  EHPP  train  duration  and  average  power 
were  made  equal  to  those  of  an  LPP;  therefore  both  exposure  modalities  produced  the  same 
temperature  rise.  Bioeffects  were  studied  in  isolated,  spontaneously  beating  slices  of  the  frog  heart. 
In  most  cases,  a  single  EHPP  train  or  LPP  immediately  decreased  the  inter-beat  interval  (IBI).  The 
effect  was  proportional  to  microwave  heating,  fully  reversible,  and  easily  reproducible.  The 
magnitude  and  time  course  of  EHPP-  and  LPP-induced  changes  always  were  the  same.  No  delayed 
or  irreversible  effects  of  irradiation  were  observed.  The  same  effect  could  be  repeated  in  a  single 
preparation  numerous  times  with  no  signs  of  adaptation,  sensitization,  lasting  functional  alteration, 
or  damage.  A  qualitatively  different  effect,  namely,  a  temporary  arrest  of  preparation  beats,  could  be 
observed  when  microwave  heating  exceeded  physiologically  tolerable  limits.  This  effect  also  did 
not  depend  on  whether  the  critical  temperature  rise  was  produced  by  LPP  or  EHPP  exposure. 
Within  the  studied  limits,  we  found  no  indications  of  EHPP-specific  bioeffects.  EHPP-  and  LPP- 
induced  changes  in  the  pacemaker  rhythm  of  isolated  frog  heart  preparation  were  identical  and 
could  be  entirely  attributed  to  microwave  heating.  Bioelectromagnetics  21 :245-254, 2000.  ©  2000 

Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 


Key  words:  high  power  microwave  pulses;  specific  effects;  frog  heart  rhythm;  beating  rate 


INTRODUCTION 

It  is  well  known  that  bioeffects  of  high  peak 
power  microwaves  can  be  qualitatively  different  from 
those  of  continuous-wave  (CW)  fields  of  the  same 
average  power.  The  best  studied  example  is  a  micro- 
wave  auditory  effect,  which  is  caused  by  a  thermo¬ 
elastic  stress  in  absorbing  tissue  and  perception  of  the 
resulting  pressure  wave  by  animal  or  human  hearing 
apparatus  [Guy  et  al.,  1975;  Lin,  1978,  1989].  The 
threshold  of  microwave-induced  sound  perception  in 
humans  at  2450  MHz  was  found  to  be  about  400  mJ/m2 
per  pulse  for  various  pulse  widths  shorter  than  30  ps 
[Guy  et  al.,  1975].  Other  phenomena,  such  as  mem¬ 
brane  damage  by  high  instant  values  of  the  electric 


Contract  grant  sponsor:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory 
(HEDR  and  AFOSR);  Contract  grant  number:  DAMD17-94-C- 
4069 

The  views  expressed  in  this  article  are  those  of  the  authors  and 
should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting  the  official  policy  or  position 
of  the  Department  of  the  Army,  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  or 
the  United  States  Government. 

‘Correspondence  to:  Dr.  A.  Pakhomov,  McKesson  BioServices, 
8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San 
Antonio,  TX  78235-5324.  E-mail:  andrei.pakhomov@afrlars. 
brooks.af.mil 

Received  20  April  1999;  Final  revision  received  2  August  1999 


©  2000  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 


246  Pakhomov  et  al. 


field,  could  theoretically  contribute  to  pulsed  field 
bioeffects  and  cause  damage  without  significant 
heating  of  tissues  [Albanese  et  al.,  1994].  Lin  [1989] 
stated,  “While  there  is  very  little  likelihood  that  the 
microwave  auditory  effect  at  threshold  incident  power 
can  constitute  a  hazard,  exposures  at  levels  that  are 
significantly  higher  than  threshold  will  undoubtedly  be 
very  harmful  to  cell  membranes,  cytoplasm,  and  whole 
organisms.” 

However,  there  are  few  experimental  data  avail¬ 
able  to  support  this  conjecture.  Experimentation  with 
animals  at  peak  specific  absorption  rates  (SAR)  of  the 
order  of  kilowatts  per  gram  requires  unique  exposure 
facilities  and  is  rather  laborious  and  expensive.  Only  a 
few  such  studies  have  been  reported  in  the  literature. 
Akyel  et  al.  [1992]  and  Raslear  et  al.  [1993]  found  that 
extremely-high  power  pulses  (EHPP)  significantly 
decrease  physical  endurance  and  disrupted  cognitive 
function  in  rats.  These  effects  developed  after  exposure 
to  200  pulses  at  a  rate  of  1  pulse/8  s  (80  ns  pulse  width, 
3  GHz).  Though  the  peak  specific  absorption  rate 
(SAR)  reached  approximately  8.7kW/g  (body  aver¬ 
age)  and  21kW/g  in  the  midbrain,  the  time-average 
values  were  108  times  lower,  thus  making  it  possible  to 
rule  out  the  ordinary  thermal  origin  of  the  observed 
effects.  However,  at  different  exposure  regimes  and 
somewhat  lower  peak  SAR  levels  (0.2-6.9  kW/g),  no 
behavioral  or  physiological  changes  could  be  detected 
in  EHPP-exposed  monkeys  and  rats  unless  the  time- 
average  SAR  was  high  enough  to  produce  a  thermal 
response  [D’ Andrea  et  al.,  1989;  Klauenberg  et  al., 
1990;  Akyel  et  al.,  1991;  Jauchem  and  Frei,  1995]. 
Though  very  limited,  these  findings  seem  to  be 
consistent  with  the  idea  that  mechanisms  other  than 
ordinary  microwave  heating  could  be  involved  in  the 
bioeffects  when  EHPP  intensity  exceeds  a  certain 
threshold. 

As  an  alternative  to  animal  experiments,  many 
aspects  of  EHPP  biological  action  can  be  studied  in 
vitro  in  cell  and  tissue  models.  The  volume  of  in  vitro 
samples  usually  does  not  have  to  be  greater  than  0.1- 
lml,  and  producing  peak  SAR  of  tens  and  even 
hundreds  of  kilowatts  per  gram  in  this  small  volume 
does  not  require  custom-built,  megawatt-output  trans¬ 
mitters  or  anechoic  chambers.  Instead,  the  radiation 
can  be  confined  in  a  waveguide,  maximizing  the 
portion  of  the  output  power  that  is  effectively  absorbed 
by  the  sample  and  minimizing  undesired  exposure  of 
service  personnel  and  laboratory  equipment.  Further 
advantages  of  in  vitro  experimentation  are  the  possi¬ 
bilities  for  precise  control  of  temperature  and  SAR  in 
the  exposed  sample  and  greater  flexibility  of  modula¬ 
tion  regimes  in  the  lower-power  microwave  trans¬ 
mitters. 


Stewart-DeHaan  et  al.  [1983,  1985]  and 

Creighton  et  al.  [1987]  have  used  an  in  vitro  set-up 
to  compare  CW  and  EHPP  exposure  damage  in 
isolated  ocular  lenses.  Irradiation  at  915  or  918  MHz 
lasted  for  up  to  60  min  at  the  time-average  SAR  of 
5.75-750  mW/g  (0.5-60  W  average  transmitted 
power,  respectively).  For  EHPP  exposures  (10  ps  wide, 
24  kW  peak  power  pulses,  or  20  ps  wide,  48  kW  peak 
power  pulses),  pulse  repetition  rates  were  adjusted  to 
match  the  average  power  from  CW  exposure.  Lenses 
were  fixed  immediately  after  irradiation  and  analyzed 
by  scanning  electron  microscopy.  In  most  cases,  EHPP 
caused  significantly  greater  damage  than  CW  radiation 
at  the  same  average  power.  The  thermoelastic  expan¬ 
sion  following  each  microwave  pulse  and  the  resulting 
pressure  waves  induced  in  the  aqueous  medium  and 
lens  tissue,  was  the  most  likely  mechanism  to  explain 
the  greater  effects  of  EHPP  exposures.  The  possibility 
of  tissue  damage  by  mechanisms  other  than  average 
heating  under  EHPP  exposure  may  have  major  impli¬ 
cations  for  safety  guidelines. 

Using  an  in-waveguide  exposure  setup  allowed 
us  to  study  EHPP  effects  at  peak  SAR  as  high  as 
270-310kW/g  at  9.5 GHz  and  1  ps  pulse  width 
[Pakhomov  et  al.,  1998,  1999b].  Spontaneous  beating 
rate  of  isolated  sections  of  the  frog  heart  sinoatrial  area 
was  a  robust  and  sensitive  index  of  EHPP  effect  on 
pacemaker  function,  and  various  exposure  regimes 
were  compared  in  an  attempt  to  reveal  possible  specific 
EHPP  effects.  The  experiments  established  that  brief 
(4-100 ms)  EHPP  trains  of  5-60  pulses  immediately 
decreased  the  inter-beat  interval  (IBI).  This  change 
was  fully  reversible  and  proportional  to  the  maximum 
microwave  heating,  which,  in  our  conditions,  was 
entirely  determined  by  the  number  of  pulses  in  the 
EHPP  train.  With  the  number  of  pulses  per  train  kept 
constant,  the  maximum  heating  remained  the  same; 
trains  of  different  durations,  but  with  the  same  number 
of  pulses,  produced  the  same  biological  effect.  This 
pattern  of  reacting  to  the  exposure  suggested  a  merely 
thermal  mechanism  of  EHPP  action. 

In  a  few  cases,  the  exposure  caused  a  qualita¬ 
tively  different  effect,  namely  a  more  or  less  prolonged 
cessation  of  the  preparation  beats.  It  was  possible  to 
demonstrate  that,  at  least  in  some  of  these  cases,  the 
cessation  of  beats  was  caused  by  uncoupling  of 
contractile  elements  from  the  pacemaker,  and  not  by 
deceleration  or  stoppage  of  the  pacemaker  itself. 
While  stoppage  of  the  pacemaker  could  have  been  an 
indication  of  a  specific  EHPP  effect,  the  uncoupling 
could  reasonably  be  explained  by  general  heating. 

The  above  experiments,  although  being  indica¬ 
tive  of  a  thermal  EHPP  effect  only,  did  not  answer  the 
principal  question:  whether  the  biological  effective- 


Effects  of  EHPP  Microwave  Pulses 


247 


ness  of  EHPP  trains  is  different  from  CW  exposure 
at  the  same  power.  This  comparison  is  made  in  the 
present  study. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 

Except  for  a  few  modifications,  we  employed  the 
same  techniques  and  procedures  as  described  pre¬ 
viously  [Pakhomov  et  al.,  1998,  1999b].  These  modi¬ 
fications  included  somewhat  different  design  of  the 
exposure  cell,  switching  from  9.5  to  9.2  GHz,  and 
using  an  extracellular  glass  microelectrode  to  record 
the  preparation  beats. 

Exposure  System,  Dosimetry  and 
Thermometry 

Square  microwave  pulses  (9.2  GHz,  1  ps  width, 
65-1 10 kW)  were  produced  by  an  EPSCO  Model 
MH300  system  with  an  MF-IM65-01  RF  plug-in  into  a 
WR90  waveguide  (22.86  x  10.16  mm).  Incident  and 
reflected  powers  in  the  waveguide  were  measured  via 
directional  couplers  by  Hewlett-Packard  (HP)  438A 
and  HP  435B  power  meters  with  HP  8481 A  power 
sensors.  The  EHPP  transmitter  was  set  to  external 
triggering  from  a  Grass  Instruments  S8800  Stimulator. 
The  EHPP  train  onset,  duration,  and  the  repetition  rate 
of  pulses  in  the  train  were  controlled  by  the  stimulator, 
while  the  pulse  width,  output  power,  and  frequency 
were  determined  by  settings  of  the  transmitter  itself. 
The  shape  of  microwave  pulses  was  monitored  via  an 
HP  432  detector  on  a  TEK  2430A  digital  oscilloscope. 

With  the  help  of  a  waveguide  switch,  the  same 
waveguide  system  could  be  connected  to  a  relatively 
low  power  CW  transmitter  tuned  to  9.2  GHz  (HP 
8690A  Sweep  Oscillator  with  Hughes  8020H  Travel¬ 
ing  Wave  T\ibe  Amplifier,  up  to  8W  output).  A 
custom-made  electronic  trigger  was  used  to  keep  the 
output  power  of  the  transmitter  shut  off  except  for  the 
duration  of  control  pulses  from  the  stimulator  (“gated 
CW”).  Thus,  the  CW  transmitter  produced  microwave 
pulses  coincident  in  time  and  equal  in  duration  to  the 
control  pulses  from  the  stimulator.  Hereafter,  these 
pulses  from  the  CW  source  will  be  referred  to  as  “low- 
power  pulses”  (LPP). 

In  most  cases,  the  LPP  duration  was  set  equal  to 
the  duration  of  the  EHPP  train,  and  the  LPP  power  was 
adjusted  to  match  the  average  power  emitted  during 
the  EHPP  train.  For  example,  when  the  EHPP 
transmitter  was  set  to  produce  a  1  s  train  of  50  pulses 
(100  kW  peak  power,  1  ps  pulse  width,  5W  average 
power),  the  LPP  width  and  power  were  set  at  1  s  and 
5W,  respectively.  Reflection  from  the  exposure  cell 
situated  at  the  termination  of  the  waveguide  was 
negligible  for  both  EHPP  and  LPP  (always  less  than 


5%).  Therefore,  medium  and  sample  in  the  exposure 
cell  absorbed  the  same  total  amount  of  energy  during 
an  EHPP  train  and  during  a  single  LPP. 

The  exposure  cell  was  set  atop  a  vertical  end 
section  of  the  waveguide.  The  waveguide  flanges 
(covered  with  a  varnish)  and  a  sapphire  matching  plate 
impressed  into  the  waveguide  formed  at  the  bottom  of 
the  cell.  Plexiglas  walls  divided  the  cell  into  two 
compartments.  The  central  compartment  above  the 
center  of  the  matching  plate  was  filled  with  Ringer’s 
salt  solution,  and  samples  to  be  exposed  were  placed 
directly  on  the  matching  plate.  The  central  compart¬ 
ment  was  open  from  the  top,  to  allow  the  access  of 
recording  electrodes  and  a  temperature  probe  to  the 
sample  at  the  bottom.  The  other  (outer)  compartment 
was  essentially  a  jacket  filled  with  constant  tempera¬ 
ture  water  circulating  through  a  water  bath.  It  should 
be  emphasized  that  this  thermostabilization  system 
could  not  (and  was  not  intended  to)  compensate  for 
fast  microwave  heating  in  the  middle  compartment. 
Instead,  its  purpose  was  to  set  the  initial  temperature  in 
the  central  compartment  at  a  level  different  from  the 
room  temperature  (e.g.,  36  °C). 

A  method  of  high-resolution  microwave  dosime¬ 
try  was  described  in  detail  and  justified  in  a  previous 
publication  [Pakhomov  et  al.,  2000].  In  short,  local 
SAR  was  measured  with  the  help  of  a  microthermo¬ 
couple  (MTC)  made  of  25  pm  copper  and  constantan 
wires  (Omega  Engineering,  Inc.).  Virtually  instant 
response  of  the  MTC  to  temperature  changes  made  it 
possible  to  record  a  temperature  plateau  for  a  period  of 
200-600  ms  after  a  short  (e.g.,  10- 100  ms)  LPP  or 
after  a  brief  EHPP  train.  Within  the  duration  of  this 
plateau,  heat  flows  to  and  from  the  MTC  are  virtually 
equal,  so  heat  dissipation  could  be  disregarded.  Several 
independent  tests  proved  that  the  level  of  the  plateau  is 
precisely  proportional  to  the  dose  absorbed  locally  in 
the  medium.  Moreover,  the  plateau  level  was  not 
affected  by  microwave-induced  recording  artifacts  or 
the  presence  of  the  MTC  itself  in  the  medium  during 
exposure.  MTC  measurements  of  SAR  as  a  function  of 
the  distance  above  the  matching  plate  in  a  solution- 
filled  waveguide  section  produced  practically  the  same 
values  (within  l.l-1.8dB)  as  a  theoretical  calculation 
according  to  Chou  and  Guy  [1978].  The  method 
proved  to  be  capable  of  measuring  accurate  local  SAR 
with  a  spatial  resolution  of  better  than  0.25  mm. 

MTC  measurements  were  used  to  analyze  verti¬ 
cal  and  horizontal  field  distribution  in  our  exposure 
setup  (Fig.  1).  Along  the  axis  of  the  waveguide,  SAR 
fell  sharply  with  increasing  distance  above  the 
matching  plate  (approximately  twofold  per  milli¬ 
meter).  It  is  worth  mentioning  that  both  the  SAR 
gradient  and  the  measured  SAR  values  in  this  exposure 


248  Pakhomov  et  al. 


A 


B 


5 

4 

3 


OC  i 
^  1 
co 


tuj 

6 

S 


0.5  i - * - 1 - * - 1 - ■ - 1 

0  12  3 

mm  above  the  matching  plate 


mm  (H) 


Rg.  1  Vertical  (A)  and  horizontal  (B)  field  distribution  in  the  exposure  cell  filled  with  Ringer’s  solu¬ 
tion.  Measurements  were  performed  with  a  microthermocouple  at  9.2  GHz.  A.  Specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR,W/g)  per  Watt  of  transmitted  power  as  afunction  of  the  distance  above  the  matching  plate 
along  the  axis  of  the  waveguide.  Solid  line  is  an  exponential  approximation  of  measured  SAR  values. 
Dashed  line  is  a  theoretical  curve  calculated  for  the  Ringer’s  solution-filled  waveguide  section 
according  to  Chou  and  Guy  [1978].  B.  Measured  field  attenuation  as  a  function  of  the  distance  from 
the  waveguide  axis  in  a  horizontal  plane  0.5  mm  above  the  matching  plate.  The  values  are  expressed 
as  a  percentage  ofthe  SAR  maximum  measured  along  the  waveguide  axis  (3.3  W/g/W).  Coordinates 
are  the  distances  (mm)  from  the  waveguide  axis  in  E-  and  H-vectordirections. 


cell  were  very  close  to  the  values  measured  [Pakhomov 
et  al.,  2000]  and  calculated  theoretically  in  a  solution- 
filled  waveguide  (a  theoretical  curve  for  the  solution- 
filled  waveguide  is  shown  by  a  dashed  line  in  Figure  1 
A).  Indeed,  the  SAR  gradient  is  determined  by  the 
solution  properties  rather  than  by  the  exposure  cell 
design,  and  with  very  high  losses  in  the  solution,  the 
presence  or  absence  of  waveguide  walls  has  little  effect 
on  SAR  along  the  waveguide  axis. 

It  is  known  that  a  pulsed  radiation  may  penetrate 
deeper  into  biological  tissues  than  a  CW  radiation  of 
the  same  frequency  [Lin,  1989].  This  difference  arises 
because  lower  frequency  harmonics  present  in  a  pulsed 
signal  are  attenuated  to  a  lesser  degree  than  the  main 
frequency.  However,  in  most  situations  the  power  of 
lower  frequency  harmonics  is  negligible  (orders  of 
magnitude  less)  compared  with  power  at  the  main 
frequency.  At  any  tested  location  in  our  exposure  cell, 
MTC  measurements  produced  exactly  the  same 
average  SAR  values  for  EHPP  trains  and  LPPs  of 
equivalent  average  power.  Although  the  fine  dynamics 
of  microwave  heating  were  different  (gradual  tem¬ 
perature  rise  during  an  LPP  and  a  stepwise  rise  during 
an  EHPP  train),  the  temperature  increase  by  the  end  of 
the  exposure  was  the  same. 

Field  distribution  in  the  horizontal  plane  (parallel 
to  the  matching  plate)  was  substantially  more  uniform 


(Fig.  1  B).  At  0.5  mm  above  the  plate,  i.e.,  at  the  ap¬ 
proximate  position  of  the  geometrical  center  of  heart 
slices,  SAR  decreased  by  less  than  20%  within  a  2  mm 
radius  from  the  waveguide  axis.  For  the  slice  pre¬ 
paration,  which  had  width  and  length  of  about  2-3  mm 
or  less,  irradiation  in  the  horizontal  plane  could  be 
considered  practically  uniform.  SAR  values  reported 
below  in  this  paper  are  those  along  the  waveguide  axis, 
0.5  mm  above  the  matching  plate;  they  were  calculated 
using  an  MTC-measured  transition  coefficient  of 
3.3  W/g  per  W  transmitted  power. 

While  MTC  was  an  indispensable  tool  for  local 
heating  and  SAR  measurements,  a  Luxtron  Instru¬ 
ments  model  850  multichannel  fluoroptic  thermometer 
was  more  convenient  for  routine  monitoring  of  the 
solution  temperature  during  biological  experiments.  A 
fluoroptic  probe  was  positioned  on  the  matching  plate 
1-1.5  mm  away  from  the  slice  preparation.  While  the 
Luxtron  probe  temperature  readings  could  be  some¬ 
what  different  from  the  actual  temperature  in  the  slice, 
this  offset  was  always  the  same  for  EHPP  and  LPP 
exposure. 

Physiological  Methods 

The  experiments  were  performed  in  isolated, 
spontaneously  beating  sections  of  the  cardiac  sinoatrial 
area  of  the  bullfrog,  Rana  catesbiana.  Active  adult 


Effects  of  EHPP  Microwave  Pulses 


249 


frogs  (males)  were  kept  in  vivarium  conditions  (22- 
25  °C,  30-70%  relative  humidity,  12  h  light/12  h  dark 
diurnal  light  cycle)  for  at  least  one  month  prior  to 
experiments,  which  were  carried  out  in  December 
1998.  After  animal  immobilization  by  pithing  the  brain 
and  the  spinal  cord,  heart  was  isolated  in  a  conven¬ 
tional  manner  and  submerged  into  chilled  Ringer’s 
solution  containing  (mmol/1):  NaCl,  102.6;  KC1,  1.0; 
NaHC03, 0.7;  CaCl2, 0.9;  pH  7.4-7.6.  We  were  able  to 
prepare  3-6  usable  slices  from  one  heart,  and  they  were 
used  in  experiments  one  at  a  time  during  the  same  day. 

The  slice  to  be  exposed  was  transferred  into  the 
exposure  cell  filled  with  Ringer’s  solution.  Preparation 
beats  were  recorded  extracellularly  with  a  blunt  glass 
microelectrode  (approximately  100  kilo  Ohm  resis¬ 
tance)  filled  with  the  same  solution.  The  electrode  also 
kept  the  preparation  attached  to  the  center  of  the 
sapphire  plate  at  the  bottom  of  the  exposure  cell. 

The  signal  from  the  microelectrode  was  recorded 
by  an  MP100  data  acquisition  system  (BIOPAC)  via 
a  DAM50  amplifier  (WPI).  The  preparation  beats 
appeared  as  sharp  regular  spikes,  and  the  IBI  duration 
was  automatically  calculated  and  plotted  in  real  time 
on  a  separate  channel.  (One  should  realize  that  the 
duration  of  an  ongoing  IBI  cannot  be  known  until  the 
IBI  is  over.  That  is  why,  the  duration  of  an  ongoing  IBI 
will  always  be  plotted  with  a  “one-IBI”  delay,  i.e., 
during  the  next  IBI.  This  delay  is  most  noticeable  in 
Figure  3  C).  One  more  channel  was  used  for  an  auto¬ 
matic  marker  of  exposures,  and  the  fourth  channel  served 
for  synchronous  monitoring  of  temperature  changes. 

After  being  placed  into  the  exposure  cell,  the 
preparation  was  allowed  to  stabilize  for  30-60  min. 
Preparations  with  unstable  beating  rhythm  were  dis¬ 
carded.  Each  preparation  could  be  exposed  several 
times,  allowing  enough  time  between  exposures  for 
complete  IBI  recovery  and  stabilization.  EHPP  and 
LPP  exposures  and  sham  exposures  alternated  in  a 
random  manner.  For  a  sham  exposure,  microwave 
pulses  were  triggered,  but  radiation  in  the  waveguide 
was  re-routed  to  a  matching  load  instead  of  the 
exposure  cell.  One  should  note,  however,  that  with  all 
the  recording  and  exposure  equipment  being  turned  on 
throughout  (and  just  awaiting  the  external  trigger), 
preparations  in  the  exposure  cell  were  essentially 
undergoing  sham  exposure  all  the  time  except  for 
periods  of  the  actual  exposure.  Experimental  data  were 
analyzed  by  Student’s  t  test  (see  “Results”  section  for 
details). 

RESULTS 

In  an  unchanged  environment,  the  pacemaker 
rhythm  in  isolated  frog  auricle  sections  can  remain 


very  stable  for  many  minutes  and  even  hours.  At  the 
same  time,  the  rhythm  is  highly  sensitive  to  the 
ambient  temperature,  and  this  dependence  is  gradual 
and  uniform  in  a  wide  interval  of  temperatures  (Fig.  2). 
Decrease  in  IBI  with  an  increase  in  temperature  is  a 
well-known  physiological  response;  it  is  fully  rever¬ 
sible  and  readily  reproducible. 

Sample  records  of  the  preparation  response  to 
repetitive  LPP  and  EHPP  exposures  are  shown  in 
Figure  3.  The  experiments  shown  were  performed  at 
different  initial  temperatures  and  with  different 
exposure  regimes,  but  in  all  cases  the  average  power 
and  duration  of  EHPP  trains  were  equal  to  the  power 
and  duration  of  LPP.  Indeed,  within  the  accuracy  of 
measurements,  the  magnitude  and  dynamics  of  heating 
produced  by  LPP  and  EHPP  were  the  same  (bottom 
traces). 

Either  modality  of  irradiation  caused  a  small,  but 
well  reproducible  IBI  decrease  (Figs.  3  A  and  B).  The 
changes  in  IBI  perfectly  followed  the  temperature 
curve,  and  beating  rate  returned  to  the  exact  initial 
level  as  soon  as  the  solution  cooled  down  after  each 
exposure.  The  effect  appeared  the  same  for  EHPP  and 
LPP  exposures  and  could  be  consistently  repeated 
numerous  times,  with  no  signs  of  adaptation,  sensitiza¬ 
tion,  lasting  functional  alteration,  or  preparation 
damage  by  microwaves.  No  delayed  or  irreversible 
effects  of  irradiation  were  observed. 


10  15  20  25 

Temperature,  °C 


Fig.  2.  A  typical  dependence  of  the  inter-beat  interval  in  an 
isolated  slice  of  frog  heart  sinoatrial  area  upon  the  ambient  tem¬ 
perature.  Each  dot  represents  a  single  measurement,  without 
averaging.  The  measurements  were  done  randomly  during  heat¬ 
ing  and  subsequent  cooling  of  the  preparation  to  the  initial  tem- 
perature.The  solid  line  is  an  approximation  of  measured  values  by 
an  exponential  function. 


250  Pakhomov  et  al. 


A 

1  min  I  0.2  mV 


LPP:  1 0-sec  pulse,  3.16  W/g 

EHPP:  10-sec  train,  10  pulses/sec 
316  kW/g  peak  SAR 


sec 


1.4-1 


V^TY^T 


B 


1  min  I  l  mV 


LPP:  l-sec  pulse,  15.2  W/g 

EHPP:  1-sec  train,  50  pulses/sec, 
304  kW/g  peak  SAR 


sec 

IS  — V 


u 

c 

sec 

S  E 

50  sec  | 

— i _ i - 1 - 1 - 

S  L  L  E 

JJJw, 

LPP:  2-sec 

EHPP:  2-sec 
0.2  mV  264  Y 

[iiiiL.,iiiijjiiiiuiiiiiMiiiiiiiiJii...iuiiimu.uii.iJjyjiii 

E  L 

LL, 

pulse,  26.4  W/g 

train,  100  pulses/sec, 
W/g  peak  SAR 

MuyniittM 

ni  ini 

j 

umi 

J 

Mill 

1 

■fMNM 

_ n _ n _ fi _ n _ 

>c 

L 

E  L 

I _ 1 

L.. 

E 

Fig.  3.  Sample  recordsof  the  isolated  heart  slice  response  to  repetitive  EHPPand  LPPexposures.  A, 
B,  and  C  represent  different  preparations  and  different  exposure  regimes.  All  exposures  were  per¬ 
formed  at9.2  GHz,  EHPP  width  was  1  ps;otherirradiationparametersareindicatedatthetopofeach 
fragment.  Upper  trace,  spontaneous  beats  of  the  preparation;  second  trace,  inter-beat  interval,  s; 
third  trace,  exposure  marker  (E,  EHPP  exposure;  L,  LPP  exposure;  or  S,  sham  exposure);  bottom 
trace,  solution  temperature  in  °C.  The  experiments  were  performed  at  the  initial  temperature  of 
22  °C  (A  and  C)  or  15.5  °C  (B).  Moderate  microwave  heating  (A  and  B)  decreased  the  inter-beat 
interval,  while  an  excessive  heating  (C)  ceased  the  preparation  beating  activity. 


Effects  of  EHPP  Microwave  Pulses 


251 


-10  -5  0  5  10 

Inter-beat  interval  number 


-10  -5  0  5  10 

Inter-beat  interval  number 


Fig.  4.  Comparative  effects  of  EHPP  and  LPP  exposure  on  the  inter-beat  interval  in  isolated  frog 
heart  slices.  A,  B,  and  C  represent  three  different  series  of  experiments  in  different  preparations 
and  at  different  temperatures.  Indicated  at  the  top  of  each  fragment  are  the  exposure  parameters 
and  maximum  heating  recorded  under  the  exposure,  temperature  at  the  onset  of  the  experiments 
( °C),  and  typical  inter-beat  interval  duration  at  this  temperature  (IB!,  s).  All  exposures  were  per¬ 
formed  at  9.2  GHz,  EHPP  width  was  1  ps.  Horizontal  axis:  sequential  IBI  number  with  respect  to  time 
of  microwave  exposure  (arrow).  Vertical  axis:  IBI  duration,  in  %  to  the  initial  (100%  is  the  duration  of 
the  -10th  interval  in  each  experiment).  Each  datapoint  is  mean  ±s.e.  for  a  group  of  5-11  experi¬ 
ments.  For  better  viewing,  datapoints  for  EHPP  and  LPP  experiments  are  slightly  shifted  to  the  left 
and  right,  respectively.  Effects  of  LPP  and  EHPP  exposures  were  in  all  cases  different  from  the  sham 
(P  <  .01),  but  not  from  each  other  (P  >  .2). 


252  Pakhomov  et  al. 


□ 

T 

sham 

LPP:  1 -sec  pulse 

15.2  W/g  (+2.5  °C  max.) 

, 

28  °C 

• 

EHPP:  1 -sec  train 

15.2  W/g  (+2.5  °C max.) 

IBI  =  1.2-5- 1.4  sec 

< 

50  pulses/sec 

304  kW/g  peak  SAR 

-10  -5  0  5  10 

Inter-beat  interval  number 

Fig.  4.  ( continued) 


Sometimes  (e.g.,  Fig.  3A),  irradiation  also 
changed  the  amplitude  of  beats.  These  changes  were 
coincident  with  the  temperature  rise,  fully  reversible, 
and  had  about  the  same  magnitude  under  LPP  and 
EHPP  irradiation.  However,  isolated  frog  auricle  slices 
are  not  a  proper  model  to  study  the  beat  amplitude,  so 
changes  in  this  index  were  generally  disregarded. 

While  a  temporary  IBI  decrease  was  a  standard 
response  to  various  exposure  regimes,  a  qualitatively 
different  reaction  could  be  produced  by  a  more 
intensive  irradiation,  which  pushed  the  temperature 
above  the  physiologically  tolerable  limits  (Fig.  3  C).  In 
this  case,  heating  to  28-30  °C  temporarily  arrested  the 
beats;  however,  upon  recovery  the  beats  continued  at  a 
higher  rate  until  the  temperature  returned  to  the  initial. 
The  likely  reason  for  beat  cessation  at  high  tempera¬ 
tures  was  uncoupling  of  contractile  elements  from  the 
pacemaker,  rather  than  deceleration  or  stoppage  of  the 
pacemaker  itself  [Pakhomov  et  al.,  2000].  Indeed, 
periods  of  arrest  often  included  low-amplitude  spikes 
(upper  trace),  which  were  omitted  by  the  IBI  detector 
(the  second  trace).  These  spikes  reflect  the  activity  of 
contractile  elements  still  coupled  with  the  pacemaker, 
or  electrical  discharges  of  pacemaker  cells  themselves. 
Consistently  with  the  expected  response  of  the  pace¬ 
maker  to  heating,  the  interval  between  these  spikes  is 
shorter  than  IBI  before  or  after  exposure.  As  in  the 
experiments  illustrated  previously,  EHPP  and  LPP 
exposures  produced  virtually  equal  effect. 

While  the  experimental  records  were  not  indica¬ 
tive  of  any  specific  EHPP  effect,  this  observation  had 


to  be  tested  by  a  statistical  analysis.  For  this  purpose, 
we  plotted  the  IBI  duration  against  the  IBI  sequential 
number  (Fig.  4).  Ten  IBIs  immediately  preceding  the 
exposure  were  assigned  numbers  from  —10  to  —1;  the 
IBI  coinciding  the  exposure  was  No.  0,  and  the  next  ten 
intervals  were  numbered  from  1  to  10.  A  record  of  21 
IBIs,  which  included  either  one  exposure  or  one  sham 
exposure  was  considered  as  a  single  experiment.  The 
baseline  IBI  duration  (i.e.,  without  irradiation)  could 
vary  substantially  from  one  preparation  to  another,  so 
the  raw  data  had  to  be  normalized  before  averaging. 
The  duration  of  the  initial  (—10th)  IBI  in  each 
experiment  was  taken  as  100%. 

These  experiments  were  performed  at  three 
different  baseline  temperatures  (16,  22,  and  28  °C) 
and  with  two  different  combinations  of  EHPP  and  LPP 
regimes.  The  effects  of  EHPP,  LPP,  and  sham  exposure 
at  each  of  the  baseline  temperatures  and  in  every  time- 
point  of  the  experiment  were  compared  by  Student’s 
paired  t  test.  Regardless  of  the  treatment  conditions, 
EHPP  and  LPP  produced  a  fast  and  highly  significant 
(Pc. 01  compared  with  sham)  IBI  decrease  immedi¬ 
ately  after  the  exposure,  followed  by  a  gradual  re¬ 
covery.  However,  for  any  timepoint  and  at  any  of  the 
tested  baseline  temperatures,  EHPP-  and  LPP-induced 
changes  in  the  IBI  duration  were  almost  identical 
(P  >  .2).  While  the  graphs  may  seem  to  indicate  that  the 
exposure  effect  was  stronger  and  recovery  took  longer 
at  28  °C  than  at  16  °C,  actually  this  was  not  the  case. 
With  the  average  IBI  duration  of  about  1.3  s  at  28  °C, 
recovery  to  95%  of  the  initial  IBI  took  about  13  s 


Effects  of  EHPP  Microwave  Pulses 


253 


(Fig.  4C).  This  time  interval  corresponds  to  the  4th  or 
the  5th  IBI  in  Figure  4A  (IBI  duration  at  16  °C  is  about 
3  s),  when  the  recovery  reached  the  same  94-96%. 
In  general,  all  the  experimental  data  were  consistent 
with  a  merely  thermal  mechanism  of  EHPP  and  LPP 
action. 

DISCUSSION 

We  are  not  aware  of  any  other  publication  that 
investigated  bioeffects  of  pulsed  microwaves  at  SAR 
in  excess  of  lOOkW/g.  Upon  entering  this  “uncharted 
territory”,  we  reasonably  anticipated  that  SAR  as  high 
as  300kW/g  could  be  damaging  to  biological  tissues 
and  adversely  affect  physiological  function,  by  one 
mechanism  or  another.  However,  current  experiments 
provided  no  support  to  this  hypothesis.  EHPP  trains 
always  produced  the  same  effects  as  LPP  of  the  equal 
duration  and  average  power.  These  effects  followed  the 
dynamics  of  microwave  heating  and  post-exposure 
cooling,  they  were  fully  reversible  and  well-reprodu¬ 
cible.  Within  limits  of  the  study,  EHPP  and  LPP  effects 
were  not  indicative  of  any  interaction  mechanisms 
other  than  general  heating.  This  conclusion  is  consis¬ 
tent  with  our  earlier  studies  in  frog  heart  slices,  despite 
differences  in  exposure  and  beat  recording  techniques, 
radiation  frequencies,  powers,  and  pulsing  regimes 
[Pakhomov  et  al.,  1995,  1999a,  1999b]. 

At  300kW/g  and  0.5  mm  above  the  matching 
plate  (and  even  higher  SAR  at  the  surface  of  the  plate), 
each  1  ps  EHPP  increases  the  solution  and  preparation 
temperature  by  about  0.07  °C.  A  combination  of  the 
high  SAR  gradient  (about  twofold  per  mm  along  the 
waveguide  axis)  and  of  the  high  pulsed  heating  rate 
(70,000  °C/s)  will  inevitably  produce  thermoelastic 
stress  and  pressure  waves  in  the  exposure  cell. 
However,  measurements  or  calculation  of  the  EHPP- 
produced  thermoelastic  effect  were  beyond  the  scope 
of  this  study.  At  this  point,  we  can  only  state  that 
the  thermoelastic  effect  produced  by  1  ps,  300kW/g 
microwave  pulses  in  our  exposure  cell  had  no  impact 
on  the  frog  heart  pacemaker  function.  One  may 
speculate  that  longer  pulses,  pulses  delivered  at  certain 
“resonance”  repetition  rates,  or  otherwise  optimized 
for  the  maximum  thermoelastic  effect  could  be  more 
biologically  effective.  Evaluation  of  bioeffects  as  a 
function  of  the  thermoelastic  effect  magnitude  could 
be  a  reasonable  approach  to  assess  potential  hazards 
from  thermoelastic  phenomena,  and  may  constitute  a 
subject  for  future  studies.  As  concerning  other  inter¬ 
action  mechanisms  that  could  potentially  contribute  to 
microwave  bioeffect  at  high  peak  powers  (e.g.,  micro- 
wave  poration  of  cell  membrane),  the  reality  of  such 
mechanisms  has  yet  to  be  demonstrated. 


Most  of  the  currently  effective  safety  standards 
appreciate  the  possibility  of  specific  adverse  effects  of 
high  power  pulsed  microwaves  and  set  certain  restric¬ 
tions  on  peak  field  intensities.  However,  with  very 
limited  knowledge  of  EHPP  bioeffects,  it  is  no  wonder 
that  different  standards  arbitrarily  establish  very 
different  limits  of  the  maximum  permissible  exposure. 
Currently  effective  US  standard  [ANSI/IEEE  C95.1- 
1991,  1992]  limits  the  peak  E-field  of  short  pulses  to 
lOOkV/m.  Reference  limits  recommended  by  the 
International  Council  on  Nonionizing  Radiation  Pro¬ 
tection  [ICNIRP  Guidelines,  1998]  for  peak  E-field  in 
2-300  GHz  frequency  range  are  4.4kV/m  for  occupa¬ 
tional  exposure  and  1 .95  kV/m  for  general  public.  The 
highest  microwave  radiation  level  permitted  by  a 
recent  Russian  standard  [SanPin  2.2.4/2.1.8.055-96, 
1996]  is  only  5mW/cm2,  or  137  V/m  (brief  occupa¬ 
tional  exposure  of  hands);  limits  for  occupational  or 
general  public  whole-body  exposure  are  set  as  low  as 
0.01-1  mW/cm2  (6-61  V/m),  regardless  of  the  pulse 
width  or  duty  ratio.  In  our  study,  which  employed  peak 
incident  powers  of  the  order  of  lOOkW,  the  E-field  in 
the  waveguide  could  reach  950kV/m.  Even  at  this 
level,  which  exceeded  all  the  safety  standards  by  one 
or  more  orders  of  magnitude,  the  experiments  est¬ 
ablished  no  EHPP  effects  different  from  CW  radiation 
effects,  thus  giving  no  support  for  special  considera¬ 
tion  of  peak  E-field  safety  limits  for  short,  high  power 
microwave  pulses.  More  studies  in  various  biological 
subjects  and  with  a  wider  range  of  exposure  regimes 
are  needed  to  scientifically  establish  safe  levels  of 
pulsed  radiations. 


REFERENCES 

Akyel  Y,  Hunt  EL,  GambriU  C,  Vargas  C  Jr.  1991.  Immediate  post- 
exposure  effects  of  high-peak  power  microwave  pulses  on 
operant  behavior  of  Wistar  rats.  Bioelectromagnetics 
12:183-195. 

Akyel  Y,  Raslear  TG,  Hammer  RM,  Belt  M.  1992.  The  effects  of 
high-peak  power  pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmil  perfor¬ 
mance  in  the  rat.  Lake  Buena  Vista,  FL:  First  World  Cong¬ 
ress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  a  Medicine, 
June  1992,  p  60  (abstract). 

Albanese  R,  Blaschak  J,  Medina  R,  Penn  J.  1994.  Ultrashort  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  signals:  biophysical  questions,  safety  issues, 
and  medical  opportunities.  Aviat  Space  Environ  Med  65: 
A116-A120. 

ANSI/IEEE  C95.1-1991.  1992.  IEEE  standard  for  safety  levels 
with  respect  to  human  exposure  to  radio  frequency  electro¬ 
magnetic  fields,  3  kHz  to  300  GHz.  New  York:  Inst,  of 
Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers,  Inc.,  76  p. 

Chou  CK,  Guy  AW.  1978.  Effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on 
isolated  nerve  and  muscle  preparations.  IEEE  Trans 
Microwave  Theory  Tech  26:141-147. 

Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Jacobi  JH,  Sanwal 
M,  Baskerville  JC,  Bassen  HE,  Brown  DO,  Trevithick  JR. 


254  Pakhomov  et  al. 


1987.  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract.  II. 
Comparison  of  damage  observed  for  continuous  wave  and 
pulsed  microwaves.  Exp  Eye  Res  45:357-373. 

D* Andrea  JA,  Cobb  BL,  Knepton  J,  Bates  F.  1989.  Behavior  in 
rhesus  monkeys  exposed  to  very  high  peak  power  3.0-GHz 
microwave  pulses.  Tucson,  AZ:  Bioelectromagnetics  Society, 
11th  Annual  Meeting,  June  1989,  p  38-39  (abstract). 

Guy  AW,  Chou  CK,  Lin  JC.  1975.  Microwave-induced  acoustic 
effects  in  mammalian  auditory  systems  and  physical 
materials.  Ann  NY  Acad  Sci  247:194-218. 

ICNIRP  Guidelines.  1998.  Guidelines  for  limiting  exposure  to 
time-varying  electric,  magnetic,  and  electromagnetic  fields 
(up  to  300  GHz).  Health  Physics  74:494-522. 

Jauchem,  JR,  Frei,  MR.  1995.  High-peak  power  microwave  pulses: 
effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  unanesthetized 
rats.  Aviat  Space  Environ  Med  66(10):992-997. 

Klauenberg  BJ,  Cobb  BL,  Merritt  JH.  1990.  Effects  of  exposure  to 
TEMPO  pulsed  high-peak  power  microwave  radiation.  San 
Antonio,  TX:  12th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromag¬ 
netics  Society,  June  1990,  p  91  (abstract). 

Lin  JC.  1978.  Microwave  auditory  effects  and  applications. 
Springfield,  Illinois:  Charles  C.  Thomas. 

Lin  JC.  1989.  Pulsed  radioffequency  field  effects  in  biological 
systems.  In:  Lin  JC,  editor.  Electromagnetic  interaction  with 
biological  systems,  New  York:  Plenum  Press,  p  165-177. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Dubovick  BV,  Degtyariov  IG,  Pronkevich  AN. 
1995.  Microwave  influence  on  the  isolated  heart  function:  I. 
Effect  of  modulation.  Bioelectromagnetics  16(4): 24 1-249. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Belt  M,  Cox  DD,  Mathur  SP,  Akyel  Y,  Murphy 
MR.  1998.  Immediate  effects  of  extremely  high  power 
microwave  pulses  on  the  beating  rhythm  in  isolated 
frog  heart  auricle.  St.  Pete  Beach,  FL:  20th  Annual 
Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetis  Society,  June  1998, 
p  113-114. 


Pakhomov  AG,  Doyle  J,  Mathur  SP,  Kiel  JL,  Murphy  MR.  1999a. 
Search  for  specific  physiological  effects  of  extremely  high 
power  microwave  pulses.  Long  Beach,  CA:  21st  Annual 
Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  June  1999,  p 
200-201. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Mathur  SP,  Belt  M,  Murphy  MR.  1999b.  Dose 
dependencies  in  bioeffects  of  extremely  high-peak  power 
microwave  pulses.  In:  Repacholi  MH,  Rubtsova  NB,  Muc 
AM,  editors.  Electromagnetic  fields:  biological  effects  and 
hygienic  standardization.  Proceedings  of  the  International 
Meeting,  May  1998,  Moscow,  Russia.  Geneva,  Switzerland: 
World  Health  Organization,  p  325-334. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Mathur  SP,  Akyel  Y,  Kiel  JL,  Murphy  MR.  1999b. 
High-resolution  microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  In: 
NATO  Advanced  Research  Workshop  on  Radio  Frequency 
Radiation  Dosimetry  and  its  Relationship  to  the  Biological 
Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields,  October  1998,  Gozd 
Martuljek,  Slovenia  (in  press). 

Raslear  TG,  Akyel  Y,  Bates  F,  Belt  M,  Lu  ST.  1993.  Temporal 
bisection  in  rats:  the  effects  of  high-peak  power  pulsed 
microwave  irradiation.  Bioelectromagnetics  14:459-478. 

SanPin  2.2.4/2.1.8.055-96.  1996.  Sanitary  Rules  and  Norms 
Radioffequency  electromagnetic  radiations  (2.2.4.  Physical 
factors  of  industrial  surroundings.  2.1.8.  Physical  factors  of 
the  environment).  Goskomsanepidanadzor  of  Russia,  28  p. 

Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Jacobi  JH,  Ross 
WM,  Sanwal  M,  Guo  TC,  Guo  WW,  Trevithick  JR.  1983.  In 
vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract:  separation  of 
field  and  heating  effects.  Exp  Eye  Res  36:75-90. 

Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Jacobi  JH,  Sanwal 
M,  Baskerville  JC,  Trevithick  JR.  1985.  In  vitro  studies  of 
microwave-induced  cataract:  reciprocity  between  exposure 
duration  and  dose  rate  for  pulsed  microwaves.  Exp  Eye  Res 
40(1):  1—13. 


VOLUME  III 


Award  Number:  DAMD17-94-C-4069 

TITLE:  Services  to  operate  and  Maintain  a  Microwave  Research  Laboratory 
PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  Yahya  Akyel,  Ph  D. 


Copies  of  Publications  (15  -  20) 

15.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2000]:  A  Comprehensive  review  of  the  research  on 
biological  effects  of  pulsed  radiofrequency  radiation  in  Russia  and  the  former  Soviet  Union. 
In:  “Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Volume  3,”  Lin,  J.C.  (ed.),  New 
York,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  pp.  260-292. 

16.  Pakhomov,  A.;  and  Doyle,  J.  [2000]:  Effect  of  pulsed  microwaves  on  the  population  spike  in 
rat  hippocampal  slices.  In:  “Millennium  International  Workshop  on  Biological  Effects  of 
Electromagnetic  Fields  Proceedings”,  Kostarakis,  P.;  and  Starvroulakis,  P.  (ed.),  pp.  480-485 
(ISBN  960-86733-0-5). 

17.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  and  Murphy,  M.R.  [2000]:  Low-intensity  millimeter  waves  as  a  novel 
therapeutic  modality.  IEEE  Trans.  Plasma  Sci.  21  (4):  34-40. 

18.  Seaman,  R.L.;  Belt,  M  L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  and  Mathur,  S.P  [1999]:  Hyperactivity  caused  by  a 
nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor  is  countered  by  ultra-wideband  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics. 
20:431-439. 

19.  Seaman,  R.  [2000]:  Effects  of  acute  systemic  3-nitropropionic  acid  administration  on  rat 
activity  and  acoustic  startle.  Neuroscience  Letters  280:183-186. 

20.  Vijayalaxmi;  Seaman,  R.L;  Belt,  M.L.;  Doyle,  J.M.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  and  Prihode,  T.J.  [1999]: 
Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  Radiation.  Int.  J.  Radiat.  Biol.  75(1):  115-120. 

Copies  of  Technical  Reports  (1  -  2) 

1.  Lu,  S.-T.;  Mathur,  S.P.;  Stuck,  B.;  Zwick,  H.;  D’ Andrea,  J.A.;  Ziriax,  J.M.;  Merritt,  J.H.; 
Lutty,  G.;  McLeod,  D.  S.;  and  Johnson,  M.  [1999]:  Retinal  Effects  of  High  Peak  Power 
Microwaves  in  Rhesus  Monkeys.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment,  Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment,  U.S.  Air  Force  Research 
Laboratory,  Technical  Report,  USAMRD  WRAIR  9907  006  TX,  NHRC-DET  99-01,  AFRL- 
HE-BR-TR- 1999-0231. 

2.  Samn  S.;  and  Mathur,  S.  [1999]:  A  mathematical  model  of  gigahertz  transverse 
electromagnetic  cell,  I.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  U.S.A.F.  Research  Laboratory,  Technical 
Report  AFRL-HE-BR-TR- 1999-02 19. 


A  COMPREHENSIVE  REVIEW  OF  THE  RESEARCH  ON  BIOLOGICAL  EFFECTS 
OF  PULSED  RADIOFREQUENCY  RADIATION  IN  RUSSIA  AND  THE  FORMER 
SOVIET  UNION 


Andrei  G.  Pakhomov1,2  and  Michael  R.  Murphy2 

‘McKessonHBOC  BioServices,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment  of 
the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

2Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate,  Air 

Force  Research  Laboratory 

Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas,  USA 


INTRODUCTION 

Pulsed  radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation  nowadays  is  among  the  most  ubiquitous  of 
environmental  factors.  Biological  effects  and  health  hazards  of  pulsed  RF  have  been  studied 
for  decades,  but  there  is  still  little  consensus  on  whether  the  safety  of  pulsed  RF  should  be 
given  any  special  consideration  compared  to  continuous  wave  (CW)  emissions.  While  it  is 
well  known  that  pulsed  fields  can  produce  effects  principally  different  from  those  of  CW 
(e.g.,  an  auditory  effect,  see  Lin,  1990),  potential  implications  of  such  effects  for  human 
safety  and  wellbeing  continue  to  be  debated. 

A  significant  contribution  to  the  field  of  bioelectromagnetics  has  been  made  by  the 
research  performed  in  the  former  Soviet  Union  (FSU).  Unfortunately,  most  of  this  research 
was  published  in  Russian;  these  publications  are  scarcely  available  in  the  West  and  have  not 
ever  been  reviewed  in  English.  Even  some  key  findings,  which  may  affect  the  conceptual 
understanding  of  interaction  mechanisms  and  approaches  to  RF  safety,  seem  to  be  not  known 
in  the  West,  and  their  replication  in  Western  laboratories  has  never  been  attempted. 

The  goal  of  the  present  paper  is  to  fill  in  this  void  and  deliver  a  comprehensive  review 
of  the  FSU  research  on  biological  effects  and  potential  health  hazards  of  pulsed  RF 
radiations. 


SOURCES  OF  INFORMATION 

The  principal  source  of  information  is  a  personal  collection  of  scientific  publications  in 
Russian,  which  was  accumulated  as  a  part  of  a  7-year  effort  of  one  of  the  authors  (A.G.P.)  to 


Advances  in  Electromagnetic  Fields  in  Living  Systems,  Voi  3 
Edited  by  J.C.  Un,  Kluwer  Academic/Plenum  Publishers,  2000 


265 


monitor  and  review  the  Russian/FSU  research  in  the  area  of  electromagnetic  biology. 
Currently,  this  collection  includes  over  1200  titles  and  is  one  of  the  largest  of  its  kind. 

Over  1000  of  the  collected  studies  were  abstracted  in  English,  and  the  abstracts  are 
included  in  the  electronic  EMF  Database  (produced  and  distributed  by  Information  Ventures, 
Inc.,  PA,  USA).  This  Database  (v.  3.2.4,  1999),  which  is  the  second  major  source  of 
information  for  the  current  review,  contains  about  26000  unique  citations  of  studies  on 
bioeffects  of  electromagnetic  fields  (from  DC  to  mm-waves).  Out  of  them,  there  are  about 
3600  citations  of  studies  performed  in  the  FSU  (and  published  in  either  Russian  or  English); 
we  estimate  that  this  bibliography  includes  at  least  80%  of  related  studies  performed  in  the 
FSU  and  published  in  the  open  (unclassified)  literature  since  1975  (earlier  papers  are  only 
scarcely  included  in  the  Database).  The  EMF  Database  proved  to  be  extremely  convenient  as 
a  fast  reference  and  information  search  engine,  while  the  scientific  quality  of  studies  usually 
had  to  be  judged  from  the  original  publications. 


STATISTICS  AND  GENERAL  NOTES 

For  the  purpose  of  this  review,  the  term  "pulsed  RF"  applies  to  any  pulsed,  intermittent, 
or  amplitude-modulated  electromagnetic  emissions  with  carrier  frequencies  from  units  of 
megahertz  up  to  300  GHz.  A  detailed  search  of  the  EMF  Database  revealed  a  total  of  206 
citations  of  pulsed  RF'  studies  performed  in  the  FSU.  For  convenience,  they  will  be  referred 
to  below  as  "Russian"  studies,  disregarding  the  exact  place  of  origin  (e.g.,  Russia  or  Ukraine) 
or  the  language  of  publication.  A  similar  search  for  "non-Russian"  publications  on  the  subject 
revealed  1342  citations.  The  percentage  of  pulsed  RF  publications  out  of  the  total  number  in 
the  Russian  and  non-Russian  bibliographies  was  remarkably  the  same  (6%). 

These  206  citations  were  individually  sorted  to  remove  all  meeting  abstracts,  review 
papers,  and  papers  on  dosimetry,  modeling,  standards  setting  and  enforcement;  then  we 
added  appropriate  Russian  papers  not  cited  in  the  Database.  The  final  outcome  was  .1 14 
original  experimental  Russian  studies  on  pulsed  RF  bioeffects. 

Of  these  studies,  over  70%  were  performed  in  laboratory  animals.  Only  a  few  studies 
(<4%)  employed  pro-  or  eukaryotic  cell  cultures,  whereas  a  lot  of  research  was  done  in 
various  isolated  organ  preparations  (about  20%).  A  relatively  large  number  of  studies  (>35%) 
explored  effects  of  chronic  irradiation. 

It  is  generally  accepted  in  Russian  science  that  the  nervous  system  is  the  most  sensitive 
to  electromagnetic  radiation.  Indeed,  studies  of  pulsed  RF  effects  on  nervous  system  function 
and  structure  are  by  far  the  most  numerous  (>65%);  electrophysiological  and  behavioral 
techniques  are  the  most  widely  used.  In  a  striking  contrast  with  the  Western  research,  not  a 
single  study  has  explored  possible  carcinogenic  effects  of  pulsed  RF;  apparently,  this 
possibility  has  never  been  a  concern  in  Russian  science. 

Presumably  nonthermal  (or  "RF-specific")  bioeffects  were  found  in  88  studies,  which  is 
more  than  90%  of  all  studies  that  searched  for  such  effects.  Among  them,  34  studies 
compared  bioeffects  of  various  modulation  regimens  and/or  those  of  CW  versus  pulsed  RF. 
In  most  cases  (>80%),  it  was  found  that  pulsed  RF  effects  indeed  depend  on  modulation 
and/or  are  different  from  effects  of  CW  irradiation  at  the  equivalent  time-average  intensity. 
These  data  indicated  that  pulsing  may  be  an  important  (or  even  the  most  important)  factor 
that  determines  the  biological  effects  of  low-intensity  RF  emissions. 

t  he  most  common  question  about  Russian  research  in  the  bioelectromagnetic  area  is  its 
scientific  quality.  Indeed,  noticed  flaws  include  unclear  or  invalid  experiment  protocols  (e.g., 


266 


lack  of  a  sham-exposed  control  group);  absence  of  good  thermometry  and  dosimetry  (in  most 
animal  studies,  the  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  was  neither  measured  nor  calculated); 
inadequate  statistical  analysis;  failure  to  take  into  account  specifics  of  biological 
experimentation  with  RF  radiation  (e.g.,  the  use  of  metal  recording  electrodes  in 
electrophysiological  studies  with  RF  could  cause  serious  artifacts);  and  failure  to  report  if  all 
potential  sources  of  the  artifact  were  considered  (e.g.,  the  noise  from  a  working  RF 
transmitter  can  cause  behavioral  responses  that  may  be  misinterpreted  as  an  RF  bioeffect). 
While  many  studies  were  flawed  in  one  way  or  another,  or  were  poorly  presented  in 
publications,  still  many  other  Russian  studies  demonstrated  a  high-quality  research. 

For  any  study  on  RF  bioeffects,  whether  flawless  or  not,  the  most  critical  issue  is 
independent  replication  of  findings.  Until  (or  unless)  proven  wrong  in  replicative  studies,  the 
results  of  any  reasonable-quality  research  deserve  attention  and  careful  consideration.  That  is 
why  we  attempted  to  address  in  this  review  all  available  Russian  studies  on  pulsed  RF 
bioeffects  that  meet  at  least  the  minimum  scientific  quality  criteria.  The  other  studies,  which 
failed  to  meet  these  criteria  (as  far  as  it  could  he  judged  from  the  published  material),  were 
generally  regarded  as  unacceptable.  For  example,  all  of  the  available  Russian 
epidemiological  studies  with  pulsed  RF  reported  adverse  health  effects  of  exposure  (such  as 
"asthenic  syndrome"  or  "radiofrequency  disease"),  but  none  of  them  showed  reasonable 
evidence  that  these  disorders  were  in  fact  caused  by  the  RF  exposure;  besides,  these  studies 
reported  too  little  or  even  no  data  about  the  exposure  parameters.  Because  of  the  poor  quality, 
none  of  the  Russian  epidemiological  studies  are  included  in  the  present  review. 

Among  the  "acceptable"  studies,  more  credit  was  given  to  those  that  (1)  reported 
interesting  and  potentially  important  findings,  (2)  presented  data  that  were  consistently 
reproduced  over  the  years  and  were  reported  in  more  than  a  single  publication,  and  (3) 
focused  on  research  topics  that  were  independently  explored  in  different  laboratories.  The 
reviewed  papers  are  arranged  under  the  following  categories:  "In  Vitro  and  In  Situ  Studies", 
"Animal  Studies:  Acute  Exposure",  "Animal  Studies:  Chronic  Exposure",  and  "Bioeffects  of 
Extremely  High  Power  Pulses". 


IN  VITRO  AND  IN  SITU  STUDIES 

Kim  and  co-authors  (1986)  used  fluorescent  probes  to  reveal  possible  effect  of  pulsed 
microwaves  (800  MHz,  2  W/cm2,  50-ps  pulses  at  25-100  Hz)  on  the  state  of  the  cell 
membrane  in  erythrocyte  ghosts.  The  temperature  of  exposed  samples  was  kept  stable  at  18- 
19  °C  during  20-25  min  of  exposure.  The  experiments  established  that  fluorescence  of  probes 
that  bind  to  the  lipid-water  boundary  of  the  membrane  (2-toluidinonaphthaIene-6-$ulfonate, 
or  2,6-TNS,  and  l-anilinonaphtbalene-8-sulfonate,  or  1,8-ANS)  depended  on  the  modulation 
frequency.  Fluorescence  of  2,6-TNS  was  not  different  from  control  at  25-35  Hz,  but 
exceeded  it  by  12-16%  at  55-65  Hz,  and  by  6-9%  at  80-100  Hz.  With  1,8-ANS,  the  increase 
in  fluorescence  intensity  at  55  Hz  was  16.9  ±  5.1%.  (Hereinafter,  shown  average  values 
represent  the  mean  ±  standard  error,  unless  stated  otherwise.)  Fluorescence  increased  to  the 
maximum  after  10-20  min  of  exposure  and  then  remained  stable;  the  increase  was  more 
pronounced  at  higher  concentrations  of  NaCl  in  the  medium  (up  to  300  mmol).  In  contrast, 
the  fluorescence  parameters  of  piren,  a  hydrophobic  probe,  were  not  affected  by  irradiation. 
The  authors  supposed  that  the  changes  registered  with  fluorescent  probes  were  induced  by 
mechanical  oscillations  generated  by  microwave  pulses. 


267 


Pashovskina  and  Akoev  (1996)  studied  the  effect  of  pulsed  2375  MHz  radiation  on  the 
ATPase  activity  of  rat  actomyosin  in  vitro.  Exposures  for  1  min  at  either  40  or  200  mW/cm2 
(50*  to  310-Hz  modulation)  heated  the  samples  by  less  than  0.3  °C.  ATPase  activity  was 
measured  from  accumulation  of  the  inorganic  phosphate  (IP).  Two  parallel  control  samples, 
prepared  together  with  the  exposed  one  and  from  the  same  tissue  homogenates,  were  used  to 
establish  the  background  IP  contents  at  the  time  before  and  after  the  exposure.  With  40 
mW/cm2  radiation,  130-  and  300-Hz  modulation  suppressed  the  ATPase  activity  to  50  ±  3% 
and  9.4  ±  2.7%  of  the  control  level,  respectively  (p<.05).  In  contrast,  270-Hz  modulation 
increased  the  ATPase  activity  almost  3-fold  (p<  05).  Most  of  other  tested  frequencies 
produced  weak  or  moderate  (<  50%)  activity  changes.  The  dependence  of  the  effects  upon 
the  modulation  frequency  did  not  show  any  pattern  or  shape.  Increasing  the  field  intensity  to 
200  mW/cm2  entirely  changed  the  effectiveness  of  the  same  modulation  frequencies. 
Exposure  at  130  and  300  Hz  then  caused  ATPase  activation  (by  170.3  ±  3.3%  and  61  ±  3.9%, 
respectively).  The  activation  reached  a  maximum  at  110-130  Hz  modulation  and  decreased 
at  higher  and  lower  frequencies,  forming  a  bell-shaped  dependence.  The  authors  concluded 
that  ATPase  activity  of  actomyosin  showed  a  complex  dependence  upon  both  the  field 
intensity  and  modulation,  but  were  unable  to  explain  this  result. 

Semin  et  al.  (1995)  studied  the  effect  of  weak  RF  on  the  stability  of  DNA  secondary 
structure  in  vitro.  DNA  was  exposed  in  the  presence  of  glycine  and  formaldehyde. 
Aminomethynol  compounds,  which  form  in  this  medium,  react  with  DNA  bases  at  single- 
Strand  sites,  which  prevents  recovery  from  damage  to  the  DNA  secondary  structure.  The 
damage  accumulates  during  the  incubation,  and  its  amount  can  be  estimated  from  the 
dynamics  of  thermal  DNA  denaturalization  after  RF  or  sham  exposure.  Samples  were 
exposed  for  30  min  in  an  anechoic  chamber  at  18  °C  by  10  different  microwave  frequencies 
simultaneously  (4-to  8-GHz  range,  25-ms  pulses,  1-  to  6-Hz  repetition  rate,  0.4  to  0.7 
mW/cm2  peak  power,  no  heating).  Parallel  control  samples  were  sham  exposed  in  a  shielded 
area  in  the  same  chamber.  The  experiments  established  that  irradiation  at  3  or  4  Hz  and  0.6 
mW/cm2  peak  power  clearly  increased  the  accumulated  damage  to  the  DNA  secondary 
structure  (P<0.00001).  However,  changing  the  pulse  repetition  rate  to  1,  5,  or  6  Hz,  as  well  as 
changing  the  peak  power  to  0.4  or  0.7  mW/cm1,  eliminated  the  effect  entirely.  Thus,  the 
effect  occurred  only  within  narrow  "windows"  of  the  peak  intensities  and  modulation 
frequencies. 

One  more  example  of  a  "double  window"  wax  described  hy  Ciapeev  et  al.  (1994).  In  this 
case,  the  effect  required  a  certain  combination  of  the  carrier  and  modulation  frequencies,  but 
did  not  show  a  window  dependence  on  the  field  intensity.  The  authors  explored  if  the 
spontaneous  locomotor  activity  of  a  unicellular  organism  Paramecium  caudatum  could  be 
affected  by  irradiation  with  CW  and  modulated  millimeter  waves.  Paramecia  were  placed  in  a 
thin  layer  of  saline  in  a  small  round  cuvette  (7-mm  diameter).  Hyperpolarization  of  cells  by  a 
5-fold  reduction  of  potassium  content  in  the  saline  (to  0.2  mM)  made  them  constantly  circle 
around  in  the  cuvette  for  hours.  A  "motility  index"  (MI)  was  evaluated  automatically  by  an 
optic  probe  as  the  amount  of  light  reflected  from  cells  appearing  in  the  field  of  vision  of  a 
microscope  during  any  2-min  interval.  The  MI  increased  with  increasing  average  locomotion 
velocity,  and  decreased  when  cells  made  more  turns  or  when  the  number  of  active  cells 
decreased.  Radiation  was  applied  for  12  min  after  a  10-min  stabilization  period.  Control 
samples  were  monitored  for  the  same  time  interval,  but  without  irradiation. 


268 


A  42.2  GHz 
0.1  mW/cm2 


Hz 


B  10  mW/cm2 
0.0956  Hz 


GHz 


C  42.2  GHz 
0.0956  Hz 


0.001  0.1  10 

mVWcm2 


Figure  1.  Effects  of  pulsed  millimeter-wave  radiation  on  Paramecia  motility  index.  A,  die  effect  of 
frequency  (abscissa,  Hz)  when  the  carrier  frequency  and  power  are  kept  constant  at  42.2  GHz  and  0.1  mW/cm1. 
B,  the  effect  of  earner  frequency  (abscissa,  GHz)  when  the  power  and  modulation  are  kept  constant  at  10 
mW/cm2  and  0.0936  Hz.  C,  the  effect  of  the  Incident  power  density  (abscissa,  mW/cm*)  at  the  resonance  carrier 
and  modulation  frequencies  (42.2  GHz  and  0.0956  Hz).  Dashed  line  shows  the  temperature  increase,  °C.  A 
single  datapoint  ("CW")  illustrates  the  lack  of  motility  changes  for  exposure  without  modulation  at  20  mW/cm1. 
Each  datapoint  is  the  mean  of  5-10  experiments;  the  cwor  bare  are  confidence  intervals  at  pv\03.  See  text  for 
more  detail  (Adopted  from  Gapeev  ct  aL,  1994). 


In  the  first  set  of  30  experiments,  cells  were  exposed  at  42.2  GHz  (CW)  at  power 
densities  from  units  of  microwatts  to  tens  of  milliwatts  per  centimeter  square.  These 
exposures  never  affected  the  MI,  even  at  the  highest  intensities,  which  caused  saline  heating 
by  1-3  °C.  In  the  next  30  experiments,  the  carrier  frequency  was  modulated  at  16,  8,  J,  0.5, 
0.25,  0.1,  or  0.05  Hz  (0.1  to  20  mW/cm2,  0.5  duty  ratio).  No  effect  was  detected,  except  for 
the  combination  of  0.1  Hz  modulation  at  0.1  mW/cm2,  which  considerably  decreased  the  MI. 
More  accurate  study  of  the  effect  of  various  modulation  rates  revealed  a  clear  resonant 
dependence  with  a  peak  at  0.0956  Hz  (Figure  1,  A).  At  this  modulation  rate,  the  threshold 
field  intensity  was  near  0.02  mW/cm2.  The  maximum  effect  of  about  20%  MI  redaction  was 
achieved  at  0.1  mW/cm3,  with  no  further  increase  at  intensities  of  up  to  50  mW/cm2  (Figure 
1,  C).  Further  experiments  demonstrated  that  the  effect  is  induced  only  in  a  narrow  window 
of  carrier  frequencies,  with  the  peak  at  42.25  GHz  (Figure  1,  B). 

This  effect  could  not  be  explained  by  microwave  heating,  which  reached  only  0.1 -0.2  °C 
at  5  mW/cm2.  Moreover,  the  effect  could  not  be  reproduced  by  heating  with  infrared 
radiation  modulated  at  0.0956  Hz.  The  authors  suggested  that  the  microwave-induced  MI 
decrease  could  be  caused  by  increasing  the  intracellular  Ca2+  level  and  resulting  cell 
depolarization.  However,  they  were  unable  to  explain  reasons  for  the.  sharp  resonant 

A  subsequent  study  by  the  same  group  of  authors  explored  the  effects  of  CW  and 
modulated  millimeter  waves  on  the  respiratory  burst  in  murine  peritoneal  -neutrophils 
(Gapeev  et  al.,  1997).  Isolated  neutrophils  were  exposed  in  the  far  field  for  20  mitt  in  the 


269 


presence  of  a  high  concentration  (7.5-10  pM)  of  calcium  ionophore  A23187.  After  the 
exposure,  a  respiratory  burst  was  activated  by  adding  pborboM  2-mymtafe-l  3-acetate  (l 
pM),  and  the  production  of  reactive  oxygen  species  (ROS)  by  neutrophils  was  measured 
from  luminol-dependent  chemoluminescence.  Experiments  with  CW  irradiation  at  50 
pW/cm3  at  various  fixed  frequencies  in  the  range  41 .75-42. 1 5  GHz  revealed  a  25%  inhibition 
of  ROS  production  at  a  "resonance"  frequency  of  41.95  GHz;  the  half  width  of  the  resonance 
was  about  100  MHz.  At  41.95  GHz,  a  50%  effect  (half-maximum)  was  produced  by 
intensities  under  1  pW/cm1.  The  effect  reached  maximum  (about  24%  inhibition)  at  20 
pW/cm3  and  remained  at  this  plateau  level  at  higher  intensities.  Modulation  of  41.95-GHz 
radiation  at  1  Hz  enhanced  ROS  production  by  about  10%,  modulation  rates  of  0.1,  16,  and 
50  Hz  inhibited  ROS  production  by  16-20%,  and  the  rates  of  0.5,  2,  4  and  8  Hz  had  no  effect. 
In  the  next  experiments,  the  modulation  rate  was  kept  constant  at  1  Hz  and  the  radiation 
frequency  was  varied.  This  irradiation  activated  ROS  production  in  the  carrier  frequency 
band  of  41.95-42.05  GHz,  and  suppressed  it  in  the  band  of  41.8-41.9  GHz.  The  authors 
concluded  that  the  microwave  effect  on  ROS  production  is  nonthermal  in  nature,  and  is 
determined  by  specific  combinations  of  the  carrier  frequency  and  modulation  rate. 

Tygranyan  (1986)  reported  severe  disturbances  in  isolated  frog  nerve  and  heart  function 
if  intense  enough  microwave  pulses  coincided  with  the  "active"  state  of  the  excitable 
membrane  (e.g.,  were  applied  during  propagation  of  the  compound  action  potential,  CAP).  In 
isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve,  these  effects  included  decrease  of  the  CAP  amplitude  (by  90-95%) 
and  velocity  (by  35-40%)  after  some  30  min  of  exposure.  The  same  RF  pulses  delivered 
before,  after,  or  asynchronously  with  CAP  propagation  produced  only  a  subtle  thermal  effect. 
The  author  supposed  that  microwave  pulse  energy  is  converted  into  a  mp^.finn.raf  pulse, 
which  travels  in  a  spiral  between  Schwann  cell  membranes  of  the  nerve  sheath.  Due  to  a 
phase  synchronism  effect,  the  traveling  pulse  triggers  another  mechanical  pulse  perpendicular 
to  the  nerve  surface,  and  the  latter  may  be  strong  enough  to  damage  the  "active"  nerve 
membrane.  The  author's  calculations  based  on  dielectric  and  mechanical  properties  of  nerve 
seemed  to  support  this  hypothesis. 

The  findings  of  Tygranyan  motivated  Pakhomov  et  al.  (1991)  to  search  for  similar 
effects  in  giant  nerve  fibers  of  the  isolated  ventral  nerve  cord  of  the  earthworm  Luntbricus 
terrestris.  A  length  of  about  2.5  mm  of  the  cord  was  exposed  in  a  small  drop  of  Ringer's 
solution  to  6.45-GHz  CW  or  pulsed  radiation,  or  was  sham  exposed.  Exposure  duration  was 
from  10  to  50  min  at  the  peak  SAR  from  30  to  230  mW/g.  Action  potentials,  which  were 
evoked  by  repetitive  electrical  stimulation  and  propagated  along  the  nerve,  were  recorded  by 
two  pairs  of  electrodes,  positioned  immediately  before  and  after  the  exposure  zone. 
Therefore,  comparison  of  these  records  provided  an  accurate  measure  indicating  whether  the 
nerve  conduction  in  the  exposure  zone  was  affected.  Microwave  pulses  were  synchronized 
with  the  action  potential  crossing  the  exposure  zone,  or  were  delivered  independently  from 
the  nerve  stimulation  (0.2-  to  32-ms  pulse  width,  6-  to  2000-Hz  repetition  rate).  This  study 
failed  to  produce  any  specific  microwave  effect,  regardless  of  RF  pulse  parameters  or  then- 
phasing  with  the  nerve  firing.  However,  giant  nerve  fibers  of  the  earthworm  ventral  cord  do 
not  have  a  myelin  sheath  that  was  theoretically  supposed  to  be  essential  for  Tygranyan's 
effect  described  above.  The  design  of  the  exposure  cell  and  the  carrier  frequency  were  also 
different  (6.45  GHz  versus  800-915  MHz). 

For  the  next  study  (Pakhomov  et  al.,  1993),  a  microwave  transmitter  and  irradiator  were 
borrowed  from  Tygranyan's  laboratory,  to  replicate  his  exposure  conditions  with  maximum 
care.  The  experiments  were  performed  in  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve,  which  was  continually 


270 


stimulated  at  a  rate  of  50  twin  pulses/sec  for  90  min.  This  high-rate  stimulation  caused 
gradual  decline  of  the  nerve  function,  i.c.,  increased  the  CAP  latency  and  decreased  its 
amplitude  and  tracing  integral.  Exposures  or  sham  exposures  began  1  min  after  the  onset  of 
the  high-rate  stimulation  and  continued  till  the  end  of  the  experiment.  Microwave  pulses  (915 
MHz,  5  to  70  W/g  peak  SAR,  0.5-  or  3-ms  width)  were  phased  with  CAP  in  various  ways,  or 
were  delivered  asynchronously  at  a  rate  of  50  Hz.  At  the  highest  SAR,  microwave  heating 
could  reach  2.7  °C.  Regardless  of  phasing,  SAR,  or  pulse  width,  none  of  the  exposure 
regimens  caused  severe  CAP  suppression,  therefore  the  results  of  Tygranyan  (1986)  failed  to 
be  independently  confirmed. 

At  the  same  time,  these  experiments  revealed  a  different  microwave  effect:  The  exposed 
nerves  displayed  a  faster  decrease  of  the  CAP  amplitude  and  tracing  integral  during  the 
course  of  the  high-rate  stimulation.  This  effect  was  regarded  as  nonthermai  or  microwave- 
specific,  since  conventional  heating  of  the  superfusing  solution  by  3  °C  during  sham 
irradiation  caused  the  opposite  changes.  Within  studied  limits,  the  magnitude  of  the  effect 
showed  no  significant  correlation  with  exposure  parameters.  In  general,  this  microwave- 
induced  facilitation  of  the  nerve  vitality  loss  was  similar  to  the  effect  reported  earlier  by 
McRee  and  Wachtel  (1980, 1982),  but  substantially  weaker. 

Two  subsequent  studies  explored  the  dependence  of  this  effect  upon  modulation 
(Pakhomov  et  al.,  1992;  Pakhomov,  1993).  The  course  of  the  high-rate  stimulation  and 
exposure  was  reduced  to  20  min.  Microwave  pulses  of  1-  to  1000-ps  duration  (915  MHz,  43- 
48  or  20-33  W/g  peak  SAR)  were  delivered  at  duty  cycles  from  1/20  to  1/4000,  and  were  not 
synchronized  with  nerve  firing.  These  studies  identified  effective  and  ineffective  pulsing 
regimens.  For  instance,  at  1/40  duty  cycle  and  43-48  W/g,  1-  and  100-ps  pulses  caused  a 
statistically  significant  effect,  while  10-  or  1000-ps  pulses  did  not,  despite  the  fact  that  the 
gross  microwave  heating  by  all  these  exposures  was  essentially  the  same. 

Presumably  a  nonthermai  effect  of  pulsed  RF  was  observed  in  in  situ  frog  heart  by 
Grechko  (1994).  This  wide-scale  study  used  1680  male  frogs  to  compare  the  effects  of  five 
different  types  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  cardiotoxic  effectiveness  of  a  drug  strophantine 
K.  Injection  of  this  drug  caused  a  characteristic  heart  arrest  in  systole  in  about  60  min. 
Irradiation  by  3085  MHz,  1-ps  pulses  at  400  Hz,  0.3-0.5  mW/cm2  for  30  min  significantly 
increased  the  latency  of  the  heart  arrest  (by  17-44%).  In  some  cases,  the  heart  was  even  able 
to  restore  the  activity,  which  never  happened  under  sham  exposure  conditions.  In  contrast, 
the  same  irradiation  for  10  min  at  2-3  mW/cm2  decreased  the  heart  arrest  latency  by  10-25%. 
Pakhomov  et  al.  (1995b)  attempted  to  replicate  findings  of  Tinney  and  co-authors  (1976)  that 
microwaves  can  cause  beating  rate  changes  in  isolated  heart  by  stimulation  of 
ncurotransmittcr  release  from  autonomous  nervous  system  introcordiac  fiber  terminals.  CW 
exposure  at  2-10  mW/g  (960  MHz)  was  reported  to  cause  bradycardia  in  isolated  turtle 
hearts.  This  effect  could  be  blocked  by  a  parasympathetic  blocker  atropine,  or  enhanced  by  a 

sympathetic  blocker  propranolol.  The  replication  experiments  were  performed  in  isolated 

frog  heart  slices,  using  915  MHz  radiation;  exposures  continued  for  up  to  40  min  at  SAR 
levels  from  0.1  to  52  mW/g  (10-  to  100-ps  pulses  at  16-  to  2000-Hz  repetition  rates).  Neither 
irradiation  alone  nor  in  combination  with  atropine  or  propranolol  caused  bradycardia  in  the 
frog  heart  slices.  The  only  effect  detected  was  a  reversible  beating  rate  increase  when 
microwave  heating  exceeded  0.1  "C  (when  SAR  exceeded  lOmW/g).  One  needs  to  note, 
however,  that  the  studied  drugs  alone  (i.e.,  without  irradiation)  caused  marked  beating  rate 
changes  in  isolated  turtle  hearts  (Tinney  et  al.,  1976),  but  not  in  the  frog  heart  slices,  even  at 
much  higher  concentrations.  This  finding  may  reflect  a  principal  difference  in  physiological 


271 


organization  of  these  two  heart  preparations,  which  could  be  a  reason  for  their  different 
sensitivity  to  microwave  radiation. 

It  was  also  reported  that  a  caffeine  antagonist,  tetracaine,  eliminated  a  nonthermal 
microwave  effect  in  isolated  snail  neurons  (Arber  and  Liii,  1984).  Therefore,  Pakhomov  et  al. 
(1995b)  inferred  that  caffeine  itself  could  enhance  the  microwave  effect  and  tested  this 
hypothesis  in  isolated  frog  heart  slices.  In  contrast  to  atropine  and  propranolol,  superfiision  of 
slices  with  1  mM  of  caffeine  strongly  increased  the  average  heart  power,  which  was 
calculated  as  a  product  of  the  beating  rate  and  beats'  amplitude.  Exposure  at  8-10  mW/g 
average  SAR  (1.5-ms  pulses,  2.5-ms  interpulse  interval,  8  pulses/burst,  16  bursts/s,  915  MHz 
for  33  min)  augmented  the  caffeine  effect  by  about  15%  (p<.02).  Microwave  heating  was 
under  0.1  °C  and  could  not  account  for  this  exposure  effect.  Moreover,  the  same  exposure 
without  caffeine  superfiision  caused  no  beating  rate  or  amplitude  changes. 

Afrikanova  and  Grigoriev  (1996)  reported  that  pulsed,  but  not  CW  exposure  increased 
the  probability  of  heart  rate  changes  and  heart  arrest  in  isolated  and  in  situ  frog  heart.  The 
effect  was  observed  at  intensities  from  16  to  340  uW/cm2  at  9.3  GHz  and  modulation 
frequencies  under  100  Hz  (30%  modulation  depth,  50%  duty  cycle).  The  maximum  effect 
was  produced  by  a  5-min  exposure  with  modulation  frequency  changing  by  1-Hz  steps  from 
6  to  10  Hz  (1  min  at  each  step).  A  longer  exposure  with  this  modulation  (10  or  19  min),  as 
well  as  5-min  exposure  using  various  other  modulation  patterns,  produced  weaker  or 
different  effects. 

Pulsed  RF  effects  on  individual  neurons  in  isolated  brain  slices  were  explored  in  studies 
of  Zakharova  and  co-authors  (1993,  1995,  1996).  Spontaneous  firing  of  cortical  neurons  was 
recorded  by  an  extracellular  microelectrode  before,  during,  and  after  a  brief  (4-5  min)  900- 
MHz  exposure  at  1.4  mW/g.  The  reactions  observed  with  7-,  16-,  30-,  and  60-Hz  modulation 
(1/5  duty  ratio)  were  a  decrease  of  the  firing  rate  and  desynchronization  of  firing  of 
individual  neurons.  The  probability  of  the  firing  rate  inhibition  and  its  magnitude  were  the 
highest  with  7-  and  I6-Hz  modulation  and  the  lowest  with  the  60-Hz  modulation.  For 
instance,  16-Hz  pulses  inhibited  the  activity  in  15  out  of  17  tested  neurons;  the  firing  rate 
could  fall  by  24%  on  the  1st  minute  of  irradiation,  and  by  as  much  as  65%  on  the  4th  min. 
The  rate  did  not  recover  but  sometimes  even  decreased  further  after  exposure.  A  far  more 
intense  conventional  heating  (by  0.33  "CAnin,  as  opposed  to  0.02  °C/min  under  exposure) 
also  inhibited  the  activity,  but  just  in  7  out  of  13  neurons,  and  the  firing  rate  did  recover  when 
the  heating  was  over.  The  greater  effectiveness  of  microwave  treatment,  its  dependence  on 
modulation,  as  well  as  lack  of  the  recovery  after  exposure,  suggested  a  specific  microwave 
effect  mechanism. 

Philippova  et  al.  (1988)  reported  an  interesting  effect  of  900-MHz  exposure  on  'fa- 
camphor  binding  in  isolated  membrane  fraction  of  rat  olfactory  epithelium.  Under  constant- 
temperature  conditions,  irradiation  markedly  decreased  specific  fa-camphor  binding  (down 
to  60-40%  of  the  control),  but  did  not  affect  its  nonspecific  binding.  The  effect  depended  on 
SAR  and  duration  of  exposure,  but  not  on  modulation  in  the  studied  range  from  1  to  100  Hz, 
At  1  mW/g,  the  effect  gradually  increased  and  reached  saturation  after  some  10-20  min  of 
exposure.  For  a  15-min  exposure  at  various  SARs,  the  effect  gradually  increased  with  SAR 
and  reached  saturation  at  about  4  mW/g.  The  authors  supposed  that  the  observed  decrease  of 
ligand  binding  resulted  from  microwave-induced  release  of  specific  camphor-binding  protein 
from  cell  membranes  into  solution. 

The  microwave  effect  on  olfactory  epithelium  and  neighboring  respiratory  epithelium 
was  further  investigated  in  a  histological  study  by -Popov  et  al.  (1996).  Tissue  samples  were 


272 


obtained  from  Wistar  rats;  one  sample  from  each  animal  served  as  a  control,  and  the  other 
one  was  exposed  for  15  min  at  15  W/kg  to  0.9  GHz  microwaves  (16  Hz  pulsed  modulation, 
50%  duty  ratio).  Subsequent  electron  microscopy  revealed  increased  vacuolization  of 
olfactory  neurons  in  exposed  samples,  which  indicated  dying  of  these  cells.  The  most  severe 
degenerative  changes  (swelling,  appearance  of  vesicles  and  multilamellar  structures) 
developed  in  non-myelinated  axons  of  olfactory  neurons.  Concurrently,  support  cells 
displayed  pronounced  cytoplasmic  vacuolization  in  apical  parts  of  the  cell  body,  which 
indicated  that  microwaves  enhanced  mucus  secretion.  In  the  respiratory  epithelium,  the  most 
remarkable  effect  was  fusion  of  cilia  into  so-called  "giant  cilia, "  which  contained  numerous 
basal  bodies.  These  bodies  formed  axonemes  with  a  typical  arrangement  of  microtubules. 
Giant  cilia  included  5-10  or  more  axonemes  with  basal  bodies  and  numerous  vesicles 
(remains  of  fused  membranes).  As  a  rule,  the  cytoplasm  of  respiratory  cells  was  strongly 
vacuolated.  Overall,  the  authors  regarded  these  and  other  observed  changes  as  a  "direct  and 
pronounced  degenerative  effect  of  microwaves  on  neurons  and  other  epithelial  cells." 

To  complete  this  section  on  in  viirn  bioeffects,  we  will  mention  the  studies  that 
attempted  to  demonstrate  specific  bioeffects  of  pulsed  RF,  but  could  find  either  no  effects,  or 
only  the  effects  caused  by  heating.  Alexeev  et  al.  (1987)  could  not  find  any  but  thermal 
effects  on  Ca3+  transmembrane  current  in  mollusk  neurons  (900  MHz,  <10  min  at  0.2-20 
mW/g,  0.5-  to  1,000-Hz  modulation).  Khitrov  and  Kakushkina  (1990)  observed  solely 
thermal  effects  of  CW  or  pulsed  exposure  on  K+  transport  and  oxygen  consumption  in 
isolated  rat  liver  tissue  (2450  MHz,  0.1-5  W/g,  13-,  17-,  21-,  or  25-Hz  pulses  at  1/1000  duty 
ratio).  Khramov  et  al.  (1991)  could  detect  only  thermal  effects  of  microwaves  on  the  electric 
activity  of  a  crayfish  stretch  receptor  (37-  to  78-GHz,  10  to  250  mW/cm2,  from  20  sec  to 
several  hours,  0.01-1000  Hz  modulation).  In  a  study  by  Bolshakov  and  Alexeev  (1992), 
pulsed  but  not  CW  radiation  produced  bursting  responses  of  snail  neurons  (900  MHz,  0.5  to 
15  mW/g,  0.5  to  110  Hz);  however,  the  authors  regarded  this  effect  as  possibly  being  an 
artifact  from  mechanical  vibrations  of  the  exposure  chamber.  In  experiments  with  isolated 
frog  heart  slices.  Pakhomov  et  al.  (1995a)  tested  over  400  modulation  regimens  and 
concluded  that  changes  in  the  beating  rate  and  amplitude  are  entirely  determined  by  the  time- 
average  SAR  and  microwave  heating  (885  or  915  MHz,  1-ps  to  10-ms  pulses,  1/7  to 
1/100,000  duty  cycle,  100  to  3000  mW/g  peak  SAR  for  2  min). 

ANIMAL  STUDIES:  ACUTE  EXPOSURE 

The  possible  impact  of  low-intensity  pulsed  microwaves  on  natural  ecosystems  was 
studied  in  a  laboratory  model  using  a  tick  Hyctlomma  asiaticum  (Korotkov  et  al.,  1996). 
Exposure  regimens  tested  in  this  study  differed  in  the  microwave  frequency,  peak  power,  and 
modulation  (see  Table  1).  Ticks  were  kept  at  a  room  temperature  of  21-23  °C  in  humidified 
chambers.  Exposures  were  performed  at  different  stages  of  tick  development  (eggs,  larvae, 
nymphs,  imago);  the  number  of  specimens  in  each  exposed  group  varied  from  20 
(experiments  with  larvae)  to  as  many  as  3000  (experiments  with  eggs).  Irradiation  of  eggs  5- 
6  days  after  they  were  laid  did  not  affect  the  percent  of  appearing  larvae  (95-100%  in  any 
group).  At  the  same  time,  exposures  significantly  delayed  larvae  hatching.  In  the  control 
group  (SI),  50%  of  larvae  appeared  in  11.9+1.0  days,  while  in  the  exposed  groups  this 
interval  increased  to  15.3+0.1  days  (R2),  25.3+0.1  days  (R3),  and  32.2+0.7  days  (R4);  R5 
and  R6  were  not  tested  in  these  experiments.  Activation  of  the  larvae  of  SI-  and  R2-exposed 


273 


groups  occurred  on  the  day  of  hatching,  while  R3  and  R4  exposures  delayed  it  by  17.0±0.4 
days  and  23.9±0.5  days,  respectively.  Exposures  R4  and  R5  decreased  the  life  span  of  unfed 
larvae  and  nymphs  by  20-30%,  but  this  effect  was  not  statistically  significant. 

Effects  of  R3-R6  exposure  regimens  were  studied  in  replete  larvae  in  winter  and  fall  tick 
generations.  The  larvae  were  exposed  on  the  10th  day  after  feeding.  The  first  nymphs 
appeared  in  16-18  days  after  the  feeding  in  all  the  groups,  but  their  survival,  molting,  and  life 
span  were  adversely  affected  by  exposures.  On  the  whole,  irradiation  by  pulse  bursts  at  3 
GHz  (R3  and  R4)  was  the  most  effective,  and  the  effects  were  more  profound  at  the  higher 
peak  power  (R4).  On  the  contrary,  the  wide-band  exposures  (R2  and  R5)  were  the  least 
effective,  even  at  750  pW/cmJ  peak  SAR.  Active  and  fed  ticks  were  less  sensitive  to 
microwaves  than  hungry  specimens  or  those  in  the  diapause  period.  The  authors  concluded 
that  low  intensity  pulsed  microwaves  were  a  negative  environmental  factor  for  the  tick  H. 
asiaticum. 


Table.  1.  Microwave  exposure  regimens*  employed  in  the  study  by  Korotkov  et  al.,  1996 


Regimen 

Frequency, 

GHz 

Peak  power, 
pW/ctn1 

Modulation 

Pulse  width, 
ms 

Pulse  repetition 
rate,  Hz 

Burst  duration, 
ms 

Burst  repetition 
rate,  Hz 

SI 

Sham 

- 

* 

- 

- 

- 

R2 

1-4 

150 

20 

7 

- 

- 

R3 

3 

75 

** 

1000 

20 

7 

R4 

3 

150  . 

** 

1000 

20 

7 

R5 

1-4 

750 

20 

2 

- 

- 

B/3 

1 

750 

20 

2 

- 

- 

*  Exposure  duration  in  all  cases  was  15  min  (Grigoriev,  1999). 

**  Pulse  width  for  regimene  R3  and  R4  is  not  specified  in  the  paper. 


All  other  m  vivo  studies  of  acute  bioeffects  of  pulsed  RF  were  performed  in  warm- 
blooded  laboratory  animals.  The  vast  majority  of  these  studies  focused  on  changes  in  the 
nervous  system  and  behavior;  the  other  ones  dealt  with  general  physiological  changes  (e.g., 
hormone  production,  blood  composition,  heart  rate),  and  just  one  study  explored  possible 
genetic  damage  from  RF  irradiation  (Belokhvostov  et  al.,  1995). 

In  this  work,  male  albino  rats  (150-200  g)  were  exposed  in  an  anechoic  chamber  to  1- 
p.sec,  400-Hz  microwave  pulses  (3.085  GHz)  at  5,  10,  20,  or  46  mW/cm2.  The  exposure 
lasted  for  24  min  or  2  hours,  and  the  authors  claimed  that  it  caused  no  rise  in  the  rectal 
temperature.  The  animals  were  decapitated  5  hours  after  the  exposure,  and  blood  taken  from 
6-7  rats  was  pooled  together  and  considered  as  one  sample.  Blood  cells  were  removed,  and 
the  samples  were  analyzed  by  DNA  electrophoresis  in  polyacrylamide  gel  and  by  polymerase 
chain  reaction  (PCR).  Low-molecular-weight  DNA  fraction  (175-185  nucleotide  pairs)  was 
revealed  in  blood  plasma  in  38%  of  the  samples  from  sham-exposed  animals  (6  samples  out 
of  16).  In  exposed  groups,  regardless  of  exposure  duration  and  intensity,  this  fraction  was 
found  in  80  to  100%  of  samples  (e.g.,  7  out  of  8  samples  after  24  min  at  5  mW/cm1,  see  also 
Figure  2,  A).  The  DNA  fraction  was  analyzed  further  by  PCR  to  reveal  complete  and 
incomplete  copies  of  so-called  LINE  elements  (which  are  a  known  marker  of  genetic 


274 


transposition  in  various  pathologic  conditions).  Complete  copies  of  the  LINE  element  were 
not  found  in  any  control  samples,  but  were  present  in  1  out  of  7,  5  out  of  7,  and  1  out  7 
samples  after  a  2-hour  exposure  at  5, 10,  and  20  mW/cm1,  respectively  (i.e.,  10  mW/cm2  was 
the  most  effective).  The  amount  of  DNA  was,  on  the  average,  2.24  times  higher  after  10 
mW/cm5  exposure  than  after  20  mW/cm2  (n=3).  Since  the  transposition  of  ftill  copies  of  the 
LINE  element  is  known  to  cause  DNA  rearrangements  within  the  genome,  their  release  into 
blood  plasma  may  indicate  a  possible  adverse  effect  of  microwaves  on  genome  stability. 

In  contrast  to  complete  LINE  elements,  partial  copies  of  the  LINE  sequence  (with  3'-end 
fragment  and  the  middle  portion  of  the  sequence)  were  present  in  all  samples  taken  from  the 
exposed  animals  For  some  sequence  clones,  the  amount  of  DNA  was  proportional  to  the 
intensity  of  irradiation.  .For  example,  for  the  clone  43  (the  sequence  is  given  in  the  original 
article),  the  amount  of  DNA  increased  as  1.0/1.85/1.92/2.98  in  the  series  sham/5/10/20 
mW/cm2  (Fig.  2,  B).  The  increased  presence  of  the  partial  LINE  copies  does  not  Indicate  any 
pathological  processes,  but  may  be  a  useful  index  for  biological  dosimetry  of  microwave 
exposure. 


Figure  2.  A,  Presence  of  a  low-weight  (175-185  nucleotide  pairs)  DNA  fraction  in  blood  plasma  of  rats  after 
pulsed  RF  exposure.  1:  sham  exposure,  2: 20  mW/cm2  for  2  hours,  M:  molecular  weight  marker.  Values  to  the 
right  show  the  number  of  nucleotide  pairs  in  marker  DNA  B,  Revealing  of  the  3'-end  fragment  of  the  LINE 
DNA  element  (clone  43)  by  25  cycles  of  PCR  amplification.  1:  sham  exposure,  2:  5  mW/cm2, 3:  10  mW/cm2, 
and  4: 20  mW/cm2.  See  text  for  more  detail.  (Adopted  from  Belokhvostov  eta!,  1995). 


Microwave  exposure  of  the  head  of  rabbits  for  1  min  at  0  2  mW/cmz  (6  GHz,  50-Hz 
pulses  at  1/2  duty  cycle)  changed  the  spontaneous  firing  rate  of  individual  neurons  in  the 
sensomotor  cortex  (Lukianova  et  al.,  1995),  The  firing  rate  was  recorded  extracellularly  with 
glass  microelectrodes  (5-  to  20-  Mohm  resistance).  The  microelectrode  holder  and 


275 


micromanipulator  were  affixed  to  the  animal's  skull.  These  devices  were  custom  made  of 
plastic,  to  prevent  any  artifacts  arising  from  metal  objects  introduced  into  the  microwave 
field.  For  the  same  reason,  plastic  tubes  filled  with  saline  were  used  instead  of  metal  wires  to 
connect  the  microelectrode  holder  with  an  amplifier.  The  activity  of  53  neurons  was  analyzed 
in  67  3-min  experiments;  each  experiment  was  a  continual  activity  recording  for  1  min 
before,  1  min  during,  and  1  min  after  irradiation.  The  data  were  compared  to  those  recorded 
from  54  neurons  in  control  experiments  with  sham  irradiation.  During  the  exposure  or  sham 
exposure,  the  firing  rate  of  an  individual  neuron  could  either  increase  or  decrease,  or  showed 
no  statistically  significant  changes.  In  the  control  experiments,  the  firing  rate  decreased  in 
8.2%  of  neurons  and  increased  in  13.07%.  In  the  experiments  with  irradiation,  these  numbers 
changed  to  49.5%  and  6.4%,  respectively  (p<.05).  Thus,  the  most  characteristic  effect  of 
exposure  was  suppression  of  the  neuron  firing.  This  suppression  developed  with  an  average 
latency  of  12  sec  after  the  onset  of  exposure.  Other  parameters  studied,  such  as  spike 
amplitude  or  firing  pattern,  were  not  affected  by  microwaves. 


Table  2.  Changes  in  "spontaneous"  firing  rate  of  neurons  in  rabbit  cerebral  cortex  caused  by 
a  l-min  sham  or  microwave  exposure.  (Adopted  from  Moiseeva,  1996,  and  Lukianova  and 
Moiseeva,  1998) 


Area  of  the 
cortex 

Exposure 

regimen 

Number  of 

neurons 

Type  of  response,  %  of  the  total  number  of  neurons 

Significant  changes  in  the  firing  rate 

Lack  of 

changes 

Rate  increase 

Rate  decrease 

Sensomotor 

Sham 

72 

2,7 

n.i 

86.2 

Pulses1 

105 

27.6* 

32.4* 

40.0* 

Bursts2 

63 

24.2* 

31,0* 

44.8* 

Occipito¬ 

Sham 

73 

5.5 

11.0 

83.5 

parietal 

Pulses* 

84 

25.0* 

29.8 * 

45.2* 

Bursts2 

63 

23.2* 

30.5* 

46.3* 

1  1.5  GHz,  0.3  mW/cm2  peak  power,  0.4-ms  pulses,  1000  pulses/sec. 

2  1.5  GHz,  0.3  mW/cm2  peak  power,  0.4ms  pulses,  1000  pulses/sec  within  16-ms  bursts,  0.12  bursts/sec. 
*  The  percentage  of  neurons  is  significantly  different  from  sham  control  <p<.01,  %2  test) 


Similar  experimental  techniques  and  protocol  were  employed  by  Moiseeva  (1996)  and 
by  Lukianova  and  Moiseeva  (1998)  to  study  the  effect  of  1.5  GHz  microwaves.  These  two 
papers  described  effects  of  two  different  pulsing  regimens  in  an  experiment  with  22  rabbits. 
For  both  the  regimens,  the  pulse  width  was  0.4  ms  and  the  peak  power  was  0.3  raW/cmJ. 
These  pulses  were  either  continually  delivered  at  a  1000-Hz  repetition  rate,  or  were  arranged 
in  16-ms  bursts  (0.12  bursts/sec,  1000  pulses/sec  within  bursts).  The  data  were  collected  from 
a  total  of  240  neurons  in  the  sensomotor  cortex  and  220  neurons  in  the  occipito-parietal 
cortex.  Lack  of  statistically  significant  firing  rate  changes  was  the  predominant  response  to 
sham  exposure,  while  microwave  irradiation  markedly  increased  the  percentage  of  neurons 
that  either  decreased  or  increased  their  firing  rate  (Table  2).  Overall ,  about  60 %  of  neurons 
reacted  to  microwaves.  Both  tested  irradiation  regimens  caused  a  practically  identical 
response.  As  a  rule,  exposure  suppressed  the  activity  in  neurons  with  initially  high  firing  rate, 
and  facilitated  the  activity  in  neurons  with  initially  low  firing  rate.  The  magnitude  of  changes 


276 


also  was  higher  under  microwave  exposure.  For  exposure  with  repetitive  microwave  pulses, 
for  example,  the  pre-exposure  firing  rate  in  the  sensomotor  cortex  was  6. 1  ±  0.89  pulses/sec; 
it  increased  to  1 1.2  ±  0.64  pulses/sec  under  irradiation  (p<.05),  and  returned  to  9.2  ±  0.58 
pulses/sec  after  the  irradiation.  The  respective  numbers  for  sham  exposure  were  5.2  ±  1 .32, 
6.94  ±  1.5,  and  7.8  ±  1.09  pulses/sec  (the  changes  are  not  statistically  significant).  The 
average  latency  of  the  response  was  10  ±  3  sec  for  firing  activation,  and  9  ±  2  sec  for  firing 
suppression. 

Pulsed  RF  effects  on  brain  receptors  have  been  continually  studied  for  more  than  10 
years  (Akoev  et  al.,  1985,  Kuznetsov  et  al.,  1991,  Kolomytkin  et  al.,  1994,  Iurinskaia  et  al., 
1996).  A  brief  exposure  of  rats  to  800,  880,  or  915  MHz  microwaves  increased  radiolabelled 
agonist  binding  to  glutamate  receptors,  decreased  binding  to  gamma-aminobutyric  acid 
(GABA)  receptors,  and  decreased  acetylcholinesterase  activity  in  brain.  These  effects 
required  16-Hz  modulation,  at  either  85%  or  32%  duty  ratio;  CW  irradiation  or  other 
modulation  frequencies  (3  to  30  Hz)  caused  no  statistically  significant  changes.  Interestingly, 
brief  (1-  and  5-min)  exposures  often  produced  greater  effects  than  prolonged  exposures  (15- 
60  min).  For  a  5-min  exposure  with  16-Hz  modulation,  the  threshold  field  intensity  was 
between  10  and  50  pW/cm2  The  magnitude  of  the  effects  gradually  increased  or  remained 
almost  unchanged  for  the  field  intensities  from  0.1  to  1  mW/cm*. 

These  findings  can  be  illustrated  in  more  detail  by  the  paper  of  Iurinskaia  et  al.  (1996). 
Four  separate  series  of  experiments  were  performed  in  male  Wistar  rats  (150-200-g  body 
weight).  Animals  were  kept  in  normal  vivarium  conditions,  and  were  made  accustomed  to 
experimental  manipulations,  environment,  and  handling  for  7-10  days  prior  to  experiments. 
All  experiments  were  performed  at  the  same  time  of  day.  The  animals  were  exposed  in 
groups  of  3  in  a  plastic  cage,  from  an  open  end  of  a  waveguide.  Control  animals  were  treated 
in  exactly  the  same  manner  and  were  subjected  to  a  sham  exposure.  Rats  were  decapitated 
immediately  after  irradiation,  and  the  brain  was  extracted  and  processed  to  evaluate  the 
specific  binding  of  radiolabelled  agonists  (’H-glutamate  and  ’H-muscimol)  to  glutamate  and 
GABA  receptors.  In  the  first  6Ct  of  experiments,  the  authors  studied  the  dependence  of 
binding  on  the  incident  power  density  (from  0.01  to  1  mW/cm2),  when  other  exposure 
parameters  were  kept  constant  (915  MHz,  16  Hz  modulation  for  5  min).  Microwaves 
increased  binding  of  ’H-glutamate  and  decreased  binding  of  sH-muscimol.  At  10  pW/cm\ 
these  indices  changed  to  120  ±  12%  and  88  ±  12%,  respectively  (sham  control  was  taken  as 
100%).  At  higher  power  densities,  both  effects  gradually  became  more  substantial  (over 
200%  and  70-80%,  respectively)  and  statistically  significant  (Figure  3,  A). 

The  next  series  of  experiments  was  focused  on  determining  the  role  of  modulation  in  the 
induction  of  these  effects.  Animals  were  exposed  for  5  min  at  1  mW/cm2  (800  MHz  for 
experiments  with  3H-muscimol  and  915  MHz  for  experiments  with  ’H-glutamate),  modulated 
at  0,  2.5,  3,  5,  7,  16,  or  30  Hz  (32%  duty  ratio).  Neither  CW  nor  modulated  regimens 
produced  a  statistically  significant  change  in  ’H-muscimol  binding,  except  for  16-Hz 
modulation  which  decreased  binding  to  70  ±  5%.  Maximum  increase  in  the  ’H-glutamate 
binding  (to  200-220%)  also  occurred  at  16-Hz  modulation  (Figure  3,  B). 

In  the  third  set  of  experiments,  the  exposure  duration  was  varied  from  1  to  60  min, 
keeping  the  other  parameters  constant  (800  or  915  MHz,  16  Hz  modulation,  1  mW/cm2). 
Maximum  decrease  in  the  3H-muscimol  binding  (to  45-50%)  occurred  after  a  I -min 
exposure,  and  the  effect  gradually  weakened  for  longer  exposures.  For  3H-ghitamate  binding, 
the  maximum  effect  of  200-220%  was  observed  after  a  5-min  exposure;  after  1-min 


277 


exposure,  it  was  130  ±  6%.  The  ability  to  produce  the  effects  with  very  low  intensities  of 
radiation,  as  well  as  dependencies  on  modulation  and  exposure  duration  indicated  a 
nonthermal  mechanism  of  the  effects. 


OiL  1 - 1 - 1 

10  100  1000 
pW/cm2 


g  1mW/cm2,5min 


Figure  3.  Changes  in  the  binding  activity  of  glutamate  and  GABA  receptors  in  tbs  rat  boon  after  exposure  to 
modulated  915-MHz  microwaves.  A,  the  effect  of  a  5 -min  exposure  with  16-Hz  modulation  on  binding  of 
radiolabeUed  muscimol  (Mu)  and  glutamate  (Glu)  at  different  incident  power  densities  (abscissa,  pW/cm2).  B, 
the  effect  of  a  5-min,  1  mW/cm2  exposure  on  glutamate  binding  at  different  modulation  frequencies  (Hz).  The 
data  shown  are  the  mean  ±  s.e.,  in  %  to  sham-exposed  controls.  See  text  for  more  detail.  (Adopted  from 
Iunnslcaiaetal.,  1996). 


In  the  forth  set  of  experiments,  the  authors  studied  microwave  effects  on  the 
concentration  dependences  of  the  change  in  binding  characteristics.  Irradiation  only  slightly 
affected  the  dissociation  constant  of  muscimol,  but  decreased  the  number  of  binding  sites 
from  17.4  ±  0.8  to  10  ±  2  pmol  per  mg  of  protein.  In  contrast,  irradiation  did  not  change  the 
number  of  binding  sites  for  glutamate,  but  decreased  its  dissociation  constant  from  277  ±  IS 
nM  (control)  to  103  ±  10  nM. 

Summarizing  their  experimental  results,  the  authors  noted  that  the  dynamics  of  the 
changes  they  observed  in  the  state  of  brain  receptor  systems  is  similar  to  the  effects  produced 
by  an  electric  shock,  pain,  or  immobilization  stress.  They  hypothesized  that  electromagnetic 
radiation  works  as  a  stressing  factor,  with  adaptation  developing  under  a  prolonged  exposure. 

A  series  of  studies  performed  under  the  leadership  of  K.  V.  Sudakov  explored 
neurophysiological  and  behavioral  effects  of  the  lower  RF  frequencies  (30  to  40  MHz,  30  to 
300  V/m,  2-  to  50-Hz  sinusoidal  modulation).  The  experiments  were  performed  in  rats  and 
rabbits,  and  exposures  lasted  from  2-5  min  to  45-90  min.  These  exposures  inhibited  the 
autonomous  nervous  system  response  to  stimulation  of  the  hypothalamus  (Kashtanov  and 
Sudakov,  1981);  alleviated  stress  response  to  immobilization  and  electrical  stimulation  of  the 
skin  (Gorbunova  et  al.,  1981);  induced  spreading  epileptiform  activity  in  the  brain,  followed 
by  EEG  suppression;  induced  the  appearance  of  slow  -waves  and  even  catalepsy  in  some 


278 


animals  (Sudakov  and  Antimonii,  1977);  suppressed  defensive  behavior  and  motor  activity, 
and  inhibited  extinction  of  the  conditioned  response  (Sudakov,  1976,  1998).  Depending  on 
the  modulation  frequency,  the  exposure  had  a  biphasic  effect  on  the  self-stimulatory  behavior 
in  rats  (activation  followed  by  suppression  at  2-Hz  modulation,  or  no  effect  followed  by 
suppression  at  7-Hz  modulation),  or  even  suppressed  the  self-stimulation  practically  from  the 
onset  of  exposure  at  50-Hz  modulation  (Antimonii  et  al.,  1976). 

However,  these  interesting  findings  should  be  taken  with  caution.  One  reason  is  that,  in 
many  cases,  the  authors  used  regular  metal  electrodes  for  brain  stimulation  and  recording  of 
the  electric  activity.  The  use  of  such  electrodes  during  the  electromagnetic  field  exposure 
could  cause  field  distortion  and  various  artifacts  (e.g.,  demodulation  of  the  field  and  direct 
stimulation  of  biological  structures  by  electric  current  at  the  modulation  frequency).  Without 
independent  replication  in  artifact-free  conditions,  it  is  not  possible  to  judge  if  these  findings 
were  in  fact  the  effect  of  the  field,  or  were  just  a  result  of  the  flawed  experiment  protocol. 

Konovalov  and  Andreeva  (1989)  studied  microwave  effects  on  apomorphine-induced 
motor  stereotypy  in  rabbits  and  rats.  In  rabbits,  a  30-min  exposure  of  the  head  (880  MHz,  8 
mW/cm2,  16-  or  30-Hz  pulses  or  CW)  decreased  the  number  of  "simultaneous  hits"  by  hind 
limbs  by  15-25%,  but  this  difference  was  not  statistically  significant.  The  authors  noted, 
however,  that  in  3  animals  (out  of  34)  16-Hz  pulses  decreased  the  number  of  "simultaneous 
hits"  3-4  times,  while  the  other  exposure  regimens  had  only  a  subtle  effect.  In  rats,  a  1  mg/kg 
dose  of  apomorphine  caused  them  to  circle  around  the  cage  in  the  left  or  right  direction.  A 
single  60-min  whole-body  exposure  with  16-Hz  pulses  suppressed  this  behavior  by  21% 
(p<05  compared  with  sham  exposed  controls);  a  series  of  5  exposures  for  60  min/day 
suppressed  it  by  40%  (p<.01). 

Grigoriev  and  Stepanov  (1998)  studied  delayed  effects  of  pulsed  RF  exposure  on 
imprinting  behavior  in  chicks.  Eggs  were  exposed  on  the  16th  day  of  incubation,  for  5  min  at 
40  pW/cm2  (10  GHz,  1-,  2-,  3-,  7-,  9-,  or  10-Hz  modulation).  Two  days  after  hatching,  chicks 
were  given  a  choice  of  two  flashing  light  stimuli.  The  flashing  rate  of  one  light  was  the  same 
as  the  modulation  rate  in  the  previous  RF  exposure  of  the  egg;  the  flashing  rate  of  the  other 
light  was  offset  by  8  Hz.  It  was  found  that  chicks  exposed  in  eggs  to  9-  or  10-Hz  RF  pulses 
showed  preferences  to  the  light  flashes  of  the  same  frequency.  Sham-exposed  chicks  and 
those  exposed  at  other  RF  pulsing  rates  did  not  show  a  preference  to  either  light  stimulus. 

A  single  50-min  microwave  exposure  at  very  low  average  intensity  (15  pW/cm2,  6  GHz, 
2-Hz  pulses)  produced  no  statistically  significant  changes  in  the  physiological  condition  of 
adult  rabbits  (Rynskov  et  al.,  1995).  The  condition  of  microwave-  and  sham-exposed  animals 
was  evaluated  immediately  after  the  exposure  and  also  on  the  next  day.  The  tests  employed  in 
this  study  were  electrocardiogram,  electroencephalogram,  compound  myogram  of  musculvs 
gastrocnemius,  pneumogram,  and  blood  contents  of  cortisol,  testosterone,  insulin,  and 
thyroxin. 

Lukianova  and  co-authors  (1995)  compared  formation  of  conditioned  avoidance  reflexes 
to  light,  sound,  pulsed  microwaves  (6  GHz,  50-Hz  pulses,  200  pW/cm2  average  and  400 
pW/cm2  peak  power),  and  1000-Oe  constant  magnetic  field.  Rabbits  were  taught  to  respond 
to  only  one  type  of  the  conditioning  stimuli  (3  animals  per  group),  and  4  other  animals  were 
subjected  to  "sham  stimuli".  Exposures  and  sham  exposures  were  performed  6  times  every 
other  day,  up  to  the  total  of  400  treatments  for  each  animal.  In  20  sec  after  the  onset  of  the 
conditioning  stimulation,  the  rear  left  extremity  was  stimulated  with  electric  current,  causing 
a  flexor  reaction.  Withdrawal  of  the  leg  within  this  20-sec  interval  prevented  the  electric 
stimulation  and  was  regarded  as  a  conditioned  reflex  response.  Consolidation  of  the 


279 


conditioned  reflex  was  observed  in  all  but  one  exposed  animal  and  in  none  of  the  sham- 
treated  controls.  Consolidation  took  noticeably  more  time  in  the  case  of  magnetic  field 
exposures  (243-245  combinations  of  stimuli)  than  with  exposures  to  microwaves,  sound,  or 
light  (139-154,  98-134,  and  114-184  combinations,  respectively).  The  maximum  reflex 
percentage  per  50  combinations  established  for  the  above  groups  was  40-60%,  30-60%,  60- 
78%,  and  70-80%,  respectively.  The  average  latency  of  the  reflex  to  the  magnetic  field  (8.5  ± 
0.12  sec)  and  to  microwaves  (7.76  ±  0.35  sec)  significantly  exceeded  the  corresponding 
numbers  for  sound  (4.9  ±  0.09  sec)  and  light  (4.47  ±1.17  sec). 

Navakatikian  (1992)  has  described  a  behavioral  technique  sensitive  enough  to  detect  the 
effect  of  acute  pulsed  RF  exposure  at  10  pW/cm2  (or  2.7  pW/g).  The  author  employed  a 
well-known  shuttle-box  method  of  studying  the  conditioned  reflex  of  active  avoidance,  but 
scrupulously  refined  the  shuttle  box  design  and  optimized  the  schedules  of  animal  training 
and  testing.  Particular  attention  was  given  to  selection  of  uniform  experimental  and  control 
groups  and  to  statistical  analysis  of  the  animals'  performance  data.  An  experiment  with 
microwave  exposure  illustrated  all  the  detail  of  how  to  use  this  behavioral  method  and  how  to 
process  the  raw  data. 

Adult  male  rats  (280-  to  360-g  body  weight)  were  trained  to  respond  to  a  sound  stimulus 
by  relocating  from  one  compartment  of  the  shuttle  box  into  another,  in  order  to  avoid 
punishment  by  electrical  stimulation.  The  optimum  training  schedule  consisted  of  three 
training  series,  each  with  75  combinations  of  stimuli.  One  additional,  so-called  "testing" 
series  (identical  to  the  previous  training  series)  was  performed  immediately  after  a  30-min 
sham  or  microwave  exposure  (3000-MHz,  10  pW/cm2,  400-Hz  pulse  repetition  rate,  2-psec 
pulse  width,  4  pulses  per  burst,  one  burst  every  3.75  sec).  The  difference  in  each  animal's 
performance  in  the  testing  series  and  in  the  last  training  series  was  taken  as  an  individual 
change  (IC)  index.  The  IC  values  were  averaged  over  groups  of  1 1  exposed  and  1 1  control 
rats.  For  the  latency  of  the  reflex  response,  the  average  IC  was  -0.1 1  ±  0.06  sec  for  the  sham- 
treated  group,  and  +0.17  ±  0.09  sec  in  the  exposed  group  (p<.05).  The  author  noted  that,  for 
an  acute  exposure,  the  minimum  microwave  intensity  that  was  reported  in  literature  to  change 
conditioned  reflexes  is  1000  pW/cm2.  The  method  described  in  this  paper  has  therefore  been 
proven  to  be  sensitive  enough  to  establish  an  effect  of  acute  microwave  exposure  at  an 
intensity  two  orders  of  magnitude  less  than  previously  reported. 

However,  the  significance  of  this  demonstration  should  not  be  overestimated.  The 
reason  is,  that  with  the  employed  pulsing  regimen,  the  incident  energy  density  per  pulse 
reached  9  pJ/cm2,  which  clearly  exceeds  the  established  threshold  of  1.5-3  pJ/cm2  for 
auditory  perception  of  RF  pulses  by  rats  (Chou  et  aL,  1985).  Therefore,  it  is  not  surprising 
that  a  sensitive  behavioral  technique  could  reveal  some  effect  of  a  30-min  RF  auditory 
stimulation.  On  the  other  hand,  the  author  has  reported  elsewhere  (Navakatikian,  1993)  that 
the  described  method  reliably  detects  the  effect  of  2450  MHz  CW  exposure  at  0.1  mW/cm1 
(27  pW/g);  this  finding  suggests  that  the  microwave  effect  does  not  necessarily  involve  just 
auditory  or  thermal  stimulation. 


ANIMAL  STUDIES:  CHRONIC  EXPOSURE 

A  substantial  number  of  studies  have  explored  behavioral  and  physiological  effects  of 
exposure  conditions  that  imitated  actual  occupational  or  residential  exposures  from  various 
military  and  civilian  radar  systems.  The  employed  modulation  schemes  could  be  rather 


280 


complex,  such  as  regular  bursts  of  pulses  from  rotating  antennas  or  field  modulation  by 
Morse  code. 

Potential  health  effects  of  a  coastal  radar  were  explored  by  Tomashevskaia  and  Solenyi 
(1986).  Field  measurements  established  that  population  within  0.1-1-km  distance  from  the 
coastal  radar  can  be  exposed  to  intermittent  bursts  of  400-  or  800-Hz  microwave  pulses  (3-  or 
10-cm  wavelength)  at  levels  from  10  to  80  pW/cm2;  the  intermittence  was  produced  by 
antenna  rotation  at  16  rpm.  White  mongrel  rats  (130  -140  g  body  weight)  were  exposed  to 
intermittent  10-cm  (2750  MHz)  pulsed  microwaves  for  16  hours  a  day  at  100,  500,  or  2500 
pW/cm2  over  a  4-month  period;  control  animals  were  sham  exposed.  This  microwave 
treatment  significantly  decreased  the  animals’  motor  activity  (100  and  500  pW/cm2), 
increased  electrodermal  sensitivity  (500  and  2500  pW/cm2),  decreased  the  glycogen  content 
in  liver  and  brain  (all  intensities),  decreased  cytochrome  oxidase  activity  in  brain 
mitochondria  (2500  pW/cm2),  and  changed  some  immune  indices  (500  and  2500  pW/cm2). 
Mathematical  analysis  of  the  collected  data  has  predicted  the  "no-effect  field  intensity"  to  be 
at  10  pW/cm2,  which  was  therefore  recommended  as  a  maximum  permissible  irradiation 
level  for  residential  areas. 

The  authors  continued  with  studying  the  effects  of  a  civil  aviation  radar  system 
(Tomashevskaia  and  Dumanskii,  1988).  Adult  white  rats  were  exposed  to  400-Hz  microwave 
pulses  for  16  hours/day  for  4  months  using  various  carrier  frequencies,  intermittence 
regimens,  and  field  intensities:  (1)  2750  MHz,  50,  100,  or  500  pW/cm2  40-psec  bursts,  1 
burst  per  20  sec,  (2)  1310  MHz,  20  or  100  pW/cm2,  28-psec  bursts,  1  burst  per  10  sec,  and 
(3)  850  MHz,  20,  100,  or  500  pW/cm2,  67-psec  bursts,  1  burst  per  6  sec.  The  experiments 
established  that  exposures  at  20  and  50  pW/cm2  produced  no  statistically  significant  effects 
compared  to  sham-exposed  controls.  Exposures  at  100  and  500  pW/cm2  could  cause 
statistically  significant  changes  in  the  activity  of  several  marker  enzymes  (cholinesterase, 
cytochrome  oxidase,  succinate  dehydrogenase,  and  ceruloplasmin);  the  magnitude  of  changes 
in  different  tissues  varied  depending  on  the  particular  irradiation  regimen. 

Navakatikian  and  co-authors  (1991)  exposed  rats  to  3000-MHz  pulsed  radiation  for  2 
months,  12  hours/day  during  the  nighttime.  Bursts  of  20,  4,  or  2  pulses  (2-psec  pulse  width, 
400-Hz  repetition  rate)  were  emitted  every  20,  3.75,  or  2.07  sec,  respectively,  simulating 
antenna  rotation  speeds  of  3,  16,  and  29  rpm.  The  average  energy  output  was  virtually  the 
same  for  all  the  pulsing  regimens  (60,  64,  and  58  pulses/min).  The  incident  power  density 
levels  studied  were  0.1,  0.5,  and  2.5  mW/cm5.  Exposure  effects  evaluated  were  the  animals' 
exploratory  activity  (measured  as  an  amount  of  movement  in  a  special  maze)  and  conditioned 
avoidance  reflex  in  a  shuttle  box  test.  Most  of  the  exposure  regimens  slightly  stimulated  the 
locomotor  activity  (except  20-pulse  bursts  at  0.5  and  2.5  mW/cm2).  Performance  in  the 
shuttle-box  after  exposures  was  characterized  by  decreased  latency  of  responses  and 
increased  number  of  correct  responses.  Overall,  the  changes  were  interpreted  as  a  prolonged 
and  moderately  expressed  activation  of  the  central  nervous  system. 

Bioeffects  of  the  above-mentioned  exposure  regimens  were  explored  further  and 
compared  to  the  effects  of  2450  MHz,  0.01-1  mW/cm2  CW  irradiation  (Navakatikian  and 
Tomashevskaya,  1994).  In  particular,  it  was  found  that  2-month  CW  exposure  caused 
suppression  of  the  central  nervous  system,  in  contrast  to  weak  activation  under  pulsed 
irradiation.  Histological  examination  of  the  thyroid  gland  revealed  functional  activation  of 
the  zona  fasciculata  after  pulsed  microwave  exposure.  Pulsed  microwaves  consistently  and 
reproducibly  decreased  blood  levels  of  Insulin  and  testosterone,  while  CW  exposure  had  no 


281 


effect.  The  authors  have  speculated  that  inhibition  of  behavior  was  a  direct  effect  of 
irradiation  on  the  nervous  system,  whereas  activation  might  be  mediated  by  hormonal 
changes. 

Another  study  has  replicated  the  exposure  conditions  of  meteorological  radar  personnel 
(Navakatikian  et  al.,  1991).  Adult  female  rats  were  subjected  to  simultaneous  irradiation  from 
9375-  and  1765-MHz  sources  for  12  hours  daily,  30  min  each  hour.  The  average  incident 
power  levels  for  9375  MHz  were  0  12,  0.24,  and  0.36  mW/cm2;  for  1765  MHz,  the  power 
output  was  set  24  times  less,  so  the  integral  intensities  used  were  0.125,  0.25,  and  0.375 
mW/cm2.  Modulation  pulse  width  and  repetition  rate  were  1.1  its,  475  Hz  for  1765  MHz, 
and  2  ps,  300  Hz  for  9375  MHz.  For  9375-MHz  microwaves  only,  the  pulses  were  assembled 
into  20-msec  bursts  and  delivered  at  a  rate  of  1  burst  every  10  sec.  Behavioral  endpoints  after 
1,  2,  3,  and  4  months  of  everyday  exposure  were  compared  with  those  in  a  sham-exposed 
group.  The  exploratory  activity  in  animals  was  slightly  but  statistically  significantly 
suppressed  after  1-month  exposure  at  0.375  mW/cmJ  and  after  2-months  exposure  at  0.125 
mW/cm3  Conditioned  reflex  performance  in  a  shuttle  box  was  suppressed  after  2  months  of 
exposure  at  0.25  mW/cm2  After  3  and  4  months  of  exposure,  all  behavioral  parameters  were 
the  same  as  in  the  control  group.  Overall,  behavioral  effects  observed  in  this  study  were 
regarded  as  "weak  and  unstable". 

In  a  study  by  Grigoriev  et  al.  (1995),  adult  rabbits  were  exposed  to  1.5-GHz  pulsed 
microwaves  for  30  min  a  day  for  1  month,  excluding  weekends  and  holidays  (16-ms  pulse 
width,  0.3  mW/cm2  peak  power,  0.12-Hz  pulse  repetition  rate).  Exposures  were  performed  in 
an  anechoic  chamber,  one  animal  at  a  time.  During  the  exposure,  animals  were  placed  into  a 
special  Perspex  cage  (40  x  40  x  40  cm)  with  a  built-in  piezoelectric  probe  for  recording 
motor  activity.  The  authors  performed  two  identical  series  of  experiments.  In  each  series,  5 
animals  were  exposed  and  5  were  sham-exposed.  Sham  exposures  were  done  in  the  same 
chamber  in  a  random  sequence  with  microwave  exposures.  In  both  series,  the  motor  activity 
of  the  sham-exposed  animals  was  maximum  in  the  first  2  days,  reflecting  an  orientation- 
exploratory  reaction.  The  later  period  (until  the  1 5th  day)  was  characterized  by  extensive 
fluctuations  of  motor  activity,  which  was  interpreted  as  development  of  adaptation.  After  2 
weeks  of  treatment,  motor  activity  stabilized  at  a  significantly  lower  level,  showing  that 
adaptation  is  completed.  In  exposed  animals,  this  decrease  of  motor  activity  was  not 
significant,  and  this  effect  was  observed  in  both  series  of  experiments.  For  example,  in  the 
control  group  of  the  second  series,  the  number  of  movements  recorded  during  30  min  of 
sham  exposure  decreased  from  1 17  ±  13  (the  first  2  weeks'  average)  to  64  ±  7,8  (the  second  2 
weeks'  average,  p<.05).  The  respective  numbers  for  microwave-exposed  animals  were  120  ± 
11  and  105  ±  13  (p>.05).  This  irradiation  effect  was  regarded  as  inhibition  of  the  adaptive 
reaction,  or  disadaptation.  The  30-min  dynamics  of  motor  activity  did  not  show  any 
difference  between  exposed  and  control  animals,  but  one  type  of  movements  (rapid  moving 
of  paws  up  and  down)  significantly  increased  in  the  exposed  animals  in  the  second  2  weeks 
of  the  experiment.  This  type  of  activity  pointed  to  an  enhancement  of  excitatory  processes  in 
the  central  nervous  system,  increased  anxiety  and  distress. 

Physiological  effects  of  fields  generated  by  ship  radio  transmitters  (13  MHz,  250  or  500 
V/m,  modulated  by  Morse  code)  were  reported  in  a  series  of  studies  by  Minkina  et  al.  (1 985) 
and  Nikitina  et  al.  (1989a,b).  Male  albino  rats  (160-180  g  body  weight)  were  exposed  to  the 
field  for  2  hours  a  day,  5  times  a  week,  over  a  2-  or  6-week  period.  The  authors  did  not 
supply  information  as  to  whether  or  not  these  exposures  affected  the  body  temperature  of  the 


282 


animals.  After  the  course  of  exposures,  animals  were  decapitated  and  various  tissues  were 
taken  for  morphological  and  histological  examination. 

In  the  first  of  these  studies,  2  weeks  of  exposure  at  500  V/m  slightly  activated  the 
neurosecretory  function  of  supraoptic  and  paraventricular  nuclei  in  hypothalamus.  These 
alterations  disappeared  after  6  weeks  of  exposure,  but,  by  this  time,  the  mass  of  the  adrenals 
was  considerably  decreased.  Irradiation  at  250  V/m  for  30  days  reduced  the  blood  plasma 
level  of  corticosterone,  with  no  other  effect  on  adrenals  or  hypothalamus.  Changes  observed 
in  the  thyroid  gland  morphology  indicated  activation  of  its  function  by  500  V/m  exposure  and 
suppression  by  250  V/m  exposure.  Out  of  studied  tissues  and  organs,  spermaries  proved  to  be 
the  most  sensitive  to  irradiation.  Disorders  of  spermatogenesis,  hemorrhagia,  degenerative 
and  dystrophic  changes  increased  with  longer  course  and  higher  intensity  of  exposures. 

The  second  study  (Nikitina  et  al.,  1989a)  was  primarily  focused  on  cytogenetic  effects 
of  exposure  ( 500  V/m  for  10  days).  Chromosome  aberration  frequency  significantly 
increased  in  bone  marrow  cells  (to  10-11%  versus  5-6%  in  sham  exposed  controls,  p<.05), 
but  not  in  corneal  cells.  At  the  same  time,  the  mitotic  index  in  comeal  cells  fell  from  1.01% 
to  0.66%  (p<  05).  The  ascorbic  acid  concentration  in  the  hypophysis  and  adrenal  cortex 
increased  from  264  ±17  mg%  and  403  ±  15  mg%  in  control  animals  to  361  ±  27  mg%  and 
478  ±  24  mg%,  respectively.  The  size  of  the  adrenal  cortex  cells  decreased.  In  thyroid  gland, 
the  growth  of  colloid  accumulation  in  follicular  cavities  was  observed.  The  follicular  area 
filled  with  colloid  increased  from  10.8  ±  2.8%  to  29.7  ±  6.1%  after  irradiation.  Irradiation 
disrupted  spermatogenesis  and  reduced  the  mitotic  activity  of  spermatic  epithelium.  The 
observed  morphological  changes  indicated  suppression  of  adrenocorticotropic  hormone 
secretion  and  of  the  adrenal  cortex  and  thyroid  gland  function.  The  production  of  luteotropic 
and  follicle-stimulating  hormones  apparently  was  not  affected. 

In  the  third  study  (Nikitina  et  al.,  1989b),  the  authors  suggested  that  individual  features 
of  the  animals,  namely,  "the  type  of  organization  of  their  nervous  function",  might  play  a  role 
in  their  sensitivity  to  radiofrequency  exposure.  As  in  the  previous  studies,  the  experiments 
were  performed  in  male  albino  rats.  Based  on  the  animals'  characteristic  behavior  in  an  open- 
field  test,  they  were  assigned  to  groups  with  "low-entropy"  (LE)  and  "high-entropy"  (HE) 
organization  of  the  nervous  function.  After  60  days  of  exposure  at  500  V/m,  the  authors 
evaluated  the  condition  of  the  animals  by  30  various  indices  (morphology  of  thyroid, 
adrenals,  hypophysis;  blood  level  of  testosterone,  luteinizing  and  follicle-stimulating 
hormones,  etc.)  and  the  condition  of  their  progeny  on  the  20th  day  of  embryo  development 
by  13  other  indices  (body  mass  and  length,  organ  pathology,  ossification  rate,  etc.). 
Examination  of  the  sham-exposed  group  revealed  7  indices  that  were  significantly  different 
in  the  LE  and  HE  animals;  in  the  exposed  group,  there  were  17  such  indices.  The  authors 
provided  three  examples  that  were  characteristic  for  these  differences.  The  morphological 
changes  in  the  thyroid  gland  evidenced  for  its  activation  in  both  LE  and  HE  exposed  animals; 
however,  in  the  LE  specimens  this  actually  was  manifested  as  an  increment  in  the  epithelial 
cells  height,  and  in  the  HE  specimens  it  was  an  increment  in  the  cel!  nucleus  area.  Exposure 
significantly  diminished  body  mass  in  the  exposed  LE  animals  (by  about  10%  compared  with 
LE  controls),  but  did  not  change  ft  in  HE  animals.  There  was  no  difference  in  the  rate  of 
ossification  in  the  progeny  of  the  control  HE  and  LE  animals,  while  the  EMF  treatment 
decreased  this  index  in  the  offsprings  of  the  LE  specimens  and  increased  it  in  the  offsprings 
of  the  HE  specimens.  Thus,  the  experimental  results  revealed  considerable  differences  in  the 
EMF  sensitivity  between  the  LE  and  HE  animals.  It  was  recommended  to  consider  such 
individual  differences  in  future  behavioral  studies  and  in  the  development  of  safety  standards. 


283 


Perhaps  the  most  pronounced  and  unambiguously  adverse  effects  of  low-intensity 
microwave  radiation  were  reported  by  Lokhmatova  (1994).  Effects  of  a  4-month  exposure  for 
2  hours/day  (3-GHz,  0.25  mW/cm2)  on  reproductive  organs  were  studied  in  22  adult  male 
rats.  While  the  transmitter  operated  in  a  CW  mode,  an  intermittent  irradiation  regimen  was 
achieved  by  rotating  the  transmitter  horn  antenna  at  22  rpm.  A  similar  group  of  22  animals 
underwent  the  same  course  of  sham  exposures.  Morphological  and  histochemical  analyses  of 
the  testes  and  epididymides  were  performed  right  after  the  end  of  the  exposures  and  also  4 
months  later.  The  experiments  revealed  explicit  morphofunctional  disorders  in  RF-exposed 
animals.  The  number  of  normal  seminiferous  tubules  decreased  to  28.2  ±  5.3%  (compared 
with  47.1  ±  5.3%  in  the  controls),  while  the  number  of  the  tubules  with  dying  cells  increased 
to  27.2  ±  4.4%  (14.7  ±  3.3%  in  the  controls,  p<.05).  The  number  of  Leydig  cells  markedly 
decreased,  and  some  of  them  showed  pyknotic  and  destructive  alterations.  RF  exposures 
increased  alkaline  phosphatase  activity  in  the  vicinity  of  basal  membranes  and  in  the 
spermatic  channel  walls,  and  increased  levels  of  NADH  and  succinate  dehydrogenases.  Most 
of  these  disorders  showed  only  a  subtle  or  no  trend  to  recovery  in  4  months  after  the  end  of 
exposures.  The  author  concluded  that  the  changes  evoked  by  the  prolonged  microwave 
exposure  are  likely  to  result  in  stable  impairments  of  production  and  balance  of  steroid 
hormones  and  premature  loss  of  reproductive  function. 

BIOEFFECTS  OF  EXTREMELY  HIGH  POWER  PULSES  (EHPP) 

Nowadays,  EHPP  technologies  and  applications  are  among  the  fastest  growing  areas, 
but  very  little  is  known  about  EHPP  bioeffects  and  health  hazards.  The  overall  number  of 
biological  studies  with  RF  pulses  of  1-100  kW/g  does  not  exceed  2-3  dozen  (including 
meeting  abstracts),  and  only  a  few  isolated  studies  have  explored  still  higher  peak  field 
intensities.  Russian  EHPP  studies  employed  the  most  advanced  pulsed  power  sources  (which 
are  still  not  available  for  biologists  in  the  West),  but  the  quality  of  reported  biological 
research  often  is  questionable. 

Tambiev  et  al.  (1989)  studied  the  effect  of  10-ns  wide,  200  kW/cms  RF  pulses  (3-cm 
wavelength,  1  pulse  per  6  min)  on  the  growth  rate  and  photosynthetic  oxygen  evolution  in 
blue-green  alga  Spirulina  platensis  and  unicellular  green  algae  Platymonas  viridis.  It  was 
found  that  exposure  to  10-15  pulses  stimulated  cell  culture  growth  and  oxygen  evolution.  For 
example,  by  the  30th  day  after  a  single  exposure,  the  biomass  of  S.  platensis  cultures 
increased  by  52%  in  comparison  with  sham-exposed  controls,  and  that  of  P.  viridis  increased 
by  17%.  Maximum  stimulatory  effect  (by  up  to  115%)  was  achieved  when  a  treatment  by  10- 
15  EHPP  was  performed  immediately  after  a  30-min  exposure  to  2.2  mW/cm2,  7.1-mm 
wavelength  CW  radiation  (this  mm-wave  irradiation  alone  enhanced  the  growth  by  about 
50%).  The  same  combined  treatment  caused  the  most  pronounced  enhancement  of  the 
photosynthetic  oxygen  evolution  (about  1.5  times).  Further  experiments  demonstrated  that  a 
greater  number  of  EHPP  (20-25)  had  the  opposite  effect,  i.e.,  suppressed  the  alga  growth. 

Deviatkov  et  al.  (1994,  1998)  studied  the  effects  of  10-ns  EHPP  (3-cm  wavelength,  100- 
MW  peak  output  power)  on  malignant  neoplasm  development  in  vivo  and  in  vitro.  Exposure 
of  Wistar  rats  for  9  days,  43  pulses/day,  prior  to  inoculation  with  Walker  carcinoma, 
decelerated  the  neoplasm  growth  rate  1.5  times  and  increased  the  life  expectancy  by  25-30%. 
In  vitro  exposure  of  Walker  carcinoma  cell  suspensions  (80  kV/cm,  6  pulses/min  for  5  to  30 
min)  increased  the  number  of  degenerating  cells  and  those  in  a  stage  of  lysis.  Further 


284 


experiments  studied  combined  effects  of  EHPP  and  an  anti-tumor  drug  endoksan  on  alveolar 
hepatic  cancer  RS-1  in  rats.  The  drug  treatment  and  exposures  (6  pulses/min,  30  min/day  for 
7  days)  began  when  the  tumor  volume  reached  3-4  cm3.  By  the  55th  day  after  tumor 
inoculation,  the  tumor  volume  was  84.7  cm3  in  controls,  14  cm3  in  the  endoksan-treated 
group,  and  8.9  cm3  in  the  group  treated  by  endoksan  and  EHPP.  A  similar  experiment  with 
Lewis  lung  carcinoma  found  that  EHPP  treatment  (6  pulses/min,  30  min/day  for  4  days  and 
then  for  5  days  more,  after  a  1-day  interval)  suppressed  metastases,  from  3.0  points 
(untreated  controls)  to  2.3  ±  0.4  (EHPP  only)  or  0.6  ±  0.2  (EHPP  +  endoksan);  endoksan  only 
decreased  this  index  to  1.4  ±  0.4.  For  a  health  risk  assessment,  58  animals  were  exposed  to 
EHPP  (from  130  to  720  pulses  in  5  sessions)  and  compared  with  64  control  animals.  Periodic 
examinations  (3-4  times  a  month)  over  a  period  of  1-1.5  years  have  not  revealed  any 
modifications  in  behavioral  responses  or  in  the  general  state  of  health  of  the  animals. 
Autopsy  of  animals  in  one  year  after  the  exposure  did  not  reveal  any  pathological 
modifications  in  the  liver,  kidneys,  adrenals,  thymus,  spleen,  or  other  organs.  We  have  to 
note,  however,  that  lack  of  sufficient  detail  on  the  experimental  data,  protocols,  dosimetry, 
and  statistics  in  this  study  makes  it  difficult  to  evaluate  the  validity  of  reported  findings. 

An  interesting  EHPP  study  has  been  recently  reported  from  the  Institute  of  High  Current 
Electronics  in  Tomsk,  Russia  (Bolshakov  et  al.,  1999).  The  study  was  designed  to  check,  out 
several  likely  mechanisms  of  EHPP  biological  action,  namely  (1)  membrane  electroporation 
by  high  instant  voltages  of  the  electric  field,  (2)  direct  influence  of  the  intense  electric  filed 
on  macromolecular  charged  complexes,  such  as  unfolded  DNA  sites  and  cytoskeleton  fibers, 
and  (3)  changes  in  the  rate  of  biochemical  reactions,  diffusion  of  substances  and  cell 
migration  due  to  temperature  gradients  caused  by  EHPP  absorption.  These  mechanisms  were 
tested  in  experiments  with  (1)  growth  rate  of  Escherichia  coli  culture,  (2)  proliferation  and 
growth  of  simple  eukaryotic  organisms  (fungus  Fusarh/m),  and  (3)  ontogenetic  development 
of  Drosophila  flies.  All  exposures  employed  a  relativistic  microwave  generator  with  200- 
MW  output,  10-ns  pulse  duration,  and  3-cm  wavelength.  The  incident  E-field  in  the  exposure 
zone  (about  25-cm  diameter)  was  1.5  MV/m,  which  corresponds  to  the  incident  power 
density  of 300  kW/cm2. 

The  growth  of  E  coli  culture  was  measured  from  changes  in  its  optical  density.  Two 
identical  thcrmostabilizcd  (±  1  °C)  vials  with  the  bacterial  culture  were  simultaneously  placed 
in  an  anechoic  chamber,  but  one  of  the  vials  (control)  was  shielded  from  microwave 
radiation.  Exposures  for  5  or  15  min  at  various  EHPP  repetition  rates  (up  to  100  Hz)  caused 
no  significant  changes  in  the  cell  growth  rate.  This  result  was  interpreted  as  lack  of  cell 
electroporation  by  the  EHPP  pulses. 

Proliferation  rate  of  the  Fusarium  fungus  was  measured  by  micrometry,  from  the 
diameter  of  cell  colonies  and  the  length  of  hyphae.  Exposure  regimens  were  the  same  as  in 
experiments  with  E  coli ;  in  addition,  some  samples  were  exposed  in  cycles  (5  min  exposure, 
5  min  pause)  fbr  a  total  of  1  hour  at  the  EHPP  repetition  rate  of  6  Hz.  All  tested  exposure 
regimens  substantially  decelerated  the  growth  of  hyphae,  on  the  average  from  0.338  ±  0.055 
mm/hour  (control)  to  0.242  ±  0.033  mm/hour.  This  deceleration  was  equivalent  to  the  effect 
of  conventional  heating  by  20-25  °C;  however,  heating  of  samples  during  microwave 
exposure  was  less  than  1  °C. 

For  experiments  with  Drosophila  eggs,  larvae,  and  pupa,  each  group  included  at  least 
300  specimens.  Each  group  was  exposed  or  sham  exposed  just  a  single  time,  at  different 
stages  of  ontogenesis.  The  exposure  duration  was  5  min  or  60  min  (12  cycles  of  5-min 
exposure  with  5-min  intervals);  the  EHPP  repetition  rate  was  6, 10, 16,  or  22  Hz.  All  tested 


285 


exposure  parameters  typically  caused  a  2-  to  10-fold  increase  of  cases  of  interrupted 
specimen  development.  Exposures  of  1-hour-old  embryos  could  cause  developmental 
abnormalities  (morphoses)  in  6  to  9%  of  specimens  (versus  zero  cases  in  parallel  controls), 
increased  imago  lethality,  and  caused  infertility  in  survivors.  Additional  experiments  with 
imago  flies  established  that  5  to  12%  of  flies  died  during  a  1-min  exposure  at  EHPP 
repetition  rates  of  16,  50,  and  100  Hz.  At  the  rates  of  6  and  10  Hz,  no  flies  died,  but  their  first 
generation  progeny  became  almost  entirely  nonviable  (34%  had  morphoses,  38%  died  on  the 
first  day,  and  100%  were  unable  to  lay  eggs).  Since  the  average  heating  by  microwave 
exposures  was  negligible,  the  observed  effects  point  to  certain  specific  mechanisms  of  EHPP 
biological  action. 


SUMMARY 

We  conclude  that  Russian/FSU  studies  constitute  an  important  source  of  information  on 
pulsed  RF  bioeffects.  Par  ticular  emphasis  in  these  studies  was  given  to  RF-induced  changes 
in  the  nervous  system  function,  while  such  issues  as  RF-induced  carcinogenesis  apparently 
have  not  been  a  concern  and  were  not  studied  at  all. 

While  many  (perhaps,  most)  of  the  studies  were  flawed,  a  number  of  good-quality 
studies  have  convincingly  demonstrated  significant  bioeffects  of  pulsed  microwaves. 
Modulation  often  was  the  factor  that  determined  the  biological  response  to  irradiation,  and 
reactions  to  pulsed  and  CW  emissions  at  equal  time-averaged  intensities  in  many  cases  were 
substantially  different.  These  results  showed  that  bioeffects  of  pulsed  RF  may  involve  some 
specific  mechanisms  of  interaction,  which  are  not  understood  yet. 

Most  reported  bioeffects  of  low-intensity  pulsed  microwaves  were  just  subtle  functional 
changes,  which  did  not  exceed  the  limits  of  normal  physiological  variation  and  could  only  be 
detected  by  sensitive  physiological  tests.  However,  some  studies  did  report  clearly 
pathogenic  effects,  and  an  independent  confirmation  of  these  findings  would  be  of  principle 
importance  for  understanding  of  the  health  hazards  from  RF  exposure  and  development  of 
safety  standards.  These  studies  deserve  careful  consideration  and  their  replication  in  the  West 
and/or  with  participation  of  Western  scientists  should  be  given  a  high  priority. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel 
Command  and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  (HEDR  and  AFOSR)  under  U.S. 
Army  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKessonHBOC  BioServices.  The  views 
expressed  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting  the  official  policy 
or  position  of  the  Department  of  the  Army,  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  or  the  United  States 
Government. 

REFERENCES 

Afrikanova,  L.  A.  and  Grigoriev,  Iu.  G.,  1996,  Effects  of  various  regimens  of 
electromagnetic  irradiation  on  cardiac  activity  (an  experimental  study),  Radiats  Biol 
Radioccol,  36/5:  691-699. 


286 


Akoev,  I.  G.,  Karanova,  M.  V.,  Kuznetsov,  V.  I.,  and  Kotomytkin,  O.  V.,  1985,  Action  of  a 
uhf  field  on  GABA-ergic  and  acetyl  cholinergic  systems  in  synaptic  transmission, 
Radiobiologiia,  25/3:  426-428. 

Antimonii,  G.  D.,  Badikov,  V.  I.,  Kel,  A.  A.,  Krasnov,  E.  A.,  and  Sudakov,  S.  K,  1976, 
Changes  in  the  self-stimulation  reaction  in  rats  under  the  action  of  a  modulated 
electromagnetic  field,  BiuII  Eksp  Biol  Med,  82/10: 1 163-1 165. 

Arber,  S.  L.  and  Lin,  J.  C.,  1984,  Microwave  enhancement  of  membrane  conductance: 
effects  of  EDTA,  caffeine  and  tetracaine,  Physiol  Chem  Phys  Med  NMR,  16/6:  469- 
475. 

Belokhvostov,  A.  S.,  Osipovich,  V.  K.,  Veselova,  O.  M.,  and  Kolodiazhnaia,  V.  A.,  1995, 
Analysis  of  DNA  of  retrotransposon-like  genetic  line-elements  in  blood  plasma  of  rats 
exposed  to  radiofrequency  electromagnetic  waves,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  35/3:  356- 
363. 

Bolshakov,  M.  A.  and  Alexeev,  S.  I.,  1992,  Bursting  responses  of  Lymnea  neurons  to 
microwave  radiation.  Bioelectromagnetics,  13/2: 119-129. 

Bolshakov,  M.  A.,  Bugaev,  S.  P.,  Goncharik,  A.  0.,  Gunin,  A.  V.,  Evdokimov,  E.  V., 
Klimov,  A.  I.,  Korovin,  S.  D.,  Pegel',  I.  V.,  and  Rostov,  V.  V.,  2000,  Effects  of  intense 
microwave  radiation  of  nanosecond  duration  on  some  biological  objects,  Dokladi 
Akademii  Nauk  (in  press,  referenced  by  permission  of  the  authors). 

Chou,  C-K.,  Yee,  K-C.,  and  Guy,  A.  W.,  1985,  Auditoty  response  in  rats  exposed  to  2,450 
MHz  electromagnetic  fields  in  a  circularly  polarized  waveguide.  Bioelectromagnetics, 
6/3 : 323-326. 

Deviatkov,  N.  D.,  Betskii,  O.  V.,  Kabisov,  R.  K.,  Morozova,  N.  B.,  Pletnev,  S.  D.,  Faikin, 
V.  V.,  and  Chernov,  Z.  S.,  1998,  Effect  of  low-energy  pulsed  ehf  and  microwave 
radiation  with  nanosecond  pulse  duration  and  high  peak  power  on  biological 
structures  (malignant  neoplasms),  Biomedicinskaya  Radioelectronica,  1:  56-62. 

Deviatkov,  N.  D.,  Pletnev,  S.  D.,  Chernov,  Z.  S.,  Faikin,  V.  V.,  Bemashevskii,  G.  A.,  and 
Shchitkov,  K.  G.,  1994,  Effect  of  low-energy  pulses  of  EHF  and  SHF-radiation  of 
nanosecond  duration  with  a  high  peak  intensity  on  biological  structures  (malignant 
neoplasms),  DokI  Akad  Nauk,  336/6:  826-828. 

Gapeev,  A.  B.,  Yakushina,  V.  S.,  Chemeris,  N.  K.,  and  Fesenko,  E.  E.,  1997,  Modulated 
extremely  high  frequency  electromagnetic  radiation  of  low  intensity  activates  or 
inhibits  respiratory  burst  in  neutrophils  depending  on  modulation  frequency, 
Biofizika,  42/5:  1125-1134. 

Gorbunova,  A.  V.,  Petrova,  N.  V.,  Portugalov,  V.  V.  and  Sudakov,  S.  K,  1981,  Acute 
experimental  emotional  stress  in  rabbits  exposed  to  modulated  electromagnetic  fields, 
Izv  Akad  Nauk  SSSR  [Biol],  5:  774-780. 

Grigoriev  Yu.  G.,  1999,  personal  communication. 

Grigoriev,  Iu.  G.  and  Stepanov,  V.  S.,  1998,  Forming  of  memory  (imprinting)  in  chicks 
after  prior  low-level  exposure  to  electromagnetic  fields,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  38/2: 
223-231. 

Grigoriev,  Iu.  G.,  Lukianova,  S.  N.,  Makarov,  V.  P.,  Rynskov,  V.  V.,  and  Moiseeva,  N.  V., 
1995,  Motor  activity  of  rabbits  in  conditions  of  chronic  low-intensity  pulse  microwave 
irradiation,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  35/J:  29-35. 

Iurinskaia,  M.  M.,  Kuznetsov,  V.  I.,  Galeev,  A  L.,  and  Kolomytkin,  O.  V.,  1996,  Reaction 
of  the  brain  receptor  system  to  the  effect  of  low  intensity  microwaves,  Biofizika,  41/4: 
859-865. 


287 


Kashtanov,  S.  I.  and  Sudakov,  S.  K.,  1981,  The  predominant  role  of  reticular  formation  of 
the  midbrain  in  mediating  the  preventive  effects  of  ultra-high  frequency 
electromagnetic  fields  on  excitation  of  emotiogenic  hypothalamic  centers,  Biull  Eksp 
Biol  Med,  91/11:  523-526. 

Khitrov,  Iu.  A.  and  Kakushkina,  M.  L.,  1990,  The  action  of  microwave  radiation  on 
potassium  ion  transport  and  oxygen  consumption  in  the  perfused  rat  liver, 
Radiobiologiia,  30/2:  247-251. 

Khramov,  R.  N.,  Sosunov,  E.  A.,  Koltun,  S.  V.,  Ilyaova,  E.  N.,  and  Lednev,  V.  V.,  1991, 
Millimeter-wave  effects  on  electric  activity  of  crayfish  stretch  receptors, 
Bioelectromagnetics,  12/4: 203-214. 

Kim,  Iu.  A.,  Kasimbekov,  I.  K.,  Fomenko,  B.  S.,  Tigranian,  R.  E,  1986,  Effect  of  pulse 
electromagnetic  radiation  on  erythrocyte  ghosts,  Biol  Nauki,  11: 37-41. 

Kolomytkin,  O.,  Kuznetsov,  V.,  Yurinska,  M„  Zharikov,  S.,  and  Zharikova,  A.,  1994, 
Response  of  brain  receptor  systems  to  microwave  energy  exposure,  In:  On  the  Nature 
of Electromagnetic  Field  Interactions  with  Biological  Systems,  A.  H.  Frey,  ed.,  R.  G. 
Landes  Co.,  Austin,  TX,  pp  194-206. 

Konovalov,  V.  F.  and  Andreeva,  L.  A.,  1989,  Behavioral  effects  of  VHF  exposure.  In: 
Influence  of  Electromagnetic  Radiation  on  Biological  Objects  and  Laser  Medicine,  V. 
I.  Hichev,  ed..  Far  East  Branch,  Acad,  of  Sciences  of  the  USSR,  Vladivostok,  Russia, 
pp  122-136. 

Korotkov  Iu.  S.,  Burenkov,  M.  S.,  Burenkova,  L.  A,  Pichugin  V.  Iu,,  Chunikhin,  S.  P.,  and 
Engovatov,  V.  V.,  1996,  The  reaction  of  the  tick  Hyalomma  asiaticum  (Acarina, 
Ixodidae)  to  1-  to  4-GIIz  microwaves,  Med  Parazitol  (Mosk),  4:  28-31. 

Kuznetsov,  V.  I.,  Iurinskaia,  M.  M.,  Kolomytkin,  O.  V.,  and  Akoev,  1.  G.,  1991,  Action  of 
microwaves  with  different  modulation  frequencies  and  exposure  times  on  GABA 
receptor  concentration  in  the  cerebral  cortex  of  rats,  Radiobiologiia,  31/2: 257-260. 

Lin,  J.  C.,  1990,  Auditory  perception  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation.  In:  Biological  Effects 
and  Medical  Applications  of  Electromagnetic  Energy ,  O.  P.  Gandhi,  ed.,  Prentice 
Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ,  pp  277-3 1 8. 

Lokhmatova,  S.  A.,  1994,  The  effect  of  low-intensity  prolonged  impulse  electromagnetic 
irradiation  in  the  uhf  range  on  the  testes  and  the  appendages  of  the  testis  in  rats, 
Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  34/2: 279-285. 

Lukianova,  S.  N.  and  Moiseeva,  N.  V.,  1998,  Analysis  of  pulsed  bioelectric  activity  of 
rabbit  cerebral  cortex  in  response  to  low-intensity  microwave  radiation,  Radiats  Biol 
Radioecol,  38/5: 763-768. 

Lukianova,  S.  N.,  Rynskov,  V.  V.,  and  Makarov,  V.  P.,  1995,  A  comparison  of  conditioned 
avoidance  reflex  in  rabbits  formed  under  the  influence  of  permanent  magnetic  fields, 
ultra-high-frequency  irradiation,  light  and  sound,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  35/1: 69-73. 

Lukianova,  S.  N„  Rynskov,  V.  V.,  and  Makarov,  V.  P.,  1995,  Response  of  neurons  of  the 
sensomotor  region  of  the  cerebral  cortex  to  low-intensity  pulsed  ultra-high  frequency 
irradiation,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  35/1 :  53-56. 

McRee,  D.  I.  and  Wachtel,  H.,  1982,  Pulse  microwave  effects  on  nerve  vitality,  Radiat  Res 
91/1:212-218. 

McRee,  D.  1.,  and  Wachtel,  H.,  1980,  The  effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  the  vitality  of 
isolated  frog  sciatic  nerves,  Radiat  Res,  82/3: 536-546. 


288 


Minkina,  N.  A.,  Kuzminskaya,  G.  N.,  Nikitina,  V.  N.,  and  Garina,  I.  A,  1985,  Influence  of 
the  intermittent  short-wave  electromagnetic  field  on  endocrine  glands,  Radiobiologiia, 
25/6:  756-762. 

Moiseeva,  N.  V.,  1996,  Experimental  data  on  the  reaction  of  brain  neurons  to  low-intensity 
pulse-burst  microwave  irradiation,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  36/5: 710-713. 

Navakatikian,  M.  A.  and  Tomashevskaya,  L.  A.,  1994,  Phasic  behavioral  and  endocrine 
effects  of  microwaves  of  nonthermal  intensity,  In:  Biological  Effects  of  Electric  and 
Magnetic  Fields,  vol.  1:  Sources  and  Mechanisms,  D.  O.  Carpenter  and  S. 
Ayrapetyan,  eds.,  Academic  Press,  San  Diego,  pp  333-342. 

Navakatikian,  M.  A,  1992,  A  method  of  studying  of  a  defensive  conditioned  reflex  of 
active  avoidance,  Zh  Vyssh  Nerv  Deiat  Im  I P  Pavlova,  42/4:  812-818. 

Navakatikian,  M.  A,  Nikitina,  N.  G.,  and  Zotov,  S.  V.,  1991,  Behavioral  effects  of  the 
chronic  combined  exposure  to  9375  and  1765  MHz  microwaves.  Gig  Sanit  8:  52-53. 

Navakatikian,  M.  A.,  Soldatchenkov,  V.  N.,  Bitkin,  S.  V.,  and  Zotov,  S.  V.,  1991,  The 
status  of  the  higher  nervous  activity  in  animals  exposed  to  microwaves  in  conditions 
simulating  the  intermittent  work  of  radiolocators.  Gig  Sanit  7:  57-61. 

Navakatikyan,  M.  A,  1993,  A  problem  of  standardizing  methods  for  biological  evaluation 
of  an  electromagnetic  field  effect  in  hygienic  regulation.  In:  Hygiene  of  Physical 
Factors  of  Environmental  and  Industrial  Surroundings,  First  International  Congress 
(16-18  November  1993,  Kiev,  Ukraine),  pp  68-69. 

Nicitina  V.  N.,  Matskevich  O.  A,  Dubrovina  V.  V.,  Minkina  N.  A,  and  Kuzminskaya  G. 
N.,  1989a,  Cytogenetic  and  endocrinologic  changes  in  experimental  animals  exposed 
to  high-frequency  electromagnetic  fields.  Gig  Sanit,  5:  85-86. 

Nikitina,  Y.  N.,  Suvorov,  N.  B.,  Minkina,  N.  A,  and  Shaposhnikov,  E.  S.,  1989b, 
Peculiarities  of  the  response  of  animals  of  various  typological  groups  to 
electromagnetic  radiation  of  high  and  very  high  frequency,  Radiobiologiia,  29/5:  676- 
679. 

Pakhomov,  A  G.,  1993,  Non-thermal  microwave  effect  on  nerve  fiber  function,  Biofizika, 
8/2:  367-371. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Dubovick,  B.  V.,  Degtyariov,  I.  G.,  and  Pronkevich,  A  N.,  1995a, 
Microwave  influence  on  the  isolated  heart  function:  I.  Effect  of  modulation, 
Bioelectromagnetics,  16/4:  241-249. 

Pakhomov,  A  G.,  Dubovick,  B.  V.,  Degtyariov,  I.  G.,  and  Pronkevich,  A  N.,  1995b, 
Microwave  influence  on  the  isolated  heart  function:  n.  Combined  effect  of  radiation 
and  some  drugs.  Bioelectromagnetics,  16/4: 250-254. 

Pakhomov,  A  G.,  Dubovick,  B.  V.,  Kolupayev,  V.  E.t  and  Pronkevich,  A  N.,  1993a, 
Effect  of  high-peak-power  microwave  pulses  on  isolated  nerve  function.  Electro 
Magnetobiol,  12/1: 1-15. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Dubovick,  B.  V.,  Kolupayev,  V.  E.,  and  Pronkevich,  A  N.,  1992, 
Microwave-induced  changes  in  nerve  conduction:  effect  of  modulation.  In: 
Proceedings  of  the  14th  Int.  Conf  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology 
Society  (Paris,  France  Oct.  29-Nov.  1. 1992),  part  1,  pp.  293-294. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Dubovick,  B.  V.,  Kolupayev,  V.  E.,  and  Pronkevich,  A  N.,  1991, 
Absence  of  non-thermal  microwave  effects  on  the  function  of  giant  nerve  fibers,  J 
Bioelectr,  10/1&2:  185-203. 


289 


Pashovskina,  M.  S.  and  Akoev,  I.  G.,  1996,  Effects  of  2375  MHz  pulse-modulated 
microwave  radiation  on  ATPase  activity  of  the  rat  muscle  actomyosin,  Radiats  Biol 
Radioecol,  36/5:  700-705. 

Philippova,  T.  M.,  Novoselov,  V.  I.,  Bystrova,  M.  F.,  and  Alexeev,  S.  1,  1988,  Microwave 
effect  on  camphor  binding  to  rat  olfactory  epithelium,  Bioelectromagnctics,  9/4:  347- 
354. 

Popov,  V.  I.,  Novoselov,  V.  I,  Filippova,  T.  M.,  Khutsian,  S.  S.,  and  Fesenko,  E.  E.,  1996, 
Electron  microscopy  analysis  of  the  effect  of  a  modulated  microwave  radiation  on 
isolated  rat  olfactory  mucosa,  Biofizika,  41/4:  851-858. 

Rynskov,  V.  V.,  Polyntsev,  Iu.  V.,  Lukianova,  S.  N.,  Makarov,  V.  P.,  and  Afanas'eva,  E. 
A,  1995,  Evaluation  of  changes  in  electrophysiological  and  hormonal  parameters  in 
rabbits  resulting  from  short-term  low-intensity  ultra-high-frequency  irradiation, 
Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  35/1: 66-68. 

Semin,  Iu.  A,  Shvartsburg,  L.  K.,  and  Dubovik,  B.  V,,  1995,  Changes  in  the  secondary 
structure  of  DNA  under  the  influence  of  an  external  low-intensity  electromagnetic 
field,  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  35/1:  36-41. 

Sudakov,  K.  V.  and  Antimonii,  G.  D.,  1977,  The  hypnotic  effect  of  modulated 
electromagnetic  field,  Biull  Eksp  Biol  Med,  34/8:146-149. 

Sudakov,  K.  V.,  1976,  Modulated  electromagnetic  field  as  a  factor  of  selective  effect  on  the 
mechanisms  of  purposeful  behavior  in  animals,  Zh  Vyssh  Nerv  Deiat,  26/5:  899-908. 

Sudakov,  K.  V.,  1998,  Action  of  modulated  electromagnetic  fields  on  the  emotional 
component  of  the  systems  organization  of  behavioral  acts  in  rats,  Neurosci  Behav 
Physiol,  28/6:  686-693. 

Tambiev,  A.  Kh.,  Kirikova,  N.  N.,  Lapshin,  0.  M.,  Betzkii,  O.  V.,  Novskova,  T.  A, 
Nechaev,  V.  M.,  and  Petrov,  I.  Yu.,  1989,  The  combined  effect  of  exposure  to  EMF  of 
millimeter  and  centimeter  wavelength  ranges  oil  productivity  of  microalgae.  In: 
Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,  N.  D.  Devyatkov,  ed.,  Radioelectronica, 
Moscow,  pp  183-188. 

Tinney,  C.  E.,  Lords,  J.  L.,  and  Dumey,  C.  H.,  1976,  Rate  effects  in  isolated  turtle  hearts 
induced  by  microwave  irradiation,  IEEE  Trans  Microwave  Theory  Tech,  24/1:  18-24. 

Tomashevskaia,  L.  A  and  Dumanskii,  Iu.  D.,  1988,  Hygienic  evaluation  of  the  biological 
effect  of  pulsed  electromagnetic  fields  of  850-2750  MHz,  Gig  Sanit,  9:  22-24. 

Tomashevskaia,  L.  A  and  Solenyi,  E.  A,  1986,  Biological  action  and  hygienic  significance 
of  the  electromagnetic  field  created  by  coastal  radar  facilities,  Gig  Sanit,  7:  34-36. 

Tygranyan,  R.  E.,  1986,  On  the  mechanism  of  pulsed  microwaves  effects  on  excitable 
structures,  Vopr  Kurortol  Fizioter  Lech  Fiz  Kult,  6: 11-14. 

Zakharova,  N.  M.,  1995,  Enhancement  of  rhythmic  processes  in  slices  of  the  cerebral 
cortex  under  the  action  of  pulse-modulated  microwave  radiation,  Biofizika,  40/3:  695- 
696. 

Zakharova,  N.  M.,  Alexeev,  S.  I.,  and  Zhadin,  M.  N.,  1993,  Microwave  effect  on 
spontaneous  electrical  activity  in  slices  of  the  cerebral  cortex  in  vitro,  Biofizika,  38/3 : 
520-523. 

Zakharova,  N.  M.,  Karpuk,  N.  N.,  and  Zhadin,  M.  N.,  1996,  Cross-correlation  analysis  of 
interconnections  in  neuron  firing  in  neocortex  slices  under  the  effect  of  microwave 
irradiation.  Biofizika,  41/4:  913-915. 


290 


EFFECT  OF  PULSED  MICROWAVES  ON  THE  POPULATION 
SPIKE  IN  RAT  HIPPOCAMPAL  SLICES 


ANDREI  PAKHOMOV1’2  and  JOANNE  DOYLE1 

'McKessonHBOC  BioServices,  US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment 
directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate, 
Air  Force  Research  Laboratory 

Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas,  78235-5324,  USA. 
E-mail:  andrei .pakhomov  @ afrl ars  .brooks,  af . m i  1 


ABSTRACT 

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  reveal  possible  modulation-specific  effect  of  microwaves  on  the 
neuron  circuitry  function  in  the  isolated  brain  slice  model.  Hippocampal  slices  (350-prn  thick)  were 
obtained  from  4-  to  6-week  old  male  Sprague-Dawley  rats.  The  slices  were  exposed  to  9.2  GHz 
microwaves  in  a  custom-made  chamber  filled  with  artificial  cerebrospinal  fluid  (ACSF)  at  35.5  °C  and 
connected  to  a  waveguide  via  a  sapphire  window.  Stratum  radiatum  area  of  the  slice  was  stimulated  with  a 
bipolar  tungsten  electrode  at  30-sec  intervals,  and  extracellular  population  spikes  (PS)  in  the  CA1  area 
were  recorded  by  a  glass  microelectrode.  Experiments  began  after  a  30-  to  60-min  stabilization.  Each 
experiment  included  recording  of  the  PS  amplitude  for  5  min  before  exposure,  5  min  during  it,  and  10  min 
after  it.  Each  slice  preparation  could  be  exposed  up  to  three  times;  various  regimens  of  exposure  and  sham 
exposures  alternated  in  a  random  manner.  The  interval  between  sequential  exposures  was  no  less  than  15 
min,  and  the  data  for  each  exposure  were  analyzed  as  an  independent  experiment.  In  the  1st  series  of 
experiments,  the  modulation  rate  was  fixed  at  1 6  Hz;  the  average  SAR,  peak  SAR,  and  pulse  width  were 
varied,  respectively,  from  0.06  to  7.2  W/g,  from  2.4  to  14.4  W/g,  and  from  1.55  to  31  ms.  In  the  2nd 
series,  pulsed  or  CW  exposures  were  performed  at  the  average  SAR  of  2.4  W/g.  Tested  pulse  repetition 
rates  were  10,  100,  and  1000  Hz,  while  the  peak  SAR  and  duty  cycle  were  kept  constant  (12  W/g  and 
1/5).  In  the  3rd  series.  CW  and  10-Hz  exposure  regimens  from  the  Series  2  were  tested  again,  in  order  to 
validate  a  potential  modulation-dependent  microwave  effect.  In  all  the  series,  microwave-induced  heating 
was  directly  proportional  to  the  average  SAR  (up  to  4  °C  at  7.2  W/g).  The  experiments  established  that 
exposure  regimens  caused  no  reproducible  and  statistically  significant  effect  on  the  PS  if  the  temperature 
during  the  exposure  did  not  exceed  36.5  °C.  If  the  average  SAR  was  high  enough  to  exceed  this 
temperature,  irradiation  decreased  the  PS  amplitude.  This  effect  was  proportional  to  the  average  SAR  and 
heating,  while  other  particulars  of  the  exposure  regimen  appeared  to  be  of  no  importance.  Within  the 
studied  limits,  all  proven  effects  of  exposure  could  be  adequately  explained  by  microwave  heating. 

INTRODUCTION 

Biological  effects  of  continuous- wave  (CW)  and  pulsed  microwaves  (PW)  have  been  compared 
in  numerous  studies.  However,  the  current  knowledge  in  this  area  is  insufficient  to  draw  a  definite 
conclusion  about  the  importance  of  modulation.  In  general,  findings  of  these  studies  fall  into  one  or  more 
of  the  following  categories: 

1.  Neither  CW  nor  PW  produced  any  bioeffect  at  low  ("nonthermal'*)  intensities.  At  higher  ("thermal") 
intensities,  CW  and  PW  effects  were  essentially  the  same.  (1-4). 

2.  Microwave  hearing  effects,  which  can  only  be  caused  by  PW  and  within  a  limited  range  of  pulsing 
parameters  (5).  The  effect  is  mediated  by  thermoelastic  expansion  that  creates  acoustic  waves  in  tissue. 
It  is  unclear  whether  these  acoustic  waves  can  cause  any  bioeffects  other  than  perception  as  an 
auditory  stimulus.  However,  secondary  effects  could  occur  (e.g.,  behavioral  response  to  the  auditory 
stimulation). 

3.  Both  CW  and  PW  produced  presumably  nonthermal  bioeffects,  and  these  effects  were  essentially  the 
same  (6). 


480 


MICROWAVE  EFFECT  IN  HIPPOCAMPUS 


4.  Only  PW  but  notvCW  caused  presumably  nonthermal  bioeffects,  or  nonthermal  effects  of  PW  were 
essentially  different  from  those  of  CW.  In  many  cases,  PW  were  effective  only  within  a  limited  range 
of  pulsing  parameters  (e.g.,  pulse  repetition  frequency,  PRF),  creating  so-called  "windows  of 
effectiveness"  (7-10). 

The  latter  phenomenon  of  "windows"  is  particularly  intriguing,  but  perhaps  the  least  established. 
A  significant  number  of  studies  have  reported  specific  microwave  bioeffects  at  the  PRF  of  16  Hz  (7-9), 
though  these  findings  still  require  independent  confirmation.  Making  the  situation  even  more  complicated, 
some  authors  have  reported  that  a  particular  PRF  will  be  biologically  effective  only  within  a  certain  range 
of  the  average  field  intensity  (II),  peak  field  intensity  (12),  or  radiation  wavelength  (10). 

The  objective  of  the  present  study  was  a  wide-scale  screening  of  various  pulsing  regimens,  in 
order  to  reveal  those  which  could  potentially  produce  specific  (nonthermal)  biological  effects.  The 
experiments  employed  a  well-defined  in  vitro  model  of  hippocampal  brain  slices  exposed  in  fully 
controlled  conditions  (including  temperature,  PRF,  peak  and  average  field  intensity,  and  pulse  width). 

METHODS 


1.  Exposure  setup ,  thermometry  and  dosimetry.  The  source  of  9.2  GHz  microwave  radiation  was 
an  HP  8690A  Sweep  Oscillator  connected  to  Hughes  8020H  Traveling  Wave  Tube  Amplifier.  The 
amplifier  output  signal  (up  to  8W)  was  transmitted  to  a  biological  sample  via  WR90  waveguide  (22.86  x 
10.16  mm).  The  oscillator  operated  in  a  CW  mode,  or  was  triggered  externally  by  a  Grass  Instruments 
S8800  Stimulator  to  produce  square  microwave  pulses.  The  pulse  width  and  the  PRF  were  determined  by 
the  stimulator  settings.  Incident  and  reflected  powers  in  the  waveguide  were  measured  via  directional 
couplers  by  HP  43 8 A  and  HP  435B  power  meters  with  HP  8481 A  power  sensors. 

The  exposure  cell  was  made  atop  a  vertical  end  section  of  the  waveguide.  The  waveguide  flanges 
(covered  with  a  varnish)  and  a  sapphire  matching  plate  impressed  into  the  waveguide  formed  the  bottom 
of  the  cell.  Plexiglas  walls  divided  the  cell  into  two  compartments.  The  middle  compartment  above  the 
center  of  the  matching  plate  was  filled  with  the  ACSF,  and  samples  to  be  exposed  were  placed  directly  on 
the  matching  plate.  The  middle  compartment  was  open  from  the  top,  to  allow  the  access  of  recording 
electrodes  and  a  temperature  probe  to  the  sample  at  the  bottom.  The  other  (outer)  compartment  was 
essentially  a  jacket  filled  with  constant-temperature  water  circulating  through  a  water  bath.  It  should  be 
emphasized  that  this  thermostabilization  system  could  not  (and  was  not  intended  to)  compensate  for  fast 
microwave  heating  in  the  middle  compartment.  Instead,  its  purpose  was  to  set  the  initial  temperature  in  the 
middle  compartment  at  a  physiological  level  (about  35  °C). 

A  method  of  liigh-resulutiun  microwave  dosimetry  was  described  in  detail  and  justified  in  our 
previous  publications  (13,  14).  Instrumental  measurements  of  local  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  in 
ACSF  solution  matched  well  with  analytically  calculated  values.  Along  the  axis  of  the  waveguide,  SAR 
fell  sharply  with  increasing  the  distance  above  the  matching  plate  (approximately  twofold  per  millimeter). 
Field  distribution  in  the  horizontal  plane  (parallel  to  the  matching  plate)  was  substantially  more  uniform. 
For  example,  at  0.5  mm  above  the  plate,  SAR  decreased  by  less  than  20%  within  a  2-nun  radius  from  the 
waveguide  axis. 

Brain  slices  (0.35-mm  thick  and  less  than  5-mm  wide  and  long)  were  placed  directly  on  the 
sapphire  matching  plate  window  and  centered  over  the  waveguide  axis.  However,  dielectric  properties  of 
brain  slice  tissues  are  somewhat  different  from  those  of  the  ACSF,  so  SAR  values  measured  for  the 
solution  had  to  be  adjusted.  Necessary  calculations  were  done  hy  Dr.  S.  Alekseev  (15)  using  analytical 
approaches  described  by  Alekseev  and  Ziskin  (16).  Local  SAR  in  the  slice  on  the  axis  of  the  waveguide 
was  calculated  to  be  2.4  W/g  per  I  W  of  transmitted  power.  Considering  slice  linear  dimensions,  SAR 
gradient  within  the  thickness  of  the  slice  was  negligible;  in  the  plane  parallel  to  the  matching  plate,  SAR 
could  decrease  by  20-30%  from  the  waveguide  axis  to  the  periphery  of  the  slice. 

Temperature  was  continually  monitored  in  all  experiments  with  a  Luxtron  Instruments  model  850 
multichannel  fluoroptic  thermometer.  A  fluoroptic  probe  sensor  was  positioned  on  the  matching  plate  in 
the  immediate  vicinity  (1-1.5  mm)  of  the  brain  slice  preparation. 

2.  Brain  slice  isolation  and  recording  of  bioelectric  potentials.  Male  Sprague-Dawley  rats  (4  to  6 
weeks  old)  were  anesthetized  with  sodium  pentobarbital  (50  mg/kg  ip)  and  decapitated.  Brain  was 
removed  and  sliced  with  a  Vibrotome  machine  (WP1)  in  a  modified  ACSF.  Saggital  slices  of  the 
hippocampus  were  transferred  into  a  holding  chamber  filled  with  the  ACSF  that  was  continually  gassed 
with  a  95%  02  /  5%  C02  mixture.  The  ACSF  was  composed  of:  (in  mM)  glucose,  1 1;  NaCl,  125;  KC1,  3; 
MgCl2,  1;  NaH2P04,  1.25;  NaHC03,  26,  CaCl2,  2;  pH  7.2-7.4.  In  the  modified  ACSF  that  was  used  to 
reduce  trauma  during  brain  slicing,  NaCl  was  substituted  with  an  equimolar  amount  of  sucrose. 


481 


Pakhomov  and  Doyle 


„  The  sl,ce  t0  be  exposed  was  transferred  into  the  exposure  cell  filled  with  the  A CSF  at  35.3-35.5 

C.  The  ACSF  was  continually  oxygenated  and  circulated  at  a  rate  of  I  ml/min..  Stratum  mdiatum  area  of 
the  hippocampus  was  stimulated  with  a  bipolar  tungsten  electrode  at  30-sec  intervals.  An  extracellular 
glass  micropipette  filled  with  2-M  NaCl  (1-  to  10-Mohm  resistance)  was  used  to  record  field  potentials  of 
neurons  in  the  CA1  area  (so  called  population  spikes,  PS).  The  signal  from  the  micropipette  was  recorded 
by  an  MP100  data  acquisition  system  (BIOPAC)  via  a  DAM50  amplifier  (WPI).  PS  peak-to-peak 
amplitude  was  the  sole  physiological  index  analyzed  in  this  study. 

Experiments  began  after  a  30-  to  120-min  stabilization  of  the  preparation  in  the  exposure  cell. 
Each  experiment  lasted  for  20  min  and  included  records  of  PS  before  exposure  (5  min),  during  exposure 
(5  min),  and  after  exposure  (10  min).  Up  to  three  experiments  could  be  performed  with  each  successful 
brain  slice  preparation;  various  exposure  regimens  and  sham  exposures  alternated  in  a  random  manner, 
and  the  interval  between  sequential  exposures  was  no  less  than  15  min. 

RESULTS 


In  the  1st  series  of  experiments,  PRF  was  fixed  at  16  Hz,  while  the  time-average  SAR  was  varied 
from  0  (sham)  to  7.2  W/g.  This  formed  6  major  groups  (S  for  sham  exposure  and  A  through  E  for  actual 
exposure,  see  Table  1).  Within  each  group,  the  specified  time-average  SAR  could  be  produced  by 
different  combination  of  peak  SAR  and  pulse  width,  thus  forming  additional  subgroups  (e.g.,  BI,  B2,  BO, 
etc.).  This  resulted  in  as  many  as  15  different  exposure  regimens;  obviously,  it  would  be  too  laborious  to 
collect  the  data  for  a  full  statistical  analysis  of  each  treatment  regimen.  Therefore,  the  statistical  analysis 
was  only  performed  for  the  6  major  groups.  Concurrently,  each  single  experiment  was  analyzed 
separately,  in  order  to  reveal  a  possible  ’■unusual"  PS  change  during  or  after  exposure.  In  case  such  a 
change  was  observed,  the  respective  exposure  regimen  was  given  special  attention  and  tested  enough 
times  to  establish  whether  the  unusual  PS  change  was  a  coincidence  or  a  real  effect  of  exposure. 

Table  1.  Parameters  of  exposure  regimens  studied  in  Scries  1  of  experiments.  Shown  in  Italics  are  l-  or  2- 
symbol  codes  for  the  regimens.  For  all  the  regimens,  PRF  was  16  Hz.  and  exposure  duration  was  5  min. 


Time-average  SAR,  W/g 

0  (5)  0.06(A)  0.3  (B)  1.2(C)  4.8  (0)  7.2  (f) 

Peak  SAR,  W/g 

Pulse  width,  ms 

2.4 

1.55(A))  7.8(B))  31(0)  - 

7.2 

0.52  (A2)  2.6  (B2)  10.4  (C2)  41.7  (02)  - 

9.6 

2.0  (B0)  8.0  (B0)  31  (DO) 

14.4 

1.3  (fli)  5.2  (CJ)  20.7(03)  31  (E3) 

The  experiments  established  that,  typically,  exposure  regimens  A,  B,  and  C,  as  well  as  sham 
exposure  (5)  caused  no  changes  in  the  PS  amplitude.  Unusual  PS  fluctuations  were  observed  only  on  a 
few  occasions  (e.g.,  with  AI  and  B3  regimens),  and  failed  to  be  confirmed  as  irradiation  effects. 
Exposures  at  higher  intensities  ( D  and  E)  caused  pronounced  heating  and  gradual  PS  decrease.  This 
decrease  was  fully  or  partially  reversible  after  the  exposure  (Figures  1  and  2)  The  effect  of  exposure  on 
the  PS  amplitude  was  apparently  determined  by  the  time-average  SAR  and  heating,  and  not  by  the  peak 
SAR  or  pulse  width.  The  data  were  not  indicative  of  any  specific  effects  of  I6-Hz  microwave  pulses. 

To  analyze  bioeffects  of  radiations  at  PRF  other  than  16  Hz,  a  Series  2  of  experiments  was 
performed.  The  experiment  protocol  was  the  same  as  for  the  Series  I .  A  total  of  4  exposure  regimens  were 
tested  (I  CW  and  3  PW).  For  all  the  regimens,  the  time-average  SAR  was  fixed  at  2.4  W/g,  and  the 
exposure  duration  was  5  min.  For  all  pulsed  exposures,  the  peak  SAR  was  set  at  1 2  W/g,  and  the  duty 
cycle  was  1/5.  Tested  PRFs  were  1000,  100,  and  10  Hz;  the  pulse  width  was  0.2,  2  and  20  ms 
respectively.  Exposure  regimens  alternated  randomly,  and  each  group  included  from  6  to  8  experiments. 

The  results  of  Series  2  are  summarized  in  Figure  3.  As  expected,  all  the  regimens  produced 
practically  Ihe  same  heating  (about  1 .2  V).  PS  amplilude  decreased  under  the  exposure,  approximately  to 
the  same  extent  for  all  tested  regimens.  Statistical  comparison  of  the  graphs  using  paired  t-test  revealed  no 


482 


MICROWAVE  EFFECT  IN  HIPPOCAMPUS 


significant  differences  at  p<0.05  level.  At  the  same  time,  the  data  showed  an  interesting  trend:  The  rate 
and  the  extent  of  PS  recovery  after  the  exposure  appeared  to  be  dependent  on  the  modulation.  Post- 
exposure  PS  recovery  was  the  steepest  after  the  CW  exposure,  somewhat  slower  after  the  1000-Hz  PW 
exposure,  still  slower  after  the  100-Hz  exposure,  and  after  the  10-Hz  exposure  there  appeared  to  be  no  PS 
recovery  at  all 


1.4-i 
PS,  _ 
mV 

1.2J 

A 

36- 

°C  ■ 

35  J 

41  . 

_  A2  S 

PS,16] 

mV 

1.2- 

B  39- 
°c  37- 
35- 

| 

B3  E3 

A1  - 

n 

i — < — i - 1 - 1 - ' — i — ' — i - 1 - 1 - • — i — ' — i — • 

0  10  20  30  40  50  60  70  mjn 

Figure  1.  Sample  records  of  PS  amplitude  variations  during  experiments  in  two  different  preparations  (A 
and  B).  Abscissa,  time  from  the  onset  of  the  1st  experiment,  min.  Ordinates,  PS  amplitude  (mV)  and 
temperature  (°C).  Periods  of  microwave  exposure  are  shown  by  horizontal  bars.  Designations  of  exposure 
regimens  correspond  to  those  in  Table  1 . 

Thus,  the  results  were  indicative  of  a  possibility  that  PW,  at  least  at  10-Hz  PRF,  could  have  a 
different  bioeffect  than  CW  radiation  at  the  same  intensity.  To  validate  this  possibility,  an  additional  series 
of  experiments  was  performed. 

In  Series  3,  we  tested  two  exposure  regimens  that  seemed  to  produce  the  most  different  effects  at 
the  same  SAR  level  (CW  and  10-Hz  PW,  same  as  in  the  previous  series).  To  ensure  greater  reliability  of 
the  data,  the  experiment  protocol  was  slightly  modified:  (1)  pre-exposure  PS  recording  period  was 
increased  from  5  min  to  10  min,  and  (2)  each  brain  slice  preparation  was  exposed  only  once  and  then 
discarded.  Otherwise,  all  experimental  conditions  remained  the  same  as  in  Series  2.  A  total  of  9  successful 
experiments  were  performed  with  each  exposure  regimen.  Unfortunately,  analysis  of  the  data  from  these 
experiments  has  failed  to  confirm  the  trend  observed  in  Series  2,  nor  did  it  reveal  any  other  differences  in 

the  bioeffects  of  CW  and  PW  exposures. 


SUMMARY 


Effects  of  9.2  GHz  CW  and  PW  microwaves  on  the  field  population  spike  in  hippocampal  brain 
slices  have  been  studied  in  three  independent  series  of  experiments.  Generally,  a  5-min  irradiation  had  no 
effect  on  the  PS  amplitude  when  the  temperature  during  exposure  remained  under  36.5  °C.  With  a  more 
intensive  irradiation  and  more  intensive  heating,  PS  amplitude  gradually  decreased.  This  PS  decrease  was 
proportional  to  the  temperature  rise  and  fully  or  partially  reversible  after  the  exposure.  On  some 
occasions,  experimental  data  showed  other  (atypical)  PS  changes  which  could  be  indicative  of  a  specific 
bioeffect  of  some  modulation  regimens.  However,  these  atypical  changes  could  not  be  confirmed  in 
replication  experiments.  Within  the  limits  of  this  study,  all  proven  effects  of  exposure  were  apparently 
caused  by  microwave  heating  and  did  not  depend  on  the  PRF,  pulse  width,  or  peak  SAR. 


483 


Pakhomov  and  Doyle 


110  °  W/g  (s)  0-06  W/g  (A) 


0  10  20  0  10  20 


0.3  W/g  (B) 


0  10  20 


0  10  20  0  10  20  0  10  mjn  20 


Figure  2.  Effect  of  time-average  SAR  on  PS  amplitude.  Abscissa,  time  from  the  onset  of  the  each 
experiment,  min.  Ordinates,  PS  amplitude  (%  of  the  average  pre-exposure  value)  and  temperature  (°C). 
Each  datapoint  is  the  mean  +/-  s.c.  for  a  group  of  5  to  11  experiments.  Indicated  arc  the  periods  of 
exposure  (horizontal  bars),  time-average  SAR,  and  a  code  letter  for  exposure  regimens  included  in  each 
group  (see  Table  I ). 


1000-Hzrate  1 00-Hz  rate  10-Hzrale 

02-ms  width  2-ms  width  20-ms  width 

CW  12  W/g  peak  12  W/g  peak  12  W/g  peak 

2.4  W/g  2.4  W/g  average  2.4  W/g  average  2.4  W/g  average 


Figure  3.  Effect  of  modulation  on  the  PS  amplitude.  Each  datapoint  is  the  mean  +/-  s.e.  for  6  to  8 
experiments.  Exposure  parameters  are  indicated  above  the  graphs.  See  Figure  2  and  text  for  more 
explanation. 


484 


MICROWAVE  EFFECT  IN  HIPPOCAMPUS 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 


The  authors  are  thankful  to  Dr.  S.  Alekseev  (Temple  Univ.,  Philadelphia,  PA)  for  calculation  of 
SAR  within  brain  slices.  The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  under  U.S.  Army  contract  DAMD17-94- 
C-4069  awarded  to  McKessonHBOC  BioServices.  The  views  expressed  are  those  of  the  authors  and 
should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting  the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  Department  of  the  Army, 
Department  of  the  Air  Force,  or  the  United  States  Government. 


REFERENCES 

1.  Chou  C-K.  and  Guy  A.  W.  Effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  isolated  nerve  and  muscle 
preparations.  IEEE  Trans  Microwave  Theory  Tech  26(3):  141-147,  1978. 

2.  Courtney  K.  R.,  Lin  J,  C.,  Guy  A.  W.,  Chou  C.  K.  Microwave  effect  on  rabbit  superior  cervical 
ganglion.  IEEE  Trans  Microwave  Theory  Tech  23(10): 809-8 13, 1975. 

3.  Pakhomov  A.G.,  Dubovick  B.  V.,  Kolupayev  V.  E.,  Pronkevich  A.  N..  Absence  of  non-thermal 
microwave  effects  on  the  function  of  giant  nerve  fibers.  J.  Bioelectricity  10(2):  185-203,  1991. 

4.  Pakhomov  A.G.,  Dubovick  B.  V.,  Degtyariov  I.  G.,  Pronkevich  A.  N.  Microwave  influence  on  the 
isolated  heart  function:  I.  Effect  of  modulation.  Bioelectromagnetics  16(4):24 1-249,  1995. 

5.  Lin  J.  C.  Auditory  perception  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation.  In:  Biological  Effects  and  Medical 
Applications  of  Electromagnetic  Energy.  O.  P.  Gandhi,  ed.,  Prentice  Hal),  Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ,  pp 
277-318,  1990. 

6.  McKee  D.  I.  and  Wachtel  H.  Pulse  microwave  effects  on  nerve  vitality.  Radiat  Res  9I(1):212-2I8, 

1982. 

7.  Iurinskaia  M.  M.,  Kuznetsov  V.  I.,  Galeev  A.  L.,  and  Kolomytkin  O.  V.  Reaction  of  the  brain 
receptor  system  to  the  effect  of  low  intensity  microwaves.  Biofizika,  41(4):  859-865,  1996. 

8.  Blackman  C.  F.,  Elder  J.  A.,  Weil  C.  M.,  Benane  S.  G.,  Eichinger  D.  C.,  and  House  D.  E.  Induction 
of  calcium-ion  efflux  from  brain  tissue  by  radiofrequency  radiation:  effects  of  modulation  frequency 
and  field  strength.  Radio  Sci  14(6S):93-98,  1979. 

9.  Adey  W.  R.  Biological  effects  of  low  energy  electromagnetic  Helds  on  the  central  nervous  system. 
In:  Biological  Effects  and  Dosimetry  of  Nonionizing  Radiation.  Radiofrequency  and  Microwave 
Energies.  M.  Grandolfo,  S.  M.  Michaelson,  A.  Rindi,  eds.,  New  York:  Plenum  Press,  pp.  359-391, 

1983. 

10.  Gapeev  A.  B.,  Chemeris  N.  K.,  Fesenko  E.  E.,  Khramov  R.  N.  Resonance  effects  of  a  low-intensity 
modulated  ehf  field.  Alteration  of  the  locomotor  activity  of  the  protozoa  Paramecium  caudatum. 
Biofizika  39(l):74-82,  1994 

1 L  Pashovskina  M.  S.  and  Akoev  I.  G.,  Effects  of  2375  MHz  pulse-modulated  microwave  radiation  on 
ATPase  activity  of  the  rat  muscle  actomyosin.  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol,  36(5):700-705,  1996. 

12.  Semin,  Iu.  A.,  Shvartsburg  L.  K.,  and  Dubovik  B.  V.  Changes  in  the  secondary  structure  of  DNA 
under  the  influence  of  an  external  low-intensity  electromagnetic  field.  Radiats  Biol  Radioecol, 
35(1):36-41,  1995. 

13.  Pakhomov  A.G.,  Mathur  S.  P.,  Akyel  Y.,  Kiel  J.  L.,  and  Murphy  M.  R.  High-resolution  microwave 
dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  In:  Radio  Frequency  Radiation  Dosimetry,  B.  I.  Klauenberg  and  D. 
Miklavcic,  eds.,  Kluwer  Academic  Publishers,  Netherlands,  pp.  187-197,  2000. 

14.  Pakhomov  A.G.,  Mathur  S.  P.,  Doyle  J.,  Stuck  B.  E.,  Kiel  J.  L.t  and  Murphy  M.  R.  Comparative  effects 
of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  and  a  brief  CW  irradiation  on  pacemaker  function  in 
isolated  frog  heart  slices.  Bioelectromagnetics  2I(4);245-254,  2000. 

15.  Alekseev  S.  I.,  personal  communication,  1999. 

16.  Alekseev  S.  I.  and  Ziskin  M.  C.  Reflection  and  absorption  of  millimeter  waves  by  thin  absorbing 
films.  Bioelectromagnetics,  21(4):  264-271,  2000. 


485 


34 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE,  VOL,  28,  NO.  I,  FEBRUARY  2000 


Low-Intensity  Millimeter  Waves  as  a  Novel 
Therapeutic  Modality 

Andrei  G.  Pakhomov  and  Michael  R.  Murphy,  Associate  Member,  IEEE 


Invited  Paper 


Abstract — One  of  the  most  significant  events  in  contemporary 
electromagnetic  biology  is  a  surge  in  interest  to  specific  effects  of 
low-intensity  millimeter-band  radiation  (30-300  GHz).  Bioeffects 
of  millimeter  waves  (MMW’s)  can  often  occur  without  any  consid¬ 
erable  heating  of  the  exposed  subject,  and  biological  responses  are 
principally  different  from  those  caused  by  heating.  The  effects  of 
MMW’s  often  have  a  sharp,  resonance-like  dependence  on  the  ra¬ 
diation  frequency,  but  they  depend  relatively  little  on  the  radiation 
intensity.  A  brief,  low-intensity  MMW  exposure  can  change  cell 
growth  and  proliferation  rates,  activity  of  enzymes,  state  of  cell  ge¬ 
netic  apparatus,  function  of  excitable  membranes  and  peripheral 
receptors;  it  can  alleviate  stress  reactions,  stimulate  tissue  repair 
and  regeneration,  etc.  In  Eastern  Europe,  low-intensity  MMW’s 
are  widely  employed  for  therapeutic  purposes.  The  method  has 
gained  official  recognition,  and  millions  of  people  received  MMW 
therapy  for  various  conditions.  While  the  mechanisms  of  MMW 
efficacy  remain  unclear  and  their  medical  usage  is  mostly  empir¬ 
ical,  the  knowledge  accumulated  over  more  than  20  years  of  MMW 
therapy  merits  careful  analysis  and  consideration. 

Index  Terms — Millimeter  waves,  specific  bioeffects,  therapy. 


I.  Introduction 

ELLIMETER  WAVES  (MMW’s)  are  characterized 
by  rather  shallow  penetration  into  biological  tissues 
(<1  mm),  and  one  may  anticipate  that  MMW  bioeffects  arise 
mostly  from  surface  heating.  Indeed,  this  thermal  mechanism 
is  well  known  and  is  essentially  the  same  as  with  other  methods 
of  local  heating  (e.g.,  with  infrared). 

At  the  same  time,  a  large  number  of  studies  have  reported 
principally  different  MMW  effects,  which  do  not  fit  into  the 
thermal  paradigm.  These  effects  may  occur  at  the  radiation  in¬ 
tensities  orders  of  magnitude  below  the  thermal  effect  threshold, 
and  often  demonstrate  a  highly  nonlinear,  resonance-type  de¬ 
pendence  on  the  radiation  frequency.  Specific  MMW  effects 
seem  to  be  of  fairly  universal  nature,  appearing  at  various  levels 

Manuscript  received  June  1,  1999;  revised  September  24,  1999.  This  work 
was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Com¬ 
mand  and  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  (AFOSR)  under  U.S.  Army 
Contract  DAMD 1 7-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices. 

A.  G.  Pakhomov  is  with  McKesson  BioServices,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Re¬ 
search  Detachment,  and  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Human  Effectivenss 
Directorate,  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Radio  Frequency  Radiation 
Branch,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235-5324  USA  (e-mail:  andrei.pakhomov@afr- 
lars.brooks.af.mil). 

M.  R.  Murphy  is  with  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory.  Human  Effectiveness 
Directorate,  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Radio  Frequency  Radiation 
Branch,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235-5324  USA, 

Publisher  Item  Identifier  S  0093-3813(00)00735-9. 


of  biological  organization  (from  cells  and  subcellular  structures 
to  animal  and  human  organisms)  and  affecting  rather  diverse  bi¬ 
ological  functions  (from  DNA  conformation  and  cell  membrane 
permeability  to  immune  reactions  and  behavior).  While  reasons 
for  the  unusual  MMW  sensitivity  of  living  subjects  and  under¬ 
lying  biophysical  mechanisms  have  yet  to  be  identified,  the  pos¬ 
sibility  of  manipulating  biological  functions  by  MMW  has  al¬ 
ready  been  employed  widely  in  biotechnology  and  medicine. 

The  purpose  of  this  paper  is  to  introduce  professionals  with 
mostly  physical  and  engineering  backgrounds  to  the  exciting 
and  potentially  important  area  of  MMW  bioeffects  and  medical 
applications.  Interested  readers  are  advised  to  see  other  reviews 
for  more  detailed  information  [1]— [8]. 

II.  Specific  Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 

Resonance  effects  of  MMW’s  on  cell  growth  rate  have  been 
studied  for  over  20  years  [9]-[l  1].  Exposure  of  the  yeast  Sac - 
charomyces  cerevisiae  to  certain  frequencies  within  a  41 .8-42.0 
GHz  band  can  either  increase  the  cell  growth  rate  by  up  to  15%, 
or  decrease  it  by  up  to  29%  [Fig.  1(a)].  The  authors  employed 
MMW’s  modulated  at  8  kHz,  and  established  the  effect  by  dif¬ 
ferent  methods,  both  in  suspended  cells  and  in  monolayer.  The 
effect  could  be  detected  at  the  radiation  intensity  as  low  as  5 
pW/cm2,  and  remained  essentially  unchanged  with  the  intensi¬ 
ties  of  up  to  1  mW/cm2  [12].  The  position  of  the  “resonance 
frequency”  (at  which  the  growth  rate  increased)  did  not  de¬ 
pend  on  the  incident  power  density,  while  the  “resonance  width” 
(taken  as  a  distance  between  two  frequencies  which  decreased 
the  growth  rate)  gradually  increased  from  about  5  MHz  at  5 
pW/cm2  to  12-15  MHz  at  1  mW/cm2  [Fig.  1(b)].  One  should 
note,  however,  that  independent  attempts  to  replicate  these  ob¬ 
servations  were  not  successful  [13],  [14],  suggesting  that  some 
other  unknown  and  unidentified  factors  could  be  essential  for 
this  MMW  effect. 

Belyaev  et  al  [15]— [18]  used  an  anomalous  viscosity  time  de¬ 
pendence  (AVTD)  technique  to  study  fine  changes  in  DNA  con¬ 
formation  and  DNA-protein  bonds  caused  by  MMW  exposure. 
Multiple  frequency  resonances  were  established  [Fig.  2(a)],  and, 
at  a  resonance  frequency,  biological  changes  could  be  produced 
by  field  intensities  as  low  as  10“ 19  W/cm2.  The  magnitude  of 
changes  gradually  increased  with  the  field  intensity,  reaching  a 
plateau  between  10“ 17  and  10“8  W/cm2.  The  resonance  fre¬ 
quencies  shifted  when  the  length  of  the  chromosomal  DNA  of 


0093-38 13/00$  10.00  ©  2000  IEEE 


PAKHOMOV  AND  MURPHY:  LOW-INTENSITY  MMW’S  AS  A  NOVEL  THERAPEUTIC  MODALITY 


35 


A 


41.690  41.700 

GHz 

B 


10  *3 

10'4 

10-5 

rs 

| 

o  o 

-^4  bi 

£ 

£ 

10  8 

5= 

10'9 

.s 

10'10 

10'11 

M1l_ 

R 

1 

V - 

1 

1 

« 

1 

1 

1  mW/cm 2 

R 

_Jm2 

t 

1 

t 

« 

1/jW/cm 2 

1 

1 

« 

1 

4 

1 

| 

1 

I  R 

1 

1 

i 

Ml  ^ 

L — * — • 

V  1  nW/cm 2  * 

*  M2 

i  • 


Ml 


U1-; 


M2  5  pW/cm1- 


41.690 


41.700 


GHz 


Fig.  1 .  (a)  Effect  of  different  MMW  frequencies  around  4 1 .696  GHz  on  yeast 
cell  growth  rate.  Exposure  at  5  pW/cm2 , 8-kHz  square-wave  modulation.  Labels 
indicate  the  frequencies  that  most  efficiently  decreased  the  growth  rate  (A/ \  and 
M2)  and  increased  it  (R).  (b)  Dependence  of  the  “resonance  width”  (defined 
as  a  distance  between  frequencies  Mi  and  M2)  and  of  the  “resonance  peak” 
( R )  position  on  the  field  intensity.  Reproduced  with  changes  from  [12],  by 
permission  of  Gordon  and  Breach  Publishers. 


exposed  cells  was  increased,  thus  suggesting  that  the  chromo¬ 
somal  DNA  may  be  a  target  for  resonance  interaction  between 
living  cells  and  MMW’s.  The  width  of  the  frequency  resonances 
increased  from  units  to  tens  of  megahertz  by  increasing  the  in¬ 
cident  power  density  [Fig.  2(b)],  which  is  in  remarkable  agree¬ 
ment  with  the  above-mentioned  independent  findings  [12]. 

Due  to  the  nature  of  the  biological  experiment,  it  becomes  in¬ 
creasingly  laborious  to  produce  detailed  frequency  and  intensity 
dependences  of  the  bioeffects  when  working  with  more  complex 
biological  subjects  (i.e.,  when  moving  from  cells  to  isolated  or¬ 
gans  and  whole  organisms).  Most  of  such  studies  analyzed  a 
limited  number  of  isolated  MMW  frequencies  and/or  intensi 


Fig.  2.  (a)  Frequency  dependence  of  MMW  effect  on  genome  conformational 
state  at  10“ 10  W/cm2.  (b)  Gradual  widening  of  a  “resonance  peak”  at  51.756 
GHz  with  increasing  of  the  radiation  intensity.  Genome  conformational  state 
was  determined  in  lysates  of  bacterial  cells  ( Escherichia  coli)  by  an  anomalous 
viscosity  time  dependence  technique.  Reproduced  with  changes  from  [18],  by 
permission  of  Wiley-Liss,  Inc.,  a  subdivision  of  John  Wiley  &  Sons,  Inc. 


ties,  or  even  employed  a  single  frequency  at  a  fixed  intensity. 
These  studies  were  focused  not  as  much  on  the  development  of 
the  biological  response  spectra,  but  rather  on  identifying  spe¬ 
cific  MMW  effects  and  examining  physiological  mechanisms 
involved. 

Kataev  et  al  [19]  studied  MMW  effects  on  transmembrane 
currents  in  giant  alga  cells  ( Nitellopsis  obtusa,  Characea).  Ex¬ 
posure  for  30-60  min  at  41  GHz,  5  mW/cm2  suppressed  the 
chloride  current  to  zero  with  no  recovery  for  10-14  h.  Marked 
inhibitory  effects  were  also  found  at  50  and  71  GHz,  while 
most  of  other  tested  frequencies  enhanced  the  chloride  current 
up  to  200%-400%  (49,  70,  76  GHz).  This  activation  was  re¬ 
versible,  and  recovery  to  the  initial  value  took  30-40  min.  In¬ 
terestingly,  “activating”  frequencies  could  restore  the  chloride 
current  after  its  complete  and  normally  irreversible  suppression 
by  “inhibitory”  frequencies.  MMW  heating  did  not  exceed  1  °C, 
and  neither  activating  nor  inhibitory  effects  were  related  to,  or 
could  be  explained  by  this  temperature  change. 

Pakhomov  et  ai  [20]— [22]  have  repeatedly  demonstrated  that 
MMW  exposure  of  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve  increases  its  ability 
to  sustain  a  high  rate  of  electrical  stimulation.  The  effect  reached 
the  maximum  of  20%~25%  at  41 .34  GHz  [Fig.  3(a)],  which  was 


36 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE,  VOL.  28,  NO.  I,  FEBRUARY  2000 


A 


O  control 
■  0.26  mW/cm2 


B 


GHz 

A  control 
1  41.34  GHz 


At 

%  *  * 


0.01  0.1  1 

mW/cm2 


Fig.  3.  MMW  effect  on  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve  tolerance  to  a  high-rate 
electrical  stimulation,  (a)  Dependence  of  the  effect  on  the  radiation  frequency 
at  a  fixed  intensity  of  0.26  mW/cm2.  (b)  Dependence  of  the  effect  on  the 
radiation  intensity  at  a  fixed  frequency  of  41.34  GHz.  The  ability  to  tolerate  the 
high-rate  stimulation  (20  paired  stimuli/s)  was  measured  from  changes  in  the 
peak  amplitude  of  the  test  compound  action  potential  (.4t ).  Asterisks  indicate 
statistically  significant  difference  from  sham-exposed  controls  (/>  <  0.05). 
Experiments  illustrated  in  fragments  A  and  B  employed  somewhat  different 
protocols  of  nerve  stimulation,  thus  resulting  in  different  baselines  (different 
At  values  in  controls).  Reproduced  with  changes  from  [21],  by  permission  of 
Marcel  Dekker,  Inc.  (fragment  .4),  and  from  [22],  by  permission  of  Elsevier 
Science  S.  A.  (fragment  B). 


one  of  the  “resonance  frequencies”  for  genome  conformation 
changes  [15].  A  100-MHz  deviation  from  41.34  GHz  (to  41.24 
or  4 1 .44  GHz)  reduced  the  effect  about  twofold,  and  a  200-MHz 
deviation  eliminated  the  effect.  The  distribution  of  the  incident 
power  density  over  the  preparation  at  these  frequencies  was 
practically  the  same,  so  different  MMW  absorption  or  heating 
patterns  could  not  account  for  the  frequency-specificity  of  the 
effect.  Moreover,  at  4 1 .34  GHz,  the  magnitude  of  MMW-induced 
changes  was  the  same  at  the  radiation  intensities  of  0.02,  0.1, 
and  2.6  mW/cm2  [Fig.  3(b)]. 

Modulation  can  be  another  important  parameter  that  affects 
MMW  biological  effectiveness.  An  unusual  “double-res¬ 
onance”  effect  was  described  in  a  Protozoan  Paramecium 
caudatum  [23].  Spontaneous  locomotor  activity  of  individual 


protozoan  cells  was  not  affected  by  irradiation  unless  both  the 
radiation  frequency  and  modulation  were  tuned  to  “resonance” 
values.  These  values  were  42.25  GHz  and  0.0956  Hz,  at  0.5 
duty  ratio.  Under  the  “double  resonance”  conditions,  the 
threshold  field  intensity  was  about  0.02  mW/cm2.  The  effect 
reached  maximum  of  about  20%  at  0.1  mW/cm2,  and  remained 
at  this  plateau  level  at  intensities  up  to  50  mW/cm2,  despite 
increasing  heat  production  (0.1  °C-0.2  °C  at  5  mW/cm2).  A 
continuous-wave  (CW)  irradiation,  or  modulation  rates  of  16, 
8,  1,  0.5,  0.25,  or  0.05  Hz  produced  no  effect,  regardless  of 
the  field  intensity  or  heating.  At  the  resonance  modulation 
frequency,  a  shift  of  the  carrier  frequency  to  42.0  or  42.5  GHz 
eliminated  the  response.  Infrared  light  at  intensities  producing 
similar  heating  of  cell  suspension,  and  modulated  at  0.0956 
Hz,  produced  no  biological  effects  either.  The  authors  were 
unable  to  give  any  reasonable  explanation  to  the  sharp  resonant 
dependence  of  the  MMW  effect  upon  both  modulation  rate  and 
radiation  frequency. 

Most  animal  and  human  studies  with  MMW  exposure  ex¬ 
plored  potential  applicability  and  benefits  of  this  factor  for  dis¬ 
ease  treatment.  Beneficial  effects  of  MMW  irradiation  include, 
primarily,  1)  anti-inflammatory  effect  and  stimulation  of  tissue 
repair  and  regeneration,  2)  stimulation  of  the  immune  function, 
and  3)  sedative  and  analgesic  effects  [7], 

Zemskov  et  al  [24]  assessed  MMW  effects  on  healing  of 
skin  wounds  in  rabbits.  The  animals  were  randomly  assigned 
to  four  groups:  wounds  in  groups  1  and  2  were  kept  aseptic,  and 
in  groups  3  and  4  were  infected  with  a  pathogenic  Staphylo¬ 
coccus.  In  groups  1  and  3,  the  wound  surface  was  irradiated  with 
1  mW/cm2, 37-  or  46-GHz  CW  MMW’s  for  30  min  twice  a  day, 
for  5  days.  Two  remaining  groups  served  as  untreated  controls. 
MMW  decreased  swelling  of  wound  edges,  hyperemia,  and  in¬ 
filtration,  and  rapidly  reduced  the  wound  area  in  the  first  24 
hours.  Complete  healing  of  aseptic  wounds  in  the  exposed  group 
took  2.9  days  less  than  in  the  control  group.  Wound  cleaning  and 
granulation  took  14-16  days  in  the  exposed  group,  and  21-23 
days  in  the  respective  control. 

A  similar  protocol  was  used  in  a  double-blind  replicative 
study  by  Korpan  et  al.  [25].  Rabbits  with  septic  or  aseptic 
cutaneous  wounds  were  exposed  for  30  min  a  day  (37  GHz 
CW,  1  mW/cm2).  The  treatment  continued  for  5  days  in  the 
aseptic  group,  and  for  seven  days  in  the  septic  one;  control 
animals  underwent  same  courses  of  sham  exposures  from  a 
nonoperational  MMW  transmitter.  The  condition  and  size  of 
the  wounds  were  monitored  for  32  days.  Wound  edge  swelling 
and  hyperemia  subsided  faster  in  MMW-irradiated  animals, 
and  granulation  tissue  filled  the  wound  earlier  than  in  the 
controls.  The  mean  daily  decrease  in  wound  surface  area  was 
significantly  greater  in  the  MMW-treated  animals,  namely 
7.9%  and  6.3%  in  the  aseptic  and  septic  exposed  groups  versus 
3.2%  and  2.7%  in  the  respective  controls  (p  <  0.05).  The 
authors  concluded  that  MMW  irradiation  enhanced  both  septic 
and  aseptic  wound  healing  and  stimulated  immune  function. 

Rather  unexpectedly,  MMW’s  promoted  regeneration 
of  deep  tissues,  which  are  not  reachable  by  the  radiation. 
Kolosova  et  al.  [26]  reported  that  MMW  treatment  facilitated 
regeneration  and  functional  recovery  of  a  damaged  peripheral 
nerve.  The  sciatic  nerve  in  40  rats  was  transected  in  the  thigh 
region  and  sutured.  MMW  exposures  of  the  injury  area  were 


PAKHOMOV  AND  MURPHY:  LOW-INTENSITY  MMW’S  AS  A  NOVEL  THERAPEUTIC  MODALITY 


37 


performed  every  third  day  for  seven  or  20  days  (10  min  at  a 
time,  4  mW/cm2,  54  GHz);  control  rats  were  sham  irradiated. 
Exposures  did  not  increase  the  skin  temperature  (0.1  °C 
accuracy).  The  seven-day  course  of  exposures  had  little  effect 
on  regeneration,  but  after  the  20-day  course  the  regeneration 
distance  was  significantly  greater  in  MMW-exposed  animals 
(18.4  ±  0.4  mm)  than  in  sham-exposed  controls  (14.0  ±  1 .4  mm, 
p  <  0.01).  In  an  independent  subsequent  study  [27],  the  same 
irradiations  were  performed  for  two  weeks  after  the  injury,  and 
the  nerve  was  isolated  for  examination  in  five  months.  Indexes 
of  regeneration  were  the  compound  action  potential  amplitude 
and  conduction  velocity  at  different  distances  distal  from  the 
nerve  suture.  Both  parameters  were  higher  in  the  exposed 
animals:  For  example,  19  mm  from  the  suture,  the  amplitude 
was  313  ±  34  pV  versus  156  ±  15  pV  in  controls  (p  <  0.001), 
and  the  velocity  was  20.4  ±  0.9  m/s  versus  15.5  ±  0.9  m/s 
(p  <  0.05).  Hence,  the  authors  concluded  that  exposures 
facilitated  both  the  growth  of  nerve  fibers  and  their  functional 
maturation.  Since  MMW  penetration  to  the  impaired  nerve  was 
negligible  (the  depth  of  penetration  for  54  GHz  in  skin  and 
muscle  tissues  is  roughly  0.5  mm),  the  authors  concluded  that 
regeneration  was  affected  via  some  indirect  mechanism,  such 
as  stimulation  of  cellular  and  humoral  immunity  and  activation 
of  neurotrophic  factors. 

Sedative  and  analgesic  effects  ofMMW’s  were  explored  in 
a  series  of  studies  by  Rojavin  et  al  [28],  [29].  In  mice  anes¬ 
thetized  by  either  ketamine  or  chloral  hydrate,  MMW  irradia¬ 
tion  of  the  nasal  area  (61.22  GHz,  15  min  at  15  mW/cm2)  pro¬ 
longed  the  drug-induced  sleep  by  up  to  50%.  This  MMW  ef¬ 
fect  could  be  blocked  by  naloxone,  an  opioid  system  antagonist. 
Similar  irradiation  of  mice  injected  with  a  pruritogenic  agent 
(compound  48/80)  significantly  and  consistently  decreased  the 
number  of  scratches  of  the  injected  site  during  90  min  after 
injection.  The  scratching  activity  was  inhibited  by  more  than 
twofold  compared  with  sham-exposed  controls.  Again,  pretreat¬ 
ment  of  animals  with  naloxone  suppressed  the  anti-pruritic  ef¬ 
fect  ofMMW’s  in  a  dose-dependent  manner. 

A  logical  extension  of  these  findings  was  a  double-blind  study 
of  the  MMW  effect  on  acute  pain  tolerance  in  human  volunteers 
[30].  Chest  skin  in  the  lower  third  of  the  sternum  was  exposed 
to  42.25  GHz  MMW’s  at  25  ±  5  mW/cm2  for  30  min,  or  it  was 
sham-exposed  from  a  nonoperational  MMW  transmitter  (nei¬ 
ther  volunteer  nor  experimenter  knew  whether  an  operational  or 
nonoperational  transmitter  was  used).  The  volunteer's  hand  was 
then  placed  in  a  bath  with  cold  water  and  melting  ice  mixture  (1 
±  0.5  °C).  Pain  sensitivity  range  and  tolerance  were  evaluated 
from  subjective  sensations  of  the  volunteer,  and  from  the  time 
until  the  pain  became  intolerable  and  the  hand  was  withdrawn. 
Overall,  MMW  exposure  increased  the  pain  tolerance  by  37.7% 
(p  <  0.05).  In  seven  volunteers  (out  of  twelve),  the  individual 
gain  in  pain  tolerance  ranged  from  120%  to  315%,  in  compar¬ 
ison  to  their  own  pre-exposure  levels.  The  authors  stated  that 
MMW  therapy  can  potentially  be  used  as  a  supplementary  or 
alternative  treatment  for  pain. 

III.  Clinical  Trials  of  the  MMW  Therapy 

The  first  clinical  trials  of  MMW  therapy  began  in  the  U.S.S.R. 
in  1977.  Nowadays,  the  method  has  been  officially  recognized 


by  the  Russian  Ministry  of  Health  and  is  used  widely.  It  was 
claimed  that  by  1995  over  3  million  people  received  MMW 
therapy  at  more  than  a  thousand  specialized  centers  as  well  as 
at  regular  hospitals  [31]. 

The  term  “MMW  therapy”  implies  repetitive  local  exposures 
of  certain  body  areas  to  low-intensity  MMW’s,  which  can  be 
used  as  a  monotherapy  or  combined  with  other  therapeutic 
procedures  and  drugs.  The  body  area  to  be  exposed,  exposure 
schedule,  regimen,  and  radiation  frequency  are  determined  by 
the  physician  based  on  the  disease  and  the  condition  of  the  par¬ 
ticular  patient.  The  radiation  intensity  is  usually  considered  as 
a  less  important  variable.  For  most  diseases,  the  daily  exposure 
varies  from  15  to  60  min,  and  the  therapy  lasts  for  8-15  days. 

Publications  on  the  clinical  use  ofMMW’s  are  counted  by 
hundreds.  While  many  of  these  reports  were  flawed  in  one  way 
or  another,  still  others  were  not  and  involved  all  necessary  at¬ 
tributes,  such  as  placebo  control  and  double-blind  protocol,  and 
a  lot  of  matching  results  have  been  provided  by  independent 
groups  of  investigators.  Many  authors  have  claimed  that  MMW 
monotherapy  was  more  effective  (sometimes,  far  more  effec¬ 
tive)  than  conventional  methods,  such  as  drug  therapy.  In  some 
cases,  MMW  has  helped  patients  who  had  already  tried  all  other 
known  therapies  without  success,  and  were  considered  incur¬ 
able.  At  the  same  time,  MMW  seldom  caused  any  adverse  ef¬ 
fects  or  allergies.  MMW  in  combination  with  drug  therapy  fa¬ 
cilitated  favorable  effects  and/or  reduced  adverse  side  effects  of 
drugs. 

The  most  common  applications  of  MMW’s  are  for  gastric 
and  duodenal  ulcers  (about  25%  of  studies);  cardiovascular 
diseases,  including  angina  pectoris,  hypertension,  ischemic 
heart  disease,  infarction  (about  25%);  respiratory  sicknesses, 
including  tuberculosis,  sarcoidosis,  bronchitis,  asthma  (about 
15%);  and  skin  diseases,  including  wounds,  trophic  ulcers, 
bums,  atopic  dermatitis  (about  10%).  Isolated  studies  claimed 
successful  MMW  treatment  for  asthenia,  neuralgia,  diabetes 
mellitus,  osteochondrosis,  acute  viral  hepatitis,  glomeru¬ 
lonephritis,  alcoholism,  etc.  MMW’s  were  also  used  for 
alleviation  of  toxic  effects  of  chemotherapy  in  cancer  patients, 
and  in  preventive  medicine  and  health  resort  therapy. 

In  most  cases,  physicians  use  specialized  MMW  generators, 
which  are  produced  commercially  by  the  medical  equipment  in¬ 
dustry.  Because  of  the  high  demand,  there  are  now  more  than 
100  models  of  medical  MMW  generators  on  the  market  in  the 
former  U.S.S.R.  and  some  other  European  countries  [7].  The 
most  commonly  used  frequencies  are  42.19  and  53.53  GHz,  and 
59-63  GHz  band  (7.1-,  5.6-,  and  4.9-mm  wavelengths).  Alter¬ 
natively,  the  practitioner  may  select  an  effective  frequency  for 
each  patient  based  on  this  patient's  individual  sensitivity  (this 
method  is  called  “microwave  resonance  therapy”  [32],  [33]). 
The  radiation  intensity  usually  is  about  10  mW/cm2,  but  can  be 
as  low  as  several  //,W/cm2.  MMW  radiation  can  be  applied  to 
biologically-active  or  acupuncture  points,  sternum  and  xiphoid 
process,  skin  projection  of  a  diseased  organ,  large  joints  and 
tender  zones. 

With  all  the  variety  of  exposure  techniques  and  protocols  cur¬ 
rently  in  use  by  medical  practitioners,  there  is  little  rationale  or 
guidance  why  particular  techniques  and  protocols  would  be  pre¬ 
ferred  over  the  others.  Mechanisms  of  the  MMW  therapy  are  not 
understood,  and  its  use  remains  predominantly  empirical. 


38 

The  format  of  this  paper  allows  us  to  exemplify  only  several 
clinical  studies  with  MMW  therapy.  More  information  on  the 
subject  can  be  found  in  other  reviews  [7],  [8]. 

Poslavsky  et  al  [34]  used  MMW’s  as  a  monotherapy  in  317 
patients  with  gastric  and  duodenal  ulcers.  The  disease  duration 
was  from  several  months  to  more  than  ten  years,  and  the  ulcer 
defect  diameter  ranged  from  0.3  to  3.5  cm.  The  epigastric  area 
was  exposed  at  10  mW/cm2,  53.53  GHz,  for  30  min  daily  ex¬ 
cluding  weekends,  until  complete  ulcer  healing.  A  comparable 
control  group  of  50  patients  received  conventional  drug  therapy. 
The  ulcers  cicatrized  in  95.3%  of  MMW-treated  patients,  with 
mean  healing  duration  of  19.8  ±  0.45  days.  Results  in  the  con¬ 
trol  group  were  substantially  worse,  namely  78%  and  33.6  ± 
1.12  days,  respectively.  The  ulcer  relapse  rate  was  also  signifi¬ 
cantly  lower  after  the  MMW  therapy. 

Korpan  and  Saradeth  [35]  used  MMW  therapy  to  assist 
healing  of  postoperative  septic  wounds.  This  double-blind 
controlled  trial  included  141  patients,  31-  to  83-years  old,  with 
purulent  wounds  after  an  abdominal  surgery.  MMW  therapy 
with  1  mW/cm2,  37-GHz  radiation  was  performed  in  71 
patients.  Wound  surface  and  adjacent  tissues  were  exposed  for 
30  min/day  for  seven  days.  The  remaining  70  patients  received 
placebo  therapy  from  a  similar  but  defective  MMW  generator 
(neither  patients  nor  physicians  knew  it  was  defective).  Radical 
surgical  cleaning  of  the  wounds  was  performed  regularly  in 
both  groups.  The  MMW-treated  patients  showed  1.8  times 
more  rapid  wound  clearance  (5.6  ±  0.6  versus  10.2  ±  0.5  days 
in  controls),  wound  granulation  and  epithelization  also  began 
substantially  earlier.  The  mean  daily  decrease  of  wound  surface 
area  in  the  treated  patients  was  twice  that  of  the  controls  (7.1% 
versus  3.2%),  and,  on  the  average,  the  MMW-treated  patients 
were  discharged  from  the  hospital  8.9  days  earlier.  The  authors 
concluded  that  low  intensity  MMW  radiation  is  a  promising 
means  to  assist  purulent  wound  treatment. 

Novikova  et  al  [36]  included  MMW’s  in  a  complex  therapy 
for  pulmonary  tuberculosis.  Fifty  patients  received  drug  therapy 
only,  and  86  patients  were  additionally  treated  with  MMW’s. 
Before  the  MMW  course,  blood  samples  were  taken  from  each 
patient,  and  the  phagocytic  activity  of  white  cells  was  analyzed 
in  an  assay  with  a  nitric  blue  tetrazolium  dye.  This  activity  usu¬ 
ally  was  increased,  up  to  threefold  over  the  norm.  The  samples 
were  exposed  to  7. 1  -,  6.4-,  and  5.6-mm  radiations,  and  the  wave¬ 
length  that  normalized  phagocytosis  was  chosen  for  the  therapy. 
In  fact,  5.6-mm  radiation  increased  the  deviation  from  the  norm, 
and  therefore  was  never  chosen.  The  wavelength  of  6.4  mm  was 
effective  mostly  in  younger  patients  with  mild  disease  course; 
7. 1  mm  was  more  appropriate  for  older  patients  with  more  pro¬ 
nounced  disorders.  Intermittent  exposure  at  7. 1  mm  was  used  for 
the  most  severe  cases.  Exposures  of  the  thymus  projection  area 
lasted  for  10  days,  at  40  or  60  min/day.  MMW’s  significantly 
facilitated  recovery,  particularly  in  patients  with  newly  devel¬ 
oped  disease.  Resolution  of  infiltrations  and  closure  of  caverns 
in  70%  of  these  patients  occurred  within  one  month  of  treatment. 
In  the  control  group,  infiltrations  resolved  in  about  two  months 
and  caverns  closed  in  three  to  four  months.  The  clearance  of  tu¬ 
berculosis  bacteria  was  achieved  in  two  months  in  50%  of  the 
exposed  group,  but  in  only  29%  of  the  controls. 

In  a  similar  study  [37]  with  54  pulmonary  tuberculosis  pa¬ 
tients,  the  caverns  closed  in  50%  of  the  exposed  group  during 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE,  VOL.  28.  NO.  1,  FEBRUARY  2000 

the  second  and  the  third  months  of  treatment,  while  in  controls  it 
always  took  more  than  three  months.  Resolution  of  infiltrations 
occurred  within  two  weeks  in  70%  of  the  exposed  group,  but 
always  took  more  than  one  month  in  controls.  However,  clear¬ 
ance  of  tuberculosis  bacteria  was  apparently  unaffected  by  the 
MMW  course. 

Babov  etal  [38]  studied  the  efficacy  of  MMW’s  (59-63  GHz, 
7  mW/cm2)  in  the  rehabilitation  of  patients  after  myocardial  in¬ 
farction.  The  course  of  MMW  therapy  started  15-20  days  after 
the  infarction  and  consisted  of  15  exposures  of  the  cardiac  area 
for  15  min/day.  Eighty  six  patients  were  treated  with  MMW’s 
and  80  patients  received  placebo.  The  results  were  analyzed  sep¬ 
arately  for  patients  with  eukinetic,  hyperkinetic,  and  hypoki¬ 
netic  types  of  blood  circulation.  MMW’s  significantly  facili¬ 
tated  tissue  repair  in  the  group  with  the  eukinetic  type  of  circu¬ 
lation.  Cardiac  muscle  repolarization  improved  in  100%  of  the 
MMW-treated  patients  and  in  48.8%  of  placebo  controls;  phys¬ 
ical  endurance  increased  by  25.8  ±  2.2  W  and  18.7  ±  1.8  W, 
respectively.  MMW’s,  but  not  placebo,  improved  microcircu¬ 
lation  and  ventricular  contraction,  and  stimulated  cicatrization 
and  collagen  formation.  The  MMW  effect  was  weaker  in  pa¬ 
tients  with  hyperkinetic  circulation  and  negligible  in  those  with 
the  hypokinetic  circulation.  Results  of  the  study  suggested  that, 
in  the  case  of  eukinetic  circulation,  MMW’s  can  be  employed 
as  a  monotherapy,  otherwise  it  should  be  combined  with  other 
rehabilitation  means. 

IV.  Conclusion 

At  present  time,  development  of  MMW  technologies  is 
driven  predominantly  by  various  industrial  and  military  appli¬ 
cations.  However,  there  is  another  lesser  known,  but  rapidly 
developing  and  promising  area  of  MMW  biomedical  applica¬ 
tions.  Numerous  studies  point  to  the  specific  ability  of  MMW’s 
to  affect  and  modify  various  biological  functions,  many  of  those 
being  of  great  importance  for  human  organism  function.  More 
than  20-year  experience  with  MMW  therapy  in  countries  of  the 
former  Soviet  Union  has  yielded  encouraging  results  in  a  broad 
spectrum  of  diseases.  Today,  MMW  therapy  gains  recognition 
in  Europe  (Bulgaria,  Germany),  and  its  first  clinical  trials  are  in 
progress  in  the  United  States  (headed  by  Dr.  M.  Ziskin,  Center 
for  Biomedical  Physics,  Temple  University,  Philadelphia,  PA). 
A  cooperative  effort  of  biological,  physical,  and  engineering 
communities  is  necessary  to  achieve  an  understanding  the 
physical  and  physiological  mechanisms  of  MMW  bioeffects. 

Acknowledgment 

The  authors  greatly  appreciate  interest  in  the  topic  and  sup¬ 
port  from  the  organizers  of  the  ElectroMed99  First  International 
Symposium  (Prof.  K.  Schoenbach).  The  views  expressed  are 
those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting 
the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  Department  of  the  Army, 
Department  of  the  Air  Force,  or  the  U.S.  Government. 

References 

[1}  H.  Frohlich,  “The  biological  effects  of  microwaves  and  related  ques¬ 
tions  ”  Adv.  Electronics  Electron.  Phys. ,  vol.  53,  pp.  85-152,  1980. 

[2]  H.  Frohlich,  Ed.,  Biological  Coherence  and  Response  to  External 
Stimuli.  New  York:  Springer- Verlag,  1988. 


PAKHOMOV  AND  MURPHY:  LOW-INTENSITY  MMW’S  AS  A  NOVEL  THERAPEUTIC  MODALITY 


39 


[3]  O.  P.  Gandhi,  “Some  basic  properties  of  biological  tissues  for  potential 
biomedical  applications  of  millimeter- waves,”  /  Microwave  Power ,  vol. 

18,  pp.  295-304,  1983. 

[4]  W.  Grundler,  “Biological  effects  of  RF  and  MW  energy  at  molecular 
and  cellular  level,”  in  Biological  Effects  and  Dosimetry  of  Nonionizing 
Radiation.  Radiofrequency  and  Microwave  Energies ,  A.  Rindi,  M. 
Grandolfo,  and  S.  M.  Michaelson,  Eds.  New  York,  NY:  Plenum, 
1983,  pp.  299-318. 

[5]  Modulated  fields  and  “window”  effects ,  Handbook  of  Biological  Ef¬ 
fects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields,  C.  Polk  and  E.  Postow,  Eds.,  CRC,  Boca 
Raton,  FL,  1986,  pp.  425-460. 

[6]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  “Some  biophysical  aspects  of  the  genetic  effect  of 
low-intensity  millimeter  waves,”  Bioelectrochem .  Bioenerg .,  vol.  27, 
pp.  11-18,  1992. 

[7]  M.  A.  Rojavin  and  M.  C.  Ziskin,  “Medical  application  of  millimeter 
waves,”  Q.  J.  Med.,  vol.  91,  pp.  57-66,  1998. 

[8]  A.  G.  Pakhomov,  Y.  Akyel,  O.  N.  Pakhomova,  B.  E.  Stuck,  and  M.  R. 
Murphy,  “Current  state  and  implications  of  research  on  biological  effects 
of  millimeter  waves:  A  review  of  literature,”  Bioelectromagnetics ,  vol. 

19,  pp.  393-413,  1998. 

[9]  W.  Grundler,  F.  Keilman,  and  H.  Froehlich,  “Resonant  growth  rate  re¬ 
sponse  of  yeast  cells  irradiated  by  weak  microwaves,”  Phys.  Lett.,  vol. 
62 A,  pp.  463-466,  1977. 

[10]  W.  Grundler,  F.  Keilman,  V.  Putterlik,  and  D.  Strube,  “Resonant-like  de¬ 
pendence  of  yeast  growth  rate  on  microwave  frequencies,”  Br.  J.  Cancer, 
vol.  45,  pp.  206-208,  1982. 

[11]  W.  Grundler,  U.  Jentzsch,  F.  Keilmann,  and  V.  Putterlik,  “Resonant  cel¬ 
lular  effects  of  low  intensity  microwave,”  in  Biological  Coherence  and 
Response  to  External  Stimuli ,  H.  Frohlich,  Ed.  New  York:  Springer- 
Verlag,  1988,  pp.  65-85. 

[12]  W.  Grundler  and  F.  Kaiser,  “Experimental  evidence  for  coherent  excita¬ 
tions  correlated  with  growth,”  Nanobiology,  vol.  1,  pp.  163-176,  1992. 

[13]  L.  Furia,  D.  W.  Hill,  and  O.  P.  Gandhi,  “Effect  of  millimeter- wave  irra¬ 
diation  on  growth  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  ”  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed. 
Eng.,  vol.  BME-33,  pp.  993-999,  1986. 

[14]  P.  Gos,  B.  Eicher,  J.  Kohli,  and  W.-D.  Heyer,  “Extremely  high  frequency 
electromagnetic  fields  at  low  power  density  do  not  affect  the  division 
of  exponential  phase  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  cells,”  Bioelectromag - 
netics,  vol.  18,  pp.  142-155,  1997. 

[15]  1.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y.  D.  Alipov,  V.  A.  Polunin,  and  V.  S.  Shcheglov,  “Evi¬ 
dence  for  dependence  of  resonant  frequency  of  millimeter  wave  interac¬ 
tion  with  Escherichia  coli  K 12  cells  on  haploid  genome  length  ”  Electro- 
and  Magnetobiol.,  vol.  12,  pp.  39-49,  1993. 

[  16]  1.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y.  D.  Shcheglov,  V.  A.  Alipov,  and  S.  P.  Radko,  “Regular¬ 
ities  of  separate  and  combined  effects  of  circularly  polarized  millimeter 
waves  on  E.  coli  cells  at  different  phases  of  culture  growth,”  Bioelec¬ 
trochem.  Bioenerg.,  vol.  31,  pp.  49-63,  1993. 

[17]  1.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y.  D.  Shcheglov,  V.  A.  Alipov,  V.  S.  Polunin,  and  O.  A. 
Aizenberg,  “Cooperative  response  of  Escherichia  coli  to  the  resonance 
effect  of  millimeter  waves  at  super  low  intensity,”  Electro-  and  Magne- 
tobiol,  vol.  13,  pp.  53-66,  1994. 

[18]  I.  Ya.  Belyaev,  Y.  D.  Shcheglov,  V.  A.  Alipov,  and  V.  S.  Polunin,  “Reso¬ 
nance  effect  of  millimeter  waves  in  the  power  range  from  10" 19  to  3  x 
10-3  W/cm2  on  Escherichia  coli  cells  at  different  concentrations,”  Bio¬ 
electromagnetics,  vol.  17,  pp.  312-321,  1996. 

[19]  A.  A.  Kataev,  A.  A.  Alexandrov,  L.  L.  Tikhonova,  and  G.  N.  Berestovsky, 
“Frequency-dependent  effects  of  the  electromagnetic  millimeter  waves 
on  the  ion  currents  in  the  cell  membrane  of  Nitellopsis:  Nonthermal  ac¬ 
tion,”  Biofizika ,  vol.  38,  pp.  446-462,  1993. 

[20]  A.  G.  Pakhomov,  H.  K.  Prol,  S.  P.  Mathur,  Y.  Akyel,  and  C.  B.  G.  Camp¬ 
bell,  “Search  for  frequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter-wave  radiation 
on  isolated  nerve  function,”  Bioelectromagnetics ,  vol.  18,  pp.  324-334, 
1997. 

[2 1  ]  - ,  “Frequency -specific  effects  of  millimeter  wavelength  electromag¬ 

netic  radiation  in  isolated  nerve,”  Electro-  and Magnetobiol.,  vol.  1 6,  pp. 
43-57,  1997. 

[22]  - ,  “Role  of  field  intensity  in  the  biological  effectiveness  of  millimeter 

waves  at  a  resonance  frequency,”  Bioelectrochem.  Bioenerg.,  vol.  43,  pp. 
27-33,  1997. 

[23]  A.  B.  Gapeev,  N.  K.  Chemeris,  E.  E.  Fesenko,  and  R.  N.  Khramov,  “Res¬ 
onance  effects  of  a  low-intensity  modulated  EHF  field.  Alteration  of  the 
locomotor  activity  of  the  protozoa  Paramecium  caudatum Biofizika, 
vol.  39,  pp.  74-82,  1994. 

[24]  V.  S.  Zemskov,  N.  N.  Korpan,  la.  1.  Khokhlich,  V.  A.  Pavlenko,  L. 
S.  Nazarenko,  A.  I.  Koval’chuk,  and  la.  1.  Stefanishin,  “Effect  of 
millimeter-band  low  intensity  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  course 
of  wound  healing,”  Klin.  Khir.,  vol.  1,  pp.  31-33,  1988. 


[25]  N.  N.  Korpan,  K.-L.  Resch,  and  P.  Kokoschinegg,  “Continuous  mi¬ 
crowave  enhances  the  healing  process  of  septic  and  aseptic  wounds  in 
rabbits,”  J.  Surg.  Res.,  vol.  57,  pp.  667-671,  1994. 

[26]  L.  1.  Kolosova,  G.  N.  Akoev,  V.  D.  Avelev,  O.  V.  Riabchikova,  and  K. 
S.  Babu,  “Effect  of  low-intensity  millimeter  wave  electromagnetic  radi¬ 
ation  on  regeneration  of  the  sciatic  nerve  in  rats,”  Bioelectromagnetics, 
vol.  17,  pp.  44-47,  1996. 

[27]  L.  I.  Kolosova,  G.  N.  Akoev,  O.  V.  Riabchikova,  and  V.  D.  Avelev,  “The 
effect  of  low-intensity  millimeter-range  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the 
functional  recovery  of  the  damaged  sciatic  nerve  in  rat,”  Fiziol.  Zh.  Im. 
I.  M.  Sechenova ,  vol.  82,  pp.  85-90,  1996. 

[28]  M.  A.  Rojavin  and  M.  C.  Ziskin,  “Anaesthesia  caused  by  ketamine  and 
chloral  hydrate  in  mice,”  Int.  J.  Radiat.  Biol.,  vol.  72,  pp.  475-480, 1997. 

[29]  M.  A.  Rojavin,  A.  Cowan,  A.  A.  Radzievsky,  and  M.  C.  Ziskin,  “An¬ 
tipruritic  effect  of  millimeter  waves  in  mice,”  Pharmacol.  Lett.,  vol.  63, 
pp.  PL  251-257,  1998. 

[30]  A.  A.  Radzievsky,  M.  A.  Rojavin,  A.  Cowan,  and  M.  C.  Ziskin,  “Sup¬ 
pression  of  pain  sensation  caused  by  millimeter  waves:  A  double  blind, 
crossover,  prospective  human  volunteer  study,”  in  Anesthesia  and  Anal¬ 
gesia,  1999.  in  press. 

[31]  N.  N.  Lebedeva  and  O.  V.  Betskii,  “Application  of  low  intensity  mil¬ 
limeter  waves  in  medicine  ”  in  Abstr.  17th  Annu.  Meet.  Bioelectromag¬ 
netics  Soc Boston,  MA,  June  1995,  p.  141. 

[32]  S.  R.  Danilenko,  “Efficacy  of  the  use  of  extremely-high-frequency  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  field  in  the  complex  therapy  of  chronic  bronchitis  patients  ” 
Vopr.  Kurortol.  Fizioter.  Lech.  Fiz.  Kult.,  vol.  6,  pp.  16-18,  1997. 

[33]  E.  B.  Kan  and  T.  D.  Nikula,  “The  effect  of  microwave  resonance  therapy 
and  hypnotherapy  on  some  factors  of  ulcerative  disease  pathogenesis,” 
Vrach.  Delo,  vol.  6,  pp.  79-83,  1992. 

[34]  M.  V.  Poslavsky,  I.  M.  Korochkin,  and  O.  F.  Zdanovich,  “Experience 
with  application  of  millimeter-range  radiation  for  treatment  and  prophy¬ 
lactics  of  stomach  and  duodenal  ulcer,”  Vopr.  Kurortol.  Fizioter.  Lech. 
Fiz.  Kult.,  vol.  4,  pp.  31-36,  1989. 

[35]  N.  N.  Korpan  and  T.  Saradeth,  “Clinical  effects  of  continuous  mi¬ 
crowave  for  postoperative  septic  wound  treatment:  A  double-blind 
controlled  trial  ”  Amen  J.  Surg.,  vol.  170,  pp.  271-276,  1995. 

[36]  L.  N.  Novikova,  G.  O.  Kaminskaia,  and  L.  N.  Efimova,  “Significance  of 
the  functional  state  of  blood  phagocytes  in  the  choice  of  optimal  regime 
of  EHF  therapy  of  patients  with  pulmonary  tuberculosis,”  Probl.  Tu¬ 
be  rk.,  vol.  6,  pp.  17-20,  1995. 

[37]  A.  G.  Khomenko,  V.  I.  Chukanov,  and  L.  N.  Novikova,  “Effectiveness  of 
chemotherapy  combined  with  ultrahigh-frequency  electromagnetic  radi¬ 
ation  for  the  treatment  of  patients  with  pulmonary  tuberculosis  ”  Probl. 
Tuberk.,  vol.  4,  pp.  2-4,  1994. 

[38]  K.  D.  Babov,  S.  A.  Novikov,  and  L.  E.  Mikhno,  “Effect  of  electromag¬ 
netic  waves  with  59-63  GHz  frequency  on  myocardial  infarct  patients 
in  the  subacute  stage,”  Vopr.  Kurortol.  Fizioter.  Lech.  Fiz.  Kult.,  vol.  6, 
pp.  10-13,  1993. 


Andrei  G.  Pakhomov  was  born  in  Sverdlovsk, 
Russia,  in  1960.  He  received  the  M.S.  degree  in 
animal  and  human  physiology  from  the  Moscow 
State  University  in  1982,  and  the  Ph.D.  degree 
in  radiation  biology  from  the  Medical  Radiology 
Research  Center,  Obninsk,  Russia,  in  1989. 

He  was  a  leading  Research  Scientist  at  the 
Medical  Radiology  Research  Center  until  receiving 
a  Resident  Research  Associateship  Award  from 
the  National  Research  Council  in  1994.  The  next 
three  years  he  spent  at  Brooks  AFB,  San  Antonio, 
TX,  as  an  NRC  Research  Associate  with  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment  (USAMRD)  of  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research.  He  is 
currently  a  Senior  Research  Physiologist  with  McKessonHBOC  BioServices 
(Brooks  AFB,  TX),  which  is  a  USAMRD  contractor  for  studying  biological 
and  health  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields.  His  primary  research  interests 
are  in  the  area  of  microwave  bioeffects  in  excitable  tissues  (nerve,  muscle, 
heart),  mechanisms  of  action,  health  hazards  and  beneficial  (e.g.,  therapeutic) 
effects  of  the  radiation.  He  also  collaborates  with  Information  Ventures, 
Inc.,  Philadelphia,  PA,  in  reviewing  and  abstracting  research  papers  for  the 
Electromagnetic  Field  (EMF)  Database,  and  has  processed  over  1000  papers. 

Dr.  Pakhomov  is  a  member  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  (BEMS)  and 
of  the  IEEE  Standards  Coordinating  Committee  (IEEE  SCC28). 


40 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  PLASMA  SCIENCE,  VOL.  28,  NO.  L  FEBRUARY  2000 


Michael  R.  Murphy  (A’93)  received  the  Ph.D. 
degree  in  psychology  and  brain  science  from  the 
Massachussetts  Institute  of  Technology  (MIT), 
Cambridge,  in  1972. 

Currently,  he  is  the  Chief  of  the  Radio  Frequency 
Radiation  Branch,  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Divi¬ 
sion,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate,  Air  Force  Re¬ 
search  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  TX.  The  organiza¬ 
tion  he  leads  is  responsible  for  assessing  human  ex¬ 
posure  standards  and  conducting  biological  research 
to  support  the  maximal  safe  exploitation  of  radio  fre¬ 
quency  radiation  for  the  national  defense.  He  has  authored  over  120  research 
publications,  book  chapters,  abstracts,  and  technical  reports. 

Dr.  Murphy  is  a  member  of  EMBS  and  is  actively  involved  with  IEEE 
Standard  Coordinating  Committee  28  on  Non-Ionizing  Radiation,  for  which 
he  serves  on  the  Executive  Committee  and  as  Chair  of  the  Subcommittee  on 
International  Liaisons.  He  is  the  Chair  of  the  Tri-Service  Electromagnetic  Ra¬ 
diation  Panel  and  the  Defense  Reliance  Technology  Panel  on  Directed  Energy 
Weapons  High  Power  Microwave  Technology  Working  Group  on  Bioeffects. 
He  is  a  member  of  the  International  Advisory  Committee  for  the  World  Health 
Organization  project  on  the  hazards  of  electromagnetic  fields  and  his  Branch  is 
a  Collaborating  Center  of  the  World  Health  Organization  and  the  Pan  American 
Health  Organization  on  the  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Radiation, 
He  is  also  an  active  member  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 


Bioelectromagnetics  20:431  -439  (1999) 


Hyperactivity  Caused  by  a  Nitric  Oxide  Synthase 
Inhibitor  is  Countered  by  Ultra-Wideband  Pulses 

Ronald  L.  Seaman/  Michelle  L.  Belt,  Joanne  M.  Doyle,  and  Satnam  P.  Mathur 

McKesson  BioServices  and  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch ,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research 

Detachment ,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

Potential  action  of  ultra-wideband  (UWB)  electromagnetic  field  pulses  on  effects  of  N°-mtro- 
L-arginine  methyl  ester  (L-NAME),  an  inhibitor  of  nitric  oxide  synthase  (NOS),  on  nociception 
and  locomotor  activity  was  investigated  in  CF-1  mice.  Animals  were  injected  IP  with  saline  or 
50  mg/kg  L-NAME  and  exposed  for  30  min  to  no  pulses  (sham  exposure)  or  UWB  pulses  with 
electric  field  parameters  of  102  ±  1  kV/m  peak  amplitude,  0.90  ±  0.05  ns  duration,  and  160  ±  5  ps 
rise  time  (mean  ±  S.D.)  at  600/s.  Animals  were  tested  for  thermal  nociceptive  responses  on  a  50  °C 
surface  and  for  spontaneous  locomotor  activity  for  5  min.  L-NAME  by  itself  increased  mean  first- 
response  (paw  lift,  shake,  or  lick;  jump)  and  back-paw-lick  response  latencies  and  mean  locomotor 
activity.  Exposure  to  UWB  pulses  reduced  the  L-NAME-induced  increase  in  back-paw-lick  latency 
by  22%,  but  this  change  was  not  statistically  significant.  The  L-NAME-induced  hyperactivity  was 
not  present  after  UWB  exposure.  Reduction  and  cancellation  of  effects  of  L-NAME  suggest 
activation  of  opposing  mechanism(s)  by  the  UWB  pulses,  possibly  including  increase  of  nitric  oxide 
production  by  NOS.  The  action,  or  actions,  of  UWB  pulses  appears  to  be  more  effective  on 
locomotor  activity  than  on  thermal  nociception  in  CF-1  mice.  Bioelectromagnetics  20:431-439, 
1999.  ©  1999  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 

Key  words:  L-NAME;  hyperactivity;  locomotor  activity;  CF-1  mice;  nociception;  UWB 
electromagnetic  pulses 


INTRODUCTION 

Ultra-wideband  (UWB)  electromagnetic  field 
pulses  are  increasingly  being  used  in  various  military 
and  civilian  applications  [Agee  et  al.,  1998].  The 
extremely  short  electromagnetic  pulses  have  durations 
of  a  few  nanoseconds  and  rise  times  of  100-500  ps. 
Their  propagation  is  by  means  of  electric  and 
magnetic  fields  with  frequency  spectra  extending  from 
near  0  Hz  into  the  GHz  range  dependent  on  pulse 
shape. 

Studies  have  been  conducted  on  possible  biolo¬ 
gical  effects  of  UWB  pulses  because  of  possible  health 
and  safety  issues.  An  exposure  of  2  min  or  less  causes 
no  effect  on  blood  pressure  and  heart  rate  or  on  certain 
behaviors  [Sherry  et  al.,  1995;  Walters  et  al.,  1995; 
Jauchem  et  al.,  1998,  1999].  An  exposure  of  6  min 
causes  hypotension  in  rats  that  persists  for  at  least  4 
weeks  [Lu  et  al.,  1998].  Longer  exposures  weakly 
influence  morphine-induced  antinociception  and 
changes  in  locomotor  activity  in  mice  [Seaman  et  al., 
1998].  Additional  information  on  UWB  biological 
effects  is  needed  for  different  types  of  pulses,  exposure 
durations,  and  biological  endpoints  for  a  more 
complete  basis  for  developing  guidelines  for  human 
exposure. 


Because  of  the  broad  frequency  spectra  of  UWB 
pulses,  biological  endpoints  that  have  been  shown  to 
change  with  exposure  to  weak  electric  or  magnetic 
fields  of  low  frequencies  may  also  be  affected  by  UWB 
pulses.  Examples  of  such  effects  are  changes  in 
nociception,  stress-  and  morphine-induced  antinoci¬ 
ception  (analgesia),  and  morphine-altered  locomotor 
activity  due  to  low-intensity  magnetic  fields  [Kavaliers 
et  al.,  1994;  Lai,  1994].  A  0.5  Hz  rotating  magnetic 
field  reduces  morphine-  and  stress-induced  analgesia 
in  CF-1  mice,  and  morphine-  and  stress-induced 


Contract  grant  sponsor:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command;  Contract  grant  number:  DAMD17-94-C- 
4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices. 

The  views,  opinions,  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  authorfs)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy,  or  decision  unless  so 
designated  by  other  documentation. 

♦Correspondence  to:  Dr.  Ronald  L.  Seaman,  McKesson  BioSer¬ 
vices,  RO.  Box  35460,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235-5460.  E-mail: 
ronald.seaman  @  aloer.brooks.af.mil 

Received  for  review  13  October  1998;  Final  revision  received  4 
January  1999 


©  1999  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 


432  Seaman  et  al. 


hyperactivity  in  C57BL/J  mice  [Kavaliers  and  Ossen- 
kopp,  1985,  1986].  Morphine-induced  analgesia  in 
CF-1  mice  is  also  reduced  by  60  Hz  magnetic  fields 
and  electromagnetic  fields  used  in  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  (MRI)  [Ossenkopp  and  Kavaliers,  1987;  Prato 
et  al.,  1992].  A  static  magnetic  field  reduces  stress- 
induced  analgesia  in  CD-I  mice  [Betancur  et  al., 
1994].  In  a  land  snail  model  of  nociception,  a  0.5  Hz 
rotating  magnetic  field,  60  Hz  magnetic  fields,  and 
MRI  fields  also  reduce  analgesic  behavior  induced  by 
opiate  agonists  [Kavaliers  and  Ossenkopp,  1988; 
Tisdale  et  al.,  1991;  Prato  et  al.,  1992].  On  the  other 
hand,  exposure  to  certain  pulsed  magnetic  fields 
can  induce  an  analgesia-like  antinociception  in  the 
snail  [Thomas  et  al.,  1997b],  increase  opioid-induced 
analgesia  in  the  snail  [Thomas  et  al.,  1997a],  and 
increase  the  response  threshold  to  electrical  shock  in 
rats  [Fleming  et  al.,  1994].  Antinociception  is  also  seen 
in  the  snail  after  exposure  to  60  Hz  fields  [Kavaliers 
and  Ossenkopp,  1993]. 

In  addition  to  these  effects  in  rodents  and  snails, 
magnetic  fields  with  multiple  frequency  components 
of  less  than  0.1  Hz  reduce  stress-induced  analgesia  in 
pigeons  [Del  Seppia  et  al.,  1995]  and  humans  [Papi 
et  al.,  1995;  Sartucci  et  al.,  1997].  In  a  study  with  UWB 
pulses,  we  have  found  that  exposures  of  15,  30,  and 
45  min  consistently  tend  to  increase  morphine-induced 
analgesia  in  CF-1  mice,  although  changes  are  not 
statistically  significant  [Seaman  et  al.,  1998].  Mor¬ 
phine-induced  hypoactivity  in  the  same  animals  tends 
to  be  reduced  with  UWB  exposure. 

Recently,  nitric  oxide  has  been  implicated  in 
opioid-induced  analgesia  and  in  its  reduction  by  60  Hz 
magnetic  fields  in  the  snail  model  [Kavaliers  et  al., 
1998].  The  enhanced  analgesia  observed  is  consistent 
with  the  role  of  nitric  oxide  in  morphine-induced 
analgesia  seen  when  using  thermal  or  mechanical 
stimuli  in  mice  [Brignola  et  al.,  1994;  Dambisya  and 
Lee,  1995;  Gtiney  et  al.,  1998]  treated  systemically. 
Similar  results  have  been  obtained  for  morphine- 
induced  analgesia  [Yamaguchi  and  Naito,  1996]  and 
stress-induced  analgesia  [Spinella  and  Bodnar,  1994] 
in  rats.  In  these  studies  on  rodents,  inhibitors  of  nitric 
oxide  synthase  (NOS)  increase  the  level  of  analgesia. 
Because  NOS  inhibitor  N°-nitro-L-arginine  methyl 
ester  (L-NAME)  increases  opioid-induced  analgesia  in 
the  snail  [Kavaliers  et  al.,  1998],  similar  effects  on 
vertebrate  and  invertebrate  nociception  are  indicated. 
L-NAME  also  blocks  reduction  of  analgesia  due  to 
magnetic  field  exposure  in  the  snail,  suggesting  that 
increased  nitric  oxide  levels  participate  in  the  action  of 
the  field  [Kavaliers  et  al.,  1998]. 

Nitric  oxide  is  also  involved  in  normal  nocicep¬ 
tion  as  well  as  in  locomotor  activity.  Antinociception  is 


caused  in  mice  by  L-NAME  [Moore  et  al.,  1991, 
Mustafa,  1992;  Babbedge  et  al.,  1993;  Brignola  et  al., 
1994;  Sakurada  et  al.,  1996]  and  other  NOS  inhibitors 
[Moore  et  al.,  1993;  Handy  et  al.,  1996].  NOS 
inhibitors  reduce  locomotor  activity  in  mice 
[Calignano  et  al.,  1993;  Dzoljic  et  al.,  1997;  Volke 
et  al.,  1997]  and  rats  [Connop  et  al.,  1994;  Sandi  et  al., 
1995;  Volke  et  al.,  1997].  In  addition,  an  inhibitor  can 
overcome  morphine-induced  increases  in  activity 
[Calignano  et  al.,  1993].  This  last  result  suggests  that 
altered  levels  of  nitric  oxide  might  also  be  involved  in 
the  reduction  of  morphine-  and  stress-induced  hyper¬ 
activity  seen  with  magnetic  fields  [Kavaliers  and 
Ossenkopp,  1985,  1986]. 

Given  the  above  roles  of  nitric  oxide  in  nocicep¬ 
tion  and  locomotion,  investigating  its  role  in  mediating 
the  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  these  behaviors 
becomes  of  interest.  We  examined  whether  the 
electromagnetic  fields  of  UWB  pulses  would  change 
the  effects  of  L-NAME  on  nociception  and  activity. 
Action  of  the  fields  on  NOS  might  contribute  to  the 
weak  UWB  effects  seen  on  morphine-induced  analge¬ 
sia  and  hypoactivity  in  CF-1  mice  [Seaman  et  al., 
1998]. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 
Animals 

Male  CF- 1/Plus  white  mice  (Charles  River  Labs, 
Portage,  MI)  weighing  30-49  g  and  9-13  weeks  of 
age  were  used.  After  a  10-day  quarantine,  the  mice 
were  housed  in  polycarbonate  shoe  box  cages  in  a 
room  having  22  ±  1  °C  temperature,  50  db  5%  relative 
humidity,  and  10-15  hourly  air  exchanges.  Animals 
were  housed  three  to  a  cage  and  were  provided  Purina 
rodent  chow  and  tap  water  ad  libitum.  All  exposures 
and  tests  were  done  7-10  h  after  lights  were  put  on  in 
a  12/12  light/dark  cycle. 

Animals  were  injected  IP  with  0.9%  saline  or 
50  mg/kg  N^nitro-L-arginine  methyl  ester  HQ  (L- 
NAME;  Sigma-Aldrich,  St.  Louis,  MO)  in  saline 
(5  mg/ml,  10  ml/kg).  The  L-NAME  dose  was  based  on 
results  of  preliminary  experiments  showing  changes  in 
nociception,  morphine-induced  antinociception,  and 
activity  in  CF-1  mice  having  many  of  the  same 
characteristics  seen  in  other  mouse  strains.  The  results 
indicated  that  use  of  NOS  inhibitor  L-NAME  at 
50  mg/kg  in  CF-1  mice  was  a  valid  approach. 

In  conducting  this  research,  the  investigator(s) 
adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of 
Laboratory  Animals,”  prepared  by  the  Committee  on 
Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals  of  the  Institute  of 
Laboratory  Animal  Resources,  National  Research 


UWB  and  L-NAME 


433 


Council  (NIH  Publication  No.  86-23,  Revised  1985). 
The  U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  (AFRL)  at 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base  is  fully  accredited  by  the 
Association  for  Assessment  and  Accreditation  of 
Laboratory  Animal  Care,  International  (AAALAC). 
All  animal  procedures  had  been  approved  by  the 
AFRL-Brooks  Institutional  Animal  Care  and  Use 
Committee. 

Nociception  and  ActivityTests 

Nociception  was  tested  by  placing  the  animal  on 
a  metallic  surface  heated  by  circulating  water  to 
50  ±0.1  °C.  The  animal  was  within  an  upright,  open 
14.5-cm  diameter  cylinder  made  of  clear  plastic. 
Latency  to  a  first  response  to  the  heated  surface  and 
latency  to  licking  a  back  paw  were  measured  by  an 
observer  by  using  a  stopwatch.  First  responses  were 
lifting,  shaking,  or  licking  a  paw  or  jumping.  If  a  first 
response  did  not  occur  before  back-paw  licking,  the 
back-paw  latency  was  also  assigned  to  the  earlier 
response.  The  animal  was  removed  from  the  heated 
surface  after  licking  a  back  paw.  Standard  laboratory 
procedure  was  to  remove  an  animal  after  160  s  if  a 
back  paw  was  not  yet  licked  and  to  assign  this  value  to 
the  latency.  However,  this  condition  did  not  occur  in 
the  experiment  with  L-NAME  and  UWB  pulses. 

Spontaneous  locomotor  activity  was  tested  by 
placing  the  animal  in  a  38.5  cm  x  38.5  cm  arena  with 
24-cm  walls  for  5  min  with  room  lights  off.  Animal 
movement  interrupted  10  light  beams,  5  in  each 
horizontal  direction.  The  number  of  beam  interrup¬ 
tions  was  counted  under  computer  control  for  each 
minute  of  the  test  and  used  to  indicate  level  of  activity. 

UWB  Exposure 

Animals  were  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  in  a 
custom-built  giga-transverse  electromagnetic  (GTEM) 
cell  originally  constructed  by  Sandia  National  Labora¬ 
tories  (Albuquerque,  NM).  The  cell,  a  tapered  two- 
conductor  transmission  line  with  a  square  cross- 
section,  was  positioned  so  that  one  ground  plane  wall 
was  horizontal.  A  modified  RG-220  coaxial  cable 
connected  the  center  conductor  of  the  GTEM  cell  to  a 
source  of  high  voltage.  Ionization  of  nitrogen  in  a 
center-conductor  gap  in  the  cable  generated  UWB 
pulses  in  the  GTEM  cell  with  electric  field  vector 
directed  from  center  conductor  to  ground  conductor. 
Two  four-inch  speakers  outside  the  GTEM  cell 
provided  broadband  noise  for  auditory  masking  of 
UWB  system  operation. 

An  EG&G  ACD(A)  D-dot  probe  mounted  in  the 
wall  of  the  GTEM  cell  was  used  to  detect  UWB  pulses 
during  animal  exposures.  The  signal  from  the  probe 
was  sampled  with  0.01 -ns  resolution  by  a  Tektronix 


SCD  5000  Transient  Digitizer.  Each  digitized  wave¬ 
form,  representing  the  average  of  200  individual 
pulses,  was  stored  and  later  processed  by  using  a 
correction  algorithm  [Bao,  1997]  to  give  pulse  electric 
field  vs.  time.  The  pulses  were  triggered  by  an  external 
pulse  generator  at  600/s.  The  UWB  pulses  used  in  this 
experiment  had  102  ±  1  kV/m  peak  amplitude, 
0.90  ±0.05  ns  duration,  and  160  ±5  ps  rise  time 
(mean  ±  S.D.).  Specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  of  these 
pulses  at  600/s  was  estimated  to  be  37  mW/kg.1  For 
sham  exposure,  no  pulses  were  triggered  (0/s). 

Animals  were  exposed  in  a  holder  made  from 
clear  plastic  placed  in  the  GTEM  cell  on  the  horizontal 
ground  plane.  The  holder  consisted  of  an  upright 
cylinder  with  0.32-cm  walls  and  12.1-cm  internal 
diameter,  a  floor  of  four  concentric  loops  of  0.63-cm 
plastic  rod,  and  a  plastic  cover.  The  top  portion  of  the 
holder  containing  the  animal  measured  4.6  cm 
between  the  raised  floor  and  the  cover.  The  animal 
was  3.8  cm  above  the  ground  plane,  a  distance 
sufficient  to  prevent  contact  between  the  animal’s  tail 
and  the  ground  plane.  Animals  exhibited  normal 
spontaneous  behavior  while  in  the  well-ventilated 
holder. 

Procedure 

Animals  were  assigned  in  sequence  to  one  of  the 
four  UWB/L-NAME  conditions,  with  all  conditions 
delivered  randomly  in  a  block  before  their  next 
delivery.  Twenty  animals  were  tested  for  each  of  the 
following  conditions:  sham/saline,  sham/NAME, 
UWB/saline,  UWB/NAME.  An  animal  was  first 
injected  IP  with  0.9%  saline  or  50  mg/kg  L-NAME 
in  saline.  The  animal  was  then  placed  in  a  holder  and 
positioned  in  the  GTEM  cell  for  sham  exposure  (0/s)  or 
exposure  to  UWB  pulses  at  600/s,  both  types  of 
exposure  lasting  30  min.  At  the  end  of  exposure,  the 
animal  was  taken  from  the  GTEM  cell  and  the  holder 
and  was  tested  for  nociception.  At  the  end  of 
nociception  testing,  the  animal  was  placed  without 
delay  into  the  arena  for  measuring  spontaneous 
locomotor  activity. 


Estimates  of  whole-body  SAR  were  made  by  W.D.  Hurt 
(Radiofrequency  Radiation  Division,  Air  Force  Research  Labora¬ 
tory,  Brooks  AFB)  by  using  the  power  spectrum  of  the  corrected 
UWB  pulse  electric  field  and  the  frequency-dependent  normalized 
SAR  (in  W/kg  per  mW/cm2)  for  a  prolate  spheroidal  model  of  a 
medium-sized  mouse  [Dumey  et  al.,  1986].  The  integral  of  the 
product  of  these  two  functions  in  the  frequency  domain  was 
multiplied  by  the  ratio  of  pulse  duration  to  repetition  period  (duty 
cycle)  to  obtain  an  SAR  value.  The  average  of  results  for  k-  and 
H-polarizations  of  the  animal  was  used  to  account  for  movement 
of  the  animal. 


434  Seaman  et  al. 


The  sound  level  in  the  GTEM  cell  at  the  location 
of  the  animal  holder  was  checked  daily  with  a  Realistic 
33-2055  sound  level  meter,  and  the  broadband  noise 
was  adjusted,  if  necessary,  to  74-75  dBA.  Low- 
frequency  magnetic  fields  were  also  measured  daily 
with  a  Dexsil  Magnum  310  three-axis  digital  gauss- 
meter  at  three  locations:  the  home  cage  in  the 
laboratory,  near  the  GTEM  cell,  and  immediately 
above  the  heated  surface  device.  The  measured 
magnetic  fields  were  0.004-0.088,  0.004-0.048,  and 
0.004-0.060  pT  at  the  respective  locations,  with 
similar  results  when  using  the  60  Hz  and  40-310  Hz 
settings  of  the  meter.  Background  low-frequency  fields 
in  the  laboratory  were  thus  less  than  0.1  pT  (1  mG). 

Data  Analysis 

Two-way  analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  was 
performed  separately  on  first-response  latency,  back- 
paw  latency,  and  total  activity,  each  with  factors 
(levels)  of  exposure  (sham  and  UWB)  and  L-NAME 
(saline  and  NAME).  Three-way  ANOVA  was  per¬ 
formed  on  the  time  profile  of  activity  with  exposure,  L- 
NAME,  and  minute  of  test  as  factors  with  repeated 
measures  on  minute  of  test.  Significant  effects  in 
ANOVAs  were  further  investigated  by  using  pair-wise 
comparisons  in  Newman-Keuls  testing.  Statistical 
tests  were  performed  by  using  GB-STAT  software 
(Dynamic  Microsystems,  Silver  Spring,  MD)  with  a 
significance  level  of  PC.05  in  all  tests. 

RESULTS 

Nociception 

Response  latencies  on  the  heated  surface  are 
shown  in  Figure  1.  Mean  first-response  latency, 
measured  in  all  animals,  increased  with  L-NAME  by 
similar  amounts  for  both  sham  and  UWB  exposures. 
Mean  back-paw-lick  latency  also  increased  with  L- 
NAME  for  both  exposure  conditions,  with  the  increase 
for  UWB  being  smaller  than  that  for  sham.  Back  paw 
latency  was  obtained  from  only  17  animals  in  sham/ 
NAME  and  UWB/NAME  due  to  persistent  jumping  of 
three  animals  in  each  of  these  groups.  For  each  latency, 
means  for  saline-injected  animals  were  nearly  the 
same  for  sham  and  UWB  exposures.  The  larger  means 
for  L-NAME-injected  animals  were  slightly  smaller 
for  UWB. 

ANOVA  indicated  no  significant  interaction  of 
exposure  and  L-NAME  for  first-response  latency  nor 
back-paw-lick  latency  (F(l  ,76)  <  1  and  F(1 ,70)  =  1 .48, 
P=.227,  respectively)  as  well  as  no  significant  main 
effect  of  UWB  (F(l,76)=  1.19,  P=.279  and 
F(l,70)  =  3.34,  P =.072,  respectively).  The  main 


Fig.  1.  Response  latency  (mean  ±  SEM)  on  the  heated  surface  of 
first  response  and  back  paw  lick.  Numbers  above  bars  are  respec¬ 
tive  sample  sizes. 


effect  of  L-NAME  was  significant  for  both  laten¬ 
cies  (F(l,76)  =  20.16,  P<.0001;  F(l,70)  =  28.73, 
P<.0001).  For  each  latency,  Newman-Keuls  testing 
showed  significant  differences  in  mean  latency 
between  saline  and  NAME  for  each  type  of  exposure 
(P<. 01  for  sham  and  Pc. 05  for  UWB).  For  back- 
paw-lick  latency,  means  for  sham/NAME  and  UWB/ 
NAME  were  also  significantly  different  (Pc. 05). 

Activity 

Total  activity  and  activity  during  each  minute  of 
the  test,  measured  in  all  animals,  are  shown  in 
Figure  2.  For  sham  exposure,  an  increase  of  about 
20%  appeared  in  total  activity  and  in  activity  for 
individual  minutes  with  L-NAME.  For  UWB  expo¬ 
sure,  the  total  activity  and  activity  for  the  minutes  of 
test  changed  in  the  opposite  direction,  i.e.,  they  were 
smaller  with  L-NAME.  For  all  four  conditions,  activity 
generally  declined  during  the  test  except  for  minutes 
1-3  of  UWB/NAME. 

ANOVA  indicated  a  significant  UWB-L-NAME 
interaction  (F(l,76)  =  12.20,  P=.0008)  and  a  signifi¬ 
cant  main  effect  of  UWB  (F(l,76)  =  5.67,  P  =  0.02), 
whereas  the  main  effect  of  L-NAME  was  not 
significant  (F(l,76)  =  1.29,  P=.260).  ANOVA  indi¬ 
cated  a  significant  main  effect  of  minute  of  test 
(F(4,304)  =  12.51,  Pc  .0001),  reflecting  the  decline  in 
activity  over  time  during  the  test.  Interaction  between 
L-NAME  and  minute  of  test  and  between  UWB  and 
minute  of  test  were  not  significant  (F(4,304)c  1)  as 
was  the  UWB-L-NAME-minute  of  test  interaction 
(F(4,304)  =  1.52,  P  =  0.195).  Newman-Keuls  testing 
of  mean  total  activity  showed  that  the  UWB  effect  was 
due  to  a  significant  difference  between  means  for 


UWB  and  L-NAME 


435 


Total  Activity 


Activity  by  Minute  of  Test 


Fig.  2.  Total  activity  (above)  and  activity  by  minute  of  test  (below) 
as  number  of  light-beam  interruptions  (mean  ±SEM).  Numbers 
above  bars  are  respective  sample  sizes. 


sham/NAME  and  UWB/NAME.  The  mean  for  UWB/ 
NAME  was  not  significantly  different  from  means  for 
sham/saline  and  UWB/saline.  Newman-Keuls  testing 
also  showed  that  means  were  different  for  minutes  1-3 
(P<  .01)  and  minute  5  (P  <  .05)  between  sham/NAME 
and  UWB/NAME,  whereas  no  difference  was  found 
between  means  for  respective  minutes  for  sham/saline 
and  UWB/saline. 

DISCUSSION 

The  NOS  inhibitor  L-NAME  was  antinociceptive 
(analgesic)  in  the  CF-1  mice  for  both  measures  of 
thermal  nociception  tested.  Latencies  to  both  first 
response  and  back  paw  lick  were  increased  signifi¬ 
cantly  for  both  exposure  conditions  (Fig.  1).  This 
finding  is  consistent  with  findings  in  studies  that  used 


other  mouse  strains  and  measures  of  nociception  with 
L-NAME  [Moore  et  al.,  1991;  Mustafa,  1992; 
Babbedge  et  al.,  1993;  Sakurada  et  al.,  1996]  and  with 
other  NOS  inhibitors  [Moore  et  al.,  1993;  Babbedge 
et  al.,  1993;  Handy  et  al.,  1996]. 

Exposure  for  30  min  to  0.9-ns,  102-kV/m  UWB 
pulses  at  600/s  in  this  study  did  not  significantly  affect 
normal  nociception  nor  the  L-NAME-induced 
changes  in  nociception.  A  lack  of  UWB  effect  on 
normal  nociception  had  previously  been  seen  for  CF-1 
mice  as  well  as  C57BL/6  mice  [Seaman  et  al.,  1998]. 
The  smaller  mean  back-paw-lick  latency  with  L- 
NAME  in  UWB -exposed  animals  (UWB/NAME)  is 
22%  smaller  than  the  mean  latency  with  L-NAME  and 
sham  exposure  (sham/NAME).  This  reduction  is  in  the 
direction  indicating  decreased  analgesia  with  UWB 
pulses,  but  the  probability  of  .072  for  a  main  effect  of 
UWB  did  not  meet  the  significance  criterion.  However, 
the  means  for  sham/NAME  and  UWB/NAME  laten¬ 
cies  were  different  in  the  Newman-Keuls  test  (P<  .05). 
The  reduction  in  response  latency  after  UWB  exposure 
is  opposite  to  the  additional  increase  in  morphine- 
increased  latency  after  similar  exposure  [Seaman  et  al., 
1998]. 

The  dose  of  50  mg/kg  L-NAME  increased  mean 
spontaneous  locomotor  activity  by  22%  in  sham- 
exposed  CF-1  mice  (Fig.  2).  Increases  in  activity  were 
also  seen  for  25  and  50  mg/kg  L-NAME  doses  in  a 
preliminary  experiment.  This  finding  is  opposite  from 
the  decreased  activity  reported  for  other  mouse  strains 
and  rats  with  L-NAME  and  other  NOS  inhibitors 
summarized  in  the  Introduction  section.  However,  we 
note  that  CF-1  mice  exhibit  a  decrease  in  activity 
30  min  after  7.5  mg/kg  morphine  sulfate  [Seaman 
et  al.,  1998]  instead  of  the  hyperactivity  seen  in  other 
mouse  strains  [Cowan,  1993].  The  difference  in 
activity  responses  are  likely  attributable  to  strain 
differences,  effective-dose  differences,  or  both.  Mor¬ 
phine  and  L-NAME  at  these  doses,  thus,  seem  to  have 
opposite  effects  on  activity,  possibly  indicating  some 
kind  of  opposing  CNS  action(s),  rather  than  the  same 
respective  effect  across  strains  and  species.  We  also 
note  that  L-NAME  is  reported  not  to  change  activity  or 
not  to  change  all  measures  of  activity  for  rats  at  10  and 
30  mg/kg  [Sandi  et  al.,  1995;  Johansson  et  al.,  1997]; 
Swiss  mice  at  1,  10,  and  30  mg/kg  [Calignano  et  al., 
1993;  Brignola  et  al.,  1994];  and  LACA  mice  at  50  and 
75  mg/kg  [Moore  et  al.,  1991;  Babbedge  et  al.,  1993]. 
In  addition,  other  NOS  inhibitors  exhibit  a  dose- 
dependent  effect  on  activity  [Connop  et  al.,  1994; 
Volke  et  al.,  1997].  Thus,  the  increase  in  CF-1  mice 
activity  might  have  also  been  partly  a  result  of  the  dose 
used.  Indeed,  in  a  preliminary  experiment,  75  mg/kg 
L-NAME  decreased  CF-1  locomotor  activity,  which  is 


436  Seaman  et  al. 


more  consistent  with  the  change  reported  for  rats  and 
other  strains  of  mice. 

Spontaneous  locomotor  activity  was  not  changed 
by  L-NAME  when  animals  were  exposed  to  UWB 
pulses  for  30  min  in  this  study  (Fig.  2).  The  mean  total 
activity  for  this  combined  condition  was  not  different 
from  totals  for  animals  without  both  UWB  exposure 
and  L-NAME  and  for  animals  with  only  UWB 
exposure.  The  reduction  in  activity  level  is  opposite 
to  the  increase  in  morphine-decreased  activity  with 
UWB  pulses  [Seaman  et  al.,  1998].  The  reduction 
represents  an  effective  cancellation  of  L-NAME- 
induced  hyperactivity  by  the  UWB  exposure  and  is 
similar  in  general  pattern  to  back-paw-lick  latency  in 
Figure  1.  Information  on  the  type  and  site  of  opposing 
action  can  be  drawn  from  studies  on  nitric  oxide. 

Nitric  oxide  is  produced  by  NOS  in  many  types 
of  cells,  including  neurons  in  the  CNS  and  endothelial 
cells  in  the  peripheral  circulation  [Bredt  and  Snyder, 
1994].  L-NAME  inhibits  both  neuronal  NOS  and 
endothelial  NOS.  Smaller  amounts  of  nitric  oxide,  an 
endogenous  vasodilator,  resulting  from  inhibition  of 
endothelial  NOS  causes  smaller  vessel  diameter  that 
leads  to  decreased  local  blood  flow  and  increased 
blood  pressure  [Moore  et  al.,  1991;  Wang  et  al.,  1995; 
Handy  et  al.,  1996;  Hu  et  al.,  1997;  Yamamoto  et  al., 
1998].  However,  the  effects  of  L-NAME  on  nocicep¬ 
tion  and  locomotor  activity  seen  here  are  most 
likely  due  to  actions  in  the  central  nervous  system 
(CNS). 

A  number  of  arguments  can  be  made  that 
increased  blood  pressure  was  not  a  direct  or  indirect 
mediator  of  the  antinociception  and  hyperactivity 
observed  with  L-NAME.  First,  reduced  blood  flow 
could  conceivably  compromise  heat  removal  from  the 
feet,  so  that  a  given  thermal  stimulus  would  cause  a 
greater  increase  in  local  temperature  that  would  be 
reflected  as  an  increased  thermal  sensitivity  to  the 
stimulus.  However,  the  analgesia  observed  with  L- 
NAME  represents  decreased  sensitivity,  thus  indicat¬ 
ing  only  minor,  if  any,  influence  of  reduced  blood  flow. 
Second,  application  of  L-NAME  directly  to  CNS  sites 
causes  antinociception  [Moore  et  al.,  1991;  Babbedge 
et  al.,  1993;  Yamaguchi  and  Naito,  1996].  Third, 
systemic  delivery  of  inhibitors  specific  for  neuronal 
NOS  cause  antinociception  without  changing  blood 
pressure  [Moore  et  al.,  1993;  Handy  et  al.,  1996]  as 
well  as  reduce  activity  [Connop  et  al.,  1994;  Dzoljic 
et  al.,  1997;  Volke  et  al.,  1997;  Maren,  1998]  in  a  way 
similar  to  L-NAME  [Calignano  et  al.,  1993;  Sandi 
et  al.,  1995],  indicating  that  L-NAME  action  on 
neuronal  NOS  is  sufficient.  Fourth,  dissociation  of 
nociceptive  and  locomotive  effects  of  L-NAME  from 
its  pressor  effects  is  further  indicated  in  studies  in 


which  L-NAME  has  been  reported  not  to  change 
nociception  [Dambisya  and  Lee,  1995;  Pavone  et  al., 
1997;  Giiney  et  al.,  1998;  Handy  and  Moore,  1998]  or 
activity  [Moore  et  al.,  1991;  Babbedge  et  al.,  1993; 
Calignano  et  al.,  1993;  Brignola  et  al.,  1994]  at  all 
doses  tested.  An  argument  that  inhibitors  of  NOS 
affect  central  mechanisms  for  cardiovascular  control 
that  are  linked  to  nociception  systems  [Ghione,  1996; 
Guasti  et  al.,  1998]  can  be  made,  but  this  also 
constitutes  a  CNS  action.  Actions  of  L-NAME  to 
change  nociception  and  activity  in  the  present  study, 
thus,  were  not  on  endothelial  cells,  but  were  on  CNS 
neurons,  where  UWB  pulses  might  have  their  greatest 
effect  in  opposing  L-NAME  action.  This  can  be  further 
pursued  by  using  an  inhibitor  specific  for  neuronal 
NOS,  such  as  7-nitroindazole,  in  experiments  similar 
to  the  one  presented  here. 

The  increases  in  back-paw-lick  latency  and 
locomotor  activity  with  L-NAME  were  reduced  by 
UWB  exposure,  significantly  so  for  activity.  Reduction 
in  L-NAME  effect  is  consistent  with  an  increase  in 
nitric  oxide  resulting  from  UWB  exposure  that 
compensates  for  a  reduction  due  to  NOS  inhibition. 
This  action  would  likely  be  the  most  effective  if 
located  at  the  CNS  site  of  inhibition  by  L-NAME.  For 
nociception,  this  is  possibly  within  the  spinal  cord 
[Sakurada  et  al.,  1996],  which  has  been  proposed  to  be 
the  site  of  a  tonic  “pronociceptive”  action  of  nitric 
oxide  [Machelska  et  al.,  1997].  Evidence  for  increased 
production  of  nitric  oxide  has  been  found  in  murine 
macrophages  exposed  to  similar  UWB  pulses  [Seaman 
et  al.,  1996].  Evidence  for  increased  nitric  oxide  levels 
in  neural  tissue  has  been  reported  for  homogenate  of 
rat  cerebellum  exposed  to  modulated  10  MHz  fields 
[Miura  et  al.,  1993]  and  rat  hippocampal  slices 
exposed  to  magnetic  fields  at  1  and  60  Hz  [Bawin 
et  al.,  1996].  Nitric  oxide  in  the  spinal  cord  is  also 
involved  in  morphine-induced  analgesia  [Yamaguchi 
and  Naito,  1996;  Machelska  et  al.,  1997]  such  that 
inhibition  of  NOS  enhances  the  analgesia.  Thus,  one 
might  expect  that  increased  production  of  nitric  oxide 
would  lead  to  the  opposite  effect:  a  reduction  in 
analgesia.  As  summarized  in  the  Introduction  section, 
this  is  the  direction  of  change  seen  across  species  in  a 
large  majority  of  experiments  with  low-frequency 
magnetic  fields.  This  proposed  action  of  electromag¬ 
netic  fields  to  increase  nitric  oxide  levels  is  consistent 
with  the  finding  that  increased  nitric  oxide  is 
associated  with  reduction  of  opioid-induced  analgesia 
by  60  Hz  magnetic  fields  in  the  land  snail  [Kavaliers 
et  al.,  1998].  Of  course,  other  sites  of  action  and  other 
compensating  mechanisms  are  also  possible. 

For  CF-1  mice  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  in  the 
present  study,  effects  seem  to  be  greater  for  CNS 


UWB  and  L-NAME 


437 


components  involved  in  locomotion  than  in  nocicep¬ 
tion.  Trends  of  UWB  pulses  to  reduce  response  latency 
in  thermal  nociception  and  locomotor  activity  in 
animals  treated  with  L-NAME  were  opposite  in 
direction  to  previously  observed  trends  of  UWB  pulses 
to  increase  die  same  measures  in  animals  treated  with 
morphine  [Seaman  et  al.,  1998].  Assuming  increased 
levels  of  nitric  oxide  after  UWB  exposure,  this  is 
consistent  with  the  existence  of  a  nitric  oxide- 
mediated  inhibition  or  offset  of  morphine-induced 
changes  in  respective  neural  pathways  in  the  CF-1 
mouse.  This  is,  of  course,  compatible  with  previous 
work  described  in  the  Introduction  section  showing  (1) 
an  increase  in  nitric  oxide  and  reduction  in  analgesia 
after  exposure  to  low-frequency  fields,  and  (2)  the 
effect  of  NOS  inhibitors  to  enhance  morphine-induced 
analgesia. 

With  assumptions  of  pulse  propagation  in  a 
transverse  electromagnetic  mode  and  wave  impedance 
of  377  ohms,  the  peak  magnetic  field  of  an  UWB  pulse 
in  the  GTEM  cell  was  estimated  to  be  about  0.33  mT. 
This  was  2  to  3  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  the 
background  low-frequency  fields  in  the  laboratory.  The 
time-averaged  value  was  much  smaller,  about  0.2  nT, 
based  on  the  small  on-off  ratio  of  about  6  •  10-7.  The 
peak  UWB  magnetic  field  amplitude  is  within  the 
range  of  0.05-9.0  mT  that  was  effective  in  changing 
nociception,  analgesia,  and  activity  in  studies  with 
static  and  low-frequency  magnetic  fields  in  mice  and 
snails,  as  summarized  in  the  Introduction  section.  It  is 
also  similar  to  the  0.1  mT  (100  pT)  peak  values  for 
effective  pulsed  magnetic  fields.  The  peak  amplitude  is 
larger  than  the  0.02-0.07  mT  (0.2-0.7  G)  multiple- 
frequency  fields  that  affect  nociception  in  pigeons  and 
humans  [Del  Seppia  et  al.,  1995;  Papi  et  al.,  1995; 
Sartucci  et  al.,  1997].  One  possible  explanation  for  the 
weakness  of  UWB  effect  on  analgesia  and  activity  seen 
here  is  the  small  amplitude  of  the  time-averaged 
electromagnetic  fields  and  the  resulting  small  ampli¬ 
tudes  of  low-frequency  spectral  components  known  to 
be  effective. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

We  are  grateful  to  Duane  Cox  for  design  and 
construction  of  animal  holders  and  heated  surface 
device. 

REFERENCES 

Agee  FJ,  Baum  CE,  Prather  WD,  Lehr  JM,  O’Loughlin  JP,  Burger 

JW,  Schoenberg  JSH,  Scholfield  DW,  Torres  RJ,  Hull  JP, 

Gaudet  JA.  1998.  Ultra-wideband  transmitter  research. 

IEEE  Trans  Plasma  Sci  26:860-873. 


Babbedge  RC,  Hart  SL,  Moore  PK.  1993.  Anti-nociceptive  activity 
of  nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitors  in  the  mouse:  dissociation 
between  the  effect  of  L-NAME  and  L-NMMA.  J  Pharm 
Pharmacol  45:77-79. 

Bao  JZ.  1997.  Picosecond  domain  electromagnetic  pulse  measure¬ 
ments  in  an  exposure  facility:  an  error  compensation  routine 
using  deconvolution  techniques.  Rev  Sci  Instrum  68:2221- 
2227. 

Bawin  SM,  Satmary  WM,  Jones  RA,  Adey  WR,  Zimmerman  G. 
1996.  Extremely-low-frequency  magnetic  fields  disrupt 
rhythmic  slow  activity  in  rat  hippocampal  slices.  Bioelec¬ 
tromagnetics  17:388-395. 

Betancur  C,  DelFOmo  G,  Alieva  E.  1994.  Magnetic  field  effects  on 
stress-induced  analgesia  in  mice:  modulation  by  light. 
Neurosci  Lett  182:147-150. 

Bredt  DS,  Snyder  SH.  1994.  Nitric  oxide:  a  physiologic  messenger 
molecule.  Annu  Rev  Biochem  63:175-195. 

Brignola  G,  Calignano  A,  Di  Rosa  M.  1994.  Modulation  of 
morphine  antinociception  in  the  mouse  by  endogenous  nitric 
oxide.  Br  J  Pharmacol  113:1372-1376. 

Calignano  A,  Persico  P,  Mancuso  F,  Sorrentino  L.  1993. 
Endogenous  nitric  oxide  modulates  morphine-induced 
changes  in  locomotion  and  food  intake  in  mice.  Eur  J 
Pharmacol  231:415-419. 

Connop  BP,  Rolfe  NG,  Boegman  RJ,  Jhamandas  K,  Beninger  RJ. 
1994.  Potentiation  of  NMDA-mediated  toxicity  on  nigros- 
triatal  neurons  by  a  low  dose  of  7-nitro  indazole. 
Neuropharmacology  33:1439-1445. 

Cowan  A.  1993.  Effects  of  opioids  on  the  spontaneous  behavior  of 
animals.  In:  Herz  A,  editor.  Handbook  of  experimental 
pharmacology,  104/0:  opioids  n.  Berlin:  Springer- Verlag. 
pp  393-428. 

Dambisya  YM,  Lee  TL.  1995.  Effects  of  L-N^nitro  arginine 
methyl  ester  (L-NAME),  and  L-N°-monomethyl  arginine 
(L-NMMA)  and  L-arginine  on  the  antinociceptive  effects  of 
morphine  in  mice.  Methods  Find  Exp  Clin  Pharmacol 
17:577-582. 

Del  Seppia  C,  Ghione  S,  Luschi  P,  Papi  F.  1995.  Exposure  to 
oscillating  magnetic  fields  influences  sensitivity  to  electrical 
stimuli.  I.  Experiments  on  pigeons.  Bioelectromagnetics 
16:290-294. 

Dumey  CH,  Massoudi  H,  Iskander  MF.  1986.  Radiofrequency 
radiation  dosimetry  handbook.  Technical  Report  USAF- 
SAM-TR-85-73.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas:  USAF 
School  of  Aerospace  Medicine. 

Dzoljic  E,  De  Vries  R,  Dzoljic  MR.  1997.  New  and  potent 
inhibitors  of  nitric  oxide  synthase  reduce  motor  activity  in 
mice.  Behav  Brain  Res  87:209-212. 

Fleming  JL,  Persinger  MA,  Koren  SA.  1994.  Magnetic  pulses 
elevate  nociceptive  thresholds:  comparisons  with  opiate 
receptor  compounds  in  normal  and  seizure-induced  brain¬ 
damaged  rats.  Electromagnetobiol  13:67-75. 

Ghione  S.  1996.  Hypertension-associated  hypalgesia:  evidence  in 
experimental  animals  and  humans,  pathophysiological 
mechanisms,  and  potential  clinical  consequences.  Hyper¬ 
tension  28:494-504. 

Guasti  L,  Grimoldi  P,  Diolisi  A,  Petrozzino  MR,  Gaudio  G,  Grand! 
AM,  Rossi  MG,  Venco  A.  1998.  Treatment  with  enalapril 
modifies  the  pain  perception  pattern  in  hypertensive 
patients.  Hypertension  31:1146-1150. 

Giiney  HZ,  Gorgiin  CZ,  Tungtan  B,  Uludag  O,  Hodoglugil  U, 
Abacioglu  N,  Zengil  H.  1998.  Circadian-rhythm-dependent 
effects  of  L-N^nitroarginine  methyl  ester  (L-NAME)  on 
morphine-induced  analgesia.  Chronobiol  Int  15:283-289. 


438  Seaman  e!  al. 


Handy  RL,  Moore  PK.  1998.  Effects  of  selective  inhibitors  of 
neuronal  nitric  oxide  synthase  carrageenan-induced 
mechanical  and  thermal  hyperalgesia.  Neuropharmacology 
37:37-43. 

Handy  RL,  Harb  HL,  Wallace  P,  Gaffen  Z,  Whitehead  KJ,  Moore 
PK.  1996.  Inhibition  of  nitric  oxide  synthase  by  l-(2- 
trifluoromethylphenyl)  imidazole  (TRIM)  in  vitro:  antino¬ 
ciceptive  and  cardiovascular  effects.  Br  J  Pharmacol  119: 
423-431. 

Hu  CT,  Chang  KC,  Wu  CY,  Chen  HI.  1997.  Acute  effects  of  nitric 
oxide  blockade  with  L-NAME  on  arterial  haemodynamics 
in  the  rat.  Br  J  Pharmacol  122:1237-1243. 

Jauchem  JR,  Seaman  RL,  Lehnerl  HM,  Mathur  SP,  Ryan  KL,  Frei 
MR,  Hurt  WD.  1998.  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic 
pulses:  lack  of  effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure 
during  two-minute  exposures  of  rats.  Bioelectromagnetics 
19:330-333. 

Jauchem  JR,  Frei  MR,  Ryan  KL,  Merritt  JH,  Murphy  MR.  1999. 
Lack  of  effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  ketamine- 
anesthetized  rats  briefly  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electro¬ 
magnetic  pulses.  IEEE  Trans  Biomed  Eng  46:117-120. 

Johansson  C,  Jackson  DM,  Svensson  L.  1997.  Nitric  oxide 
synthase  inhibition  blocks  phencyclidine-induced  beha¬ 
vioural  effects  on  prepulse  inhibition  and  locomotor  activity 
in  the  rat.  Psychopharmacology  131:167-173. 

Kavaliers  M,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1985.  Exposure  to  rotating  magnetic 
fields  alters  morphine-induced  behavioral  responses  in  two 
strains  of  mice.  Neuropharmacology  24:337-340. 

Kavaliers  M,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1986.  Stress-induced  opioid 
analgesia  and  activity  in  mice:  inhibitory  influences  of 
exposure  to  magnetic  fields.  Psychopharmacology  89: 
440-443. 

Kavaliers  M,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1988.  Magnetic  fields  inhibit  opioid- 
mediated  “analgesic”  behaviours  of  the  terrestrial  snail, 
Cepaea  nemoralis.  J  Comp  Physiol  A  162:551-558. 

Kavaliers  M,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1993.  Repeated  naloxone  treatments 
and  exposures  to  weak  60-Hz  magnetic  fields  have 
“analgesic”  effects  in  snails.  Brain  Res  620:159-162. 

Kavaliers  M,  Ossenkopp  KP,  Prato  FS,  Carson  JJL.  1994.  Opioid 
systems  and  the  biological  effects  of  magnetic  fields.  In: 
Frey  AH,  editor.  On  the  nature  of  electromagnetic  field 
interactions  with  biological  systems.  Austin,  Texas:  Landes, 
pp  181-194. 

Kavaliers  M,  Choleris  E,  Prato  FS,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1998. 
Evidence  for  the  involvement  of  nitric  oxide  and  nitric 
oxide  synthase  in  the  modulation  of  opioid-induced 
antinociception  and  the  inhibitory  effects  of  exposure  to 
60-Hz  magnetic  fields  in  the  land  snail.  Brain  Res  809: 
50-57. 

Lai  H.  1994.  Neurological  effects  of  radiofrequency  electromag¬ 
netic  radiation.  In:  Lin  JC,  editor.  Advances  in  electro¬ 
magnetic  fields  in  living  systems.  Vol  1.  New  York:  Plenum, 
pp.  27-80. 

Lu  ST,  Mathur  SP,  Akyel  Y,  Lee  JC.  1999.  Ultra-wideband 
electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiol 
Behav  65:753-761. 

Machelska  H,  Labuz  D,  Przewlocki  R,  Przewlocka  B.  1997. 
Inhibition  of  nitric  oxide  synthase  enhances  antinociception 
mediated  by  mu ,  delta  and  kappa  opioid  receptors  in  acute 
and  prolonged  pain  in  the  rat  spinal  cord.  J  Pharmacol  Exp 
Ther  282:977-984. 

Maren  S.  1998.  Effects  of  7-nitroindazole,  a  neuronal  nitric  oxide 
synthase  (nNOS)  inhibitor,  on  locomotor  activity  and  con¬ 
textual  fear  conditioning  in  rats.  Brain  Res  804:155-158. 


Miura  M,  Takayama  K,  Okada  J.  1993.  Increase  in  nitric  oxide 
and  cyclic  GMP  of  rat  cerebellum  by  radio  frequency  burst- 
type  electromagnetic  field  radiation.  J  Physiol  461: 
513-524. 

Moore  PK,  Oluyomi  AO,  Babbedge  RC,  Wallace  P,  Hart  SL.  1991. 
L-NG-nitro  arginine  methyl  ester  exhibits  antinociceptive 
activity  in  the  mouse.  Br  J  Pharmacol  102:198-202. 

Moore  PK,  Babbedge  RC,  Wallace  P,  Gaffen  ZA,  Hart  SL. 
1993.  7-nitro  indazole,  an  inhibitor  of  nitric  oxide 
synthase,  exhibits  anti-nociceptive  activity  in  the  mouse 
without  increasing  blood  pressure.  Br  J  Pharmacol  108: 
296-297. 

Mustafa  AA.  1992.  Mechanisms  of  L-NG-nitro  arginine  methyl 
ester  induced  antinociception  in  mice:  A  role  for  serotoner¬ 
gic  and  adrenergic  neurons.  Gen  Pharmacol  23:1 177-1 182. 

Ossenkopp  KP,  Kavaliers  M.  1987.  Morphine-induced  analgesia 
and  exposure  to  low-intensity  60-Hz  magnetic  fields: 
inhibition  of  nocturnal  analgesia  in  mice  is  a  function  of 
magnetic  field  intensity.  Brain  Res  418:356-360. 

Papi  F,  Ghione  S,  Rosa  C,  Del  Seppia  C,  Luschi  P.  1995.  Exposure 
to  oscillating  magnetic  fields  influences  sensitivity  to 
electrical  stimuli.  I.  Experiments  on  humans.  Bioelectro¬ 
magnetics  16:294-300. 

Pavone  F,  Capone  F,  Populin  R,  Przewlocka  B.  1997.  Nitric  oxide 
synthase  inhibitors  enhance  the  antinociceptive  effects  of 
oxotremorine  in  mice.  Pol  J  Pharmacol  49:31-36. 

Prato  FS,  Kavaliers  M,  Ossenkopp  KP,  Carson  JJL,  Drost  DJ, 
Frappier  JRH.  1992.  Extremely  low  frequency  magnetic 
field  exposure  from  MRI/MRS  procedures.  Ann  NY  Acad 
Sci  649:44-58. 

Sakurada  T,  Sugiyama  A,  Sakurada  C,  Tan-No  K,  Yonezawa  A, 
Sakurada  S,  Kensuke  K.  1996.  Effect  of  spinal  nitric  oxide 
inhibition  on  capsaicin-induced  nociceptive  response.  Life 
Sci  59:921-930. 

Sandi  C,  Venero  C,  Guaza  C.  1995.  Decreased  spontaneous  motor 
activity  and  startle  response  in  nitric  oxide  synthase 
inhibitor-treated  rats.  Eur  J  Pharmacol  277:89-97. 

Sartucci  F,  Bonfiglio  L,  Del  Seppia  C,  Luschi  P,  Ghione  S,  Murri  L, 
Papi  F.  1997.  Changes  in  pain  perception  and  pain-related 
somatosensory  evoked  potentials  in  humans  produced  by 
exposure  to  oscillating  magnetic  fields.  Brain  Res  769: 
362-366. 

Seaman  RL,  Belt  ML,  Doyle  JM,  Mathur  SP.  1998.  Ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  pulses  and  morphine-induced 
changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in  mice.  Physiol  Behav 
65:263-270. 

Seaman  RL,  Kiel  JL,  Parker  JE,  Grubbs  TR,  Prol  HK.  1996.  Effects 
of  ultra-wide-band  pulses  on  nitric  oxide  production  in 
murine  macrophages.  Abstracts  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society  Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting:  213. 

Sherry  CJ,  Blick  DW,  Walters  TJ,  Brown  GC,  Murphy  MR.  1995. 
Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after 
exposure  to  ultrawideband  electromagnetic  radiation  in  the 
microwave  frequency  range.  Radiat  Res  143:93-97. 

Spinella  M,  Bodnar  RJ.  1994.  Nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibition 
selectively  potentiates  swim  stress  antinociception  in  rats. 
Pharmacol  Biochem  Behav  47:727-733. 

Thomas  AW,  Kavaliers  M,  Prato  FS,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1997a. 
Antinociceptive  effects  of  a  pulsed  magnetic  field  in  the  land 
snail,  Cepaea  nemoralis.  Neurosci  Lett  222:107-110. 

Thomas  AW,  Kavaliers  M,  Prato  FS,  Ossenkopp  KP.  1997b.  Pulsed 
magnetic  field  induced  “analgesia”  in  the  land  snail, 
Cepaea  nemoralis ,  and  the  effects  of  p,  8,  and  k  opioid 
receptor  agonists/antagonists.  Peptides  18:703-709. 


UWB  and  L-NAME 


439 


lysdale  DM,  Lipa  SM,  Ossenkopp  KP,  Kavaliers  M.  1991. 
Inhibitory  effects  of  60-Hz  magnetic  fields  on  opiate- 
induced  '‘analgesia”  in  the  land  snail,  Cepaea  nemoralis , 
under  natural  conditions.  Physiol  Behav  49:53-56. 

Volke  V,  Soosaar  A,  Kooks  S,  Bourin  M,  Mannistuo  PT,  Vasar  E. 
1997.  7-Nitroindazole,  a  nitric  oxide  synthase  inhibitor,  has 
anxiolytic-like  properties  in  exploratory  models  of  anxiety. 
Psychopharmacology  131:399-405. 

Walters  TJ,  Mason  PA,  Sherry  CJ,  Steffen  C,  Merritt  JH.  1995.  No 
detectable  bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high  peak 
power  ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats. 
Aviat  Space  Environ  Med  66:562-567. 


Wang  YX,  Lim  SL,  Pang  CCY.  1995.  Increase  by  N°-nitro-L- 
arginine  methyl  ester  (L-NAME)  of  resistance  to  venous 
return  in  rats.  Br  J  Pharmacol  114:1454-1458. 

Yamaguchi  H,  Naito  H.  1996.  Antinociceptive  synergistic  interac¬ 
tion  between  morphine  and  n^-nitro  1-arginine  methyl  ester 
on  thermal  nociceptive  tests  in  the  rat.  Can  J  Anaesth 
43:975-981. 

Yamamoto  T,  Terada  N,  Seiyama  A,  Nishizawa  Y,  Akedo  H, 
Kosaka  H.  1998.  Increase  in  experimental  pulmonary 
metastasis  in  mice  by  L-arginine  under  inhibition  of  nitric 
oxide  production  by  NG-nitro-L-arginine  methyl  ester.  Int  J 
Cancer  75:140-144. 


ELSEVIER 


Neuroscience 

Letters 


Neuroscience  Letters  280  (2000)  183-186  ■» 

www.elsevier.com/Iocate/neulet 

Effects  of  acute  systemic  3-nitropropionic  acid  administration 
on  rat  activity  and  acoustic  startle 

Ronald  L.  Seaman* 

McKessonHBOC  BioServices  and  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch ,  US  Army  Medicaf  Research  Detachment,  RO.  Box  35460 , 

Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235-5460,  USA 

Received  15  September  1999;  accepted  20  December  1999 


Abstract 

Spontaneous  activity,  acoustic  startle,  and  prepulse  inhibition  (PPI)  of  acoustic  startle  were  measured  in  male  Spra- 
gue-Dawley  rats  3-5  h  after  0, 10, 15,  or  20  mg/kg  i.p.  3-nitropropionic  acid  (3-NP),  a  mitochondrial  toxin.  Mean  activity 
was  significantly  influenced  by  the  3-NP  dose  due  to  decreased  activity  for  20  mg/kg.  Mean  startle  amplitude  was  not 
significantly  affected  by  the  3-NP  dose.  Means  of  PPI  for  prepulses  6  and  12  dBA  above  background  were  smaller  than 
means  for  respective  0  mg/kg  doses,  but  the  main  effect  of  3-NP  dose  did  not  reach  statistical  significance  in  ANOVA.  The 
changes  in  measured  exploratory-type  activity  and,  possibly,  in  startle  PPI  parallel  the  occurrence  of  clinical  signs 
exhibited  at  3-5  h  after  3-NP  injection.  Neural  processing  involved  in  these  quantitative  behavioral  endpoints  seems 
to  be  affected  as  energy  stores  are  depleted  and  degenerative  processes  are  beginning.  ©  2000  Elsevier  Science  Ireland 
Ltd.  All  rights  reserved. 

Keywords:  3-Nitropropionic  acid;  Locomotor  activity;  Acoustic  startle;  Behavior;  Prepulse  inhibition;  Neurodegeneration 


The  succinate  dehydrogenase  (SDH)  inhibitor  3-nitropro¬ 
pionic  acid  (3-NP)  interferes  with  mitochondrial  ATP  synth¬ 
esis  and  can  cause  neurodegeneration  involving  oxidative- 
stress  and  excitotoxicity  processes  [2,19].  Multiple  systemic 
administrations  of  3-NP  to  rats  over  3-30  days  cause  brain 
lesions  (primarily  in  the  caudate-putamen),  increase  gait 
variability  and  decrease  locomotor  activity  [1,5,11,12,16]. 

Changes  have  also  been  noted  to  occur  in  the  rat  brain 
after  a  single  3-NP  injection.  These  include  decreased  SDH 
1-5  h  after  25-30  mg/kg  doses  that  lasts  for  3-7  days 
[1,7,17].  Within  3  h  after  20-30  mg/kg  3-NP,  endogenous 
antioxidant  activity  changes  in  a  number  of  brain  regions  [4] 
along  with  increases  in  free  fatty  acid  content  [3],  peroxy- 
nitrite  content  [16]  and  N-Methy  1-D- aspartate  (NMDA) 
receptor  activity  [19]  in  the  striatum.  Morphological 
changes  in  various  sites  have  been  reported  at  3-6  h  and 
at  1-7  d  after  30  mg/kg  [6,12,18].  Lesion  formation  in  the 
striatum  has  been  observed  with  MRI  methods  to  begin  3- 
4.5  h  after  30  mg/kg  i.v.  [8]. 

Due  to  the  biochemical  and  histological  changes 
observed  after  single  doses  of  3-NP,  one  might  expect 


*  Tel.:  +1-210-536-5595;  fax:  +1-210-536-5382. 

E-mail  address:  ronald.seaman@afrlars.brooks.af.mil 
(R.L.  Seaman) 


changes  in  behavior  to  occur  within  a  short  time  after 
administration.  Indeed,  depending  on  dose  level  clinical 
signs  are  observed  a  few  hours  after  a  single  dose 
[1,6,10,12].  However,  few  quantitative  behavioral  measures 
have  been  reported  after  only  one  or  two  doses  of  3-NP.  Rat 
locomotor  activity  is  increased  at  7  h  after  one  and  two 
injections  of  10  mg/kg  [5].  After  two  20  mg/kg  daily 
doses,  rat  acoustic  startle  amplitude  is  increased  and  the 
prepulse  inhibition  (PPI)  of  the  startle  is  diminished  at  7 
days  after  the  second  dose,  and  amphetamine-induced 
stereotypy  is  reduced  at  21  days  [15]. 

As  part  of  a  project  to  study  the  influence  of  electromag¬ 
netic  fields  on  neurodegeneration,  we  wished  to  establish  an 
animal  model,  such  as  a  single  administration  of  3-NP  to  the 
rat,  which  allows  a  single  exposure  to  the  fields  to  be  made 
during  ongoing  degeneration  processes.  Since  the  striatum 
plays  a  major  role  in  movement  initiation  and  acoustic  star¬ 
tle  PPI  [13,14],  locomotor  activity  and  the  PPI  were  selected 
as  behavioral  endpoints  that  might  be  modified  as  a  result  of 
3-NP  action  on  the  rat  caudate-putamen.  Due  to  the  clinical 
signs  as  well  as  the  altered  brain  chemistry  and  structure 
occurring  within  a  few  hours  of  injection,  we  decided  to  use 
a  nominal  interval  of  3.5  h  between  injection  and  behavioral 
measurements. 

A  total  of  52  male  Sprague-Dawley  rats  (Charles  River, 


0304-3940/00/$  -  see  front  matter  ©  2000  Elsevier  Science  Ireland  Ltd.  All  rights  reserved. 
Pll:  SO 30 4-3 94 0(00)0 07 90- 4 


184 


ft L  Seaman  /  Neuroscience  Letters  280  (2000)  183-186 


Portage)  weighing  555  ±  58  g  (mean  ±  SD)  and  16-24 
weeks  of  age  (3.8-5 .4  months,  average  4.6  months)  were 
tested.  Single  doses  of  10,  15  and  20  mg/kg  3-NP  (Sigma) 
were  tested  (1  ml/kg).  Injection  solutions  were  prepared  in 
sterile  distilled  water  with  pH  adjusted  to  7.4  with  1  N 
NaOH.  Sterile  saline  (1  ml/kg)  was  given  for  the  0  mg/kg 
control  dose.  Injections  were  administered  i.p.  3-6  h  after 
lights  on  in  a  12/12  light/dark  cycle. 

Activity  was  tested  by  placing  the  animal  in  a  clean  38.5  X 
38.5  cm  acrylic  arena  with  24  cm  walls  and  ten  light  beams  in 
the  horizontal  plane.  The  number  of  beam  interruptions 
caused  by  animal  movement  was  used  as  the  measure  of 
activity.  Activity  was  measured  the  day  before  injection  for 
10  min  to  insure  that  pre-injection  activity  was  not  signifi¬ 
cantly  different  among  the  four  dose  groups.  Three  animals  of 
an  original  55  were  excluded  from  use  because  of  unaccep¬ 
tably  low  pre-injection  activity  levels.  Post-injection  activity 
was  measured  for  5  min  starting  2.9-4.8  h  (3.6  h  average) 
after  injection. 

The  whole-body  startle  response  of  an  animal  was 
measured  after  activity  testing.  An  animal  was  placed  in 
a  clean  cylindrical  holder  in  a  sound-attenuating  chamber 
with  light  and  fan  on  (San  Diego  Instruments,  CA).  A  23- 
min  startle  testing  session  began  with  a  5 -min  acclimation 
period  with  70-dBA  background  noise.  Three  40-ms  star¬ 
tling  noise  bursts  of  120  dBA  were  then  presented  and  the 
results  discarded.  Subsequent  startle  trials  were  presented 
in  seven  iterations  of  five  types  of  trials:  no  prepulse  (0 
dBA)  and  prepulses  1,  3,  6,  or  12  dBA  above  background 
noise  level.  Each  prepulse  was  a  20-ms  noise  burst  deliv¬ 
ered  100  ms  (onset  to  onset)  before  a  40-ms  startling  stimu¬ 
lus.  Trial  type  was  randomized  within  each  iteration.  Inter¬ 
trial  intervals  were  randomized  over  all  38  trials  and  had  a 
mean  of  29  s.  PPI  was  calculated  for  each  animal  for  each 
prepulse  intensity  from  respective  averaged  peak  response 
amplitudes. 

Data  are  plotted  as  means  and  standard  errors  of  the 
means.  Analysis  of  variance  (ANOVA)  and  Newman- 
Keuls  pair-wise  comparisons  were  performed  with  GB- 
STAT  software  (v5.4,  Dynamic  Microsystems).  A  value 
of  P  <  0.05  was  set  as  the  criterion  for  statistical  signifi¬ 
cance. 

Animals  that  received  3-NP  exhibited  clinical  signs  of 
intoxication  starting  approximately  1.5  h  after  injection. 
Signs  common  to  all  doses  included  vacuous  chewing, 
tremor,  somnolence,  and  fixed  gaze;  these  corresponded 
roughly  to  Stage  I  of  the  system  used  by  Hamilton  and 
Gould  [10,12].  At  the  two  higher  doses  these  signs  were 
followed  by  periods  of  staggering  locomotion  (Stage  II) 
and  then,  in  some  cases,  recumbency,  postural  rigidity, 
and  rapid  respiration  (Stage  III).  Signs  occurred  earlier 
and  more  intensely  for  20  mg/kg  3-NP,  with  animals  that 
exhibited  Stage  III  signs  often  not  surviving.  Survival  rates 
of  100,  92, 71,  and  64%  at  3.5  h  for  0, 10, 15  and  20  mg/kg, 
respectively,  resulted  in  fewer  animals  being  available  for 
testing  at  the  higher  doses. 


3-NP  Dose  (mg/kg) 

Fig.  1.  Animal  activity  after  3-NP  administration  measured  as 
number  of  light  beam  interruptions  (mean  and  SEM).  n  =  12, 
11,10,  and  9  for  0, 10, 15,  and  20  mg/kg  3-NP,  respectively.  *,  P  < 
0.05  re  0  mg/kg  and  P  <  0.01  re  10  mg/kg. 

Fig.  1  shows  number  of  beam  interruptions  recorded  in 
the  post-injection  activity  test  with  n  =  12, 1 1, 10,  and  9  for 
0,  10,  15,  and  20  mg/kg  3-NP,  respectively.  Mean  activity 
for  10  mg/kg  was  larger  than  that  for  0  mg/kg;  mean  activ¬ 
ities  for  15  and  20  mg/kg  were  smaller.  ANOVA  showed  a 
significant  effect  of  3-NP  dose  (F(3,38)  =  3.85, 
P  <  0.0168).  Newman-Keuls  tests  showed  that  this  was 
due  to  the  mean  number  of  interruptions  for  the  20  mg/kg 
dose  being  significantly  smaller  than  the  means  for  0  and  10 
mg/kg  doses.  However,  the  20  mg/kg  mean  was  not  different 
from  the  15  mg/kg  mean.  Means  for  0,  10,  and  15  mg/kg 
were  not  significantly  different  from  one  another. 

Mean  amplitude  of  the  whole-body  response  to  startling 
stimuli  with  no  prepulse  decreased  with  increased  3-NP 
dose  but  was  not  significantly  different  among  dose  groups 
(data  not  shown).  Fig.  2  shows  PPI  for  the  four  prepulse 
intensities  and  the  3-NP  doses  with  n  =  12,  11,  9,  and  7 
for  0,  10, 15,  and  20  mg/kg  3-NP,  respectively.  The  inhibi¬ 
tion  increased  with  piepulse  intensity  as  expected,  with  all 
means  for  1  and  3  dBA  not  being  different  from  zero  (t- 
tests).  For  6  dBA,  mean  PPI  for  the  three  non-zero  3-NP 
doses  were  28-42%;  for  12  dBA,  57-59%.  These  means 
were  smaller  than  the  two  means  for  0  mg/kg,  67  and 
83%,  respectively.  Repeated  measures  ANOVA  showed 
that  interaction  between  prepulse  intensity  and  3-NP  dose 
was  not  significant  (F(9,105)  =  1.09,  P  =  0.37).  The 
ANOVA  also  indicated  that  the  main  effect  of  prepulse 
intensity  was  significant  (F(3,105)  =  54.9,  P  <  0.0001) 
but  that  the  main  effect  of  3-NP  dose  (F(3,35)  =  1.46, 
P  =  0.24)  was  not  Newman-Keuls  tests  showed  that 
mean  PPIs  at  6  and  12  dBA  were  significantly  larger  than 
for  1  and  3  dBA  for  each  dose  except  for  the  PPIs  for  15  and 
20  mg/kg  at  6  dBA.  However,  the  PPIs  for  6  and  12  dBA 
were  not  significantly  different  across  the  four  doses. 

Given  that  clinical  signs  occurred  to  some  degree  after  all 
three  3-NP  doses,  changes  in  the  measured  endpoints  were 
not  unexpected.  All  endpoints  were  more  variable  after  3- 


ft L  Seaman  /Neuroscience  Letters  280  (2000)  183-186 


185 


(tiBA  above  background) 

Fig.  2.  Prepulse  inhibition  (in  percent)  of  acoustic  startle  after  3- 
NP  administration  (mean  and  SEM)  for  four  prepulse  intensities. 
n  =  12, 1 1#  9,  and  7  for  0, 10, 15,  and  20  mg/kg  3-NP,  respectively. 

NP,  consistent  with  previously  reported  differences  in 
animal  susceptibility  to  this  toxin  [1,11,12,15].  An  indica¬ 
tion  of  overall  lowered  energy  during  the  testing  is  a 
previously  reported  decrease  in  body  temperature  of  1- 
3°C  1-6  h  after  30  mg/kg  3-NP  s.c.  [17].  The  reduced 
mean  spontaneous  activity  after  20  mg/kg  3-NP  likely 
reflected  a  combination  of  lowered  energy  (SDH)  levels 
and  consequent  short-term  changes  in  neural  processing. 
The  lack  of  significant  change  in  activity  after  10  and  15 
mg/kg  3-NP  might  indicate  unaltered  energy  levels  at  the 
time  of  testing  or  effects  of  lowered  energy  and  altered 
neural  processing  that  offset  each  other. 

The  PPI  of  acoustic  startle  is  more  sensitive  to  sensori¬ 
neural  changes  than  to  neuromuscular  effects  of  other  toxins 
[9].  Hence,  the  tendency  toward  smaller,  but  statistically 
non-significant  change  in,  PPI  at  6  and  12  dBA  was  more 
likely  due  to  alteration  of  the  neural  circuit  subserving  the 
PPI  [14]  than  to  muscle  weakness.  At  7  days  after  a  second 
20  mg/kg  3-NP  dose,  PPI  of  about  58%  for  prepulses  of  4 
and  5  dBA  above  background  was  found  to  be  significantly 
smaller  than  control  values  (about  75%)  for  animals  with 
gross  striatal  lesions  [15].  Also,  a  similar  difference  was 
seen  after  two  15  mg/kg  doses,  which  did  not  produce 
gross  lesions.  The  tendency  for  reduced  PPI  here  for  6  and 
12  dBA  prepulses  is  qualitatively  similar  to  these  previous 
results. 

The  results  here  for  activity  and  startle  are  consistent  with 
the  primary  site  of  3-NP  neurotoxicity  being  in  the  caudate- 
putamen,  which  is  involved  in  movement  initiation  and  star¬ 
tle  PPI.  Based  on  these  results,  the  functioning  of  neural 
circuits  underlying  rat  exploratory-type  locomotor  activity, 
and  possibly  acoustic  startle  PPI,  appears  to  start  changing 


at  or  before  3.5  h  after  systemic  administration  of  3-NP, 
concurrent  with  reported  early  changes  in  brain  chemistry 
and  morphology. 

B.  Wohlfeld,  M.  Gonzalez,  and  E.  Wood  provided  invalu¬ 
able  technical  support.  J.  DeLorge  and  G.  Mastroianni 
provided  helpful  comments  on  the  manuscript.  N.  Swerdlow 
gave  advice  on  developing  the  acoustic  startle  test.  This 
work  is  supported  by  the  US  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Material  Command  under  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069 
awarded  to  McKessonHBOC  BioServices.  The  views, 
opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those 
of  the  author(s)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy  or  decision  unless 
so  designated  by  other  documentation.  In  conducting 
research  using  animals,  the  investigator(s)  adhered  to  the 
‘Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals’ 
prepared  by  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal  Resources, 
National  Research  Council  (Washington,  DC:  National 
Academy  Press,  1996). 

[1]  Alexl,  T.,  Hughes,  P.E.,  KnQsel,  B.  and  Tobin,  A.T.,  Meta¬ 
bolic  compromise  with  systemic  3-nitropropionic  acid 
produces  striatal  apoptosis  in  Sprague-Dawley  rats  but 
not  in  BALB/c  ByJ  mice.  Exp.  Neurol.,  153  (1998)  74-93. 

[2]  Alexi,  T.,  Hughes,  P.E.,  Fault,  R.L.M.  and  Williams,  C.E.,  3- 
Nitropropionic  acid's  lethal  triplet:  Cooperative  pathways 
of  neurodegeneration.  NeuroReport,  9  (1998)  R57-R64. 

[3]  Binienda,  Z.  and  Kim,  C.S.,  Increase  in  levels  of  total  free 
fatty  acids  in  rat  brain  regions  following  3-nitropropionic 
administration.  Neurosci.  Lett.,  230  (1997)  199-201. 

[4]  Binienda,  Z.,  Simons,  C.,  Hussain,  S.,  Slikker  Jr,  W.  and  Ali, 
S.F.,  Effect  of  acute  exposure  to  3-nitropropionic  acid  on 
activities  of  endogenous  antioxidants  in  the  rat  brain. 
Neurosci.  Lett.,  251  (1998)  173-176. 

[5]  Borlongan,  C.V.,  Koutouzis,  T.K.,  Freeman,  T.B.,  Cahill, 
D.W.  and  Sanberg,  P.R.,  Behavioral  pathology  induced  by 
repeated  systemic  injections  of  3-nitropropionic  acid 
mimics  the  motoric  symptoms  of  Huntington's  disease. 
Brain  Res.,  697  (1995)  254-257. 

[6]  Bossi,  S.R.,  Simpson,  J.R.  and  Isacson,  0„  Age  dependence 
of  striatal  neuronal  death  caused  by  mitochondrial  dysfunc¬ 
tion.  NeuroReport,  4  (1993)  73-76. 

[7]  Brouillet,  E.,  Guyot,  M.C.,  Mittoux,  V.,  Altairac, S.,  Conde,  F., 
Palfi,  S.  and  Hantraye,  P.,  Partial  inhibition  of  brain  succi¬ 
nate  dehydrogenase  by  3-nitropropionic  acid  is  sufficient  to 
initiate  striatal  degeneration  in  rat.  J.  Neurochem.,  70 
(1998)  794-805. 

[8]  Chyi,  T.  and  Chang,  C.,  Temporal  evolution  of  3-nitropro¬ 
pionic  acid-induced  neurodegeneration  in  the  rat  brain  by 
T2-weighted,  diffusion-weighted,  and  perfusion  magnetic 
resonance  imaging.  Neuroscience,  92  (1999)  1035-1041. 

[9]  Crofton,  K.M.,  Reflex  modification  and  the  detection  of  toxi¬ 
cant-induced  auditory  dysfunction.  Neurotoxicol.  Teratol., 
12  (1990)  461-468. 

[10]  Gould,  D.H.,  Wilson,  M.P.  and  Hamar,  D.W.,  Brain  enzyme 
and  clinical  alterations  induced  in  rats  and  mice  by  nitroa- 
liphatic  toxicants.  Toxicol.  Lett.,  27  (1985)  83-89. 

[11]  Guyot,  M.C.,  Hantraye,  P.,  Dolan,  R.,  Palfi,  S.,  Maziere,  M. 
and  Brouillet,  E.,  Quantifiable  bradykinesia,  gait  abnormal¬ 
ities  and  Huntington's  disease-like  striatal  lesions  in  rats 
chronically  treated  with  3-nitropropionic  acid. 
Neuroscience,  79  (1997)  45-56. 


186 


R.L.  Seaman  /  Neuroscience  Letters  280  (2000)  183-186 


[12]  Hamilton,  B.F.  and  Gould,  D.H.,  Nature  and  distribution  of 
brain  lesions  in  rats  intoxicated  with  3-nitropropionic  acid: 
A  type  of  hypoxic  (energy  deficient)  brain  damage.  Acta 
Neuropathol.,  72  (1987)  286-297. 

[13]  Hauber,  W.,  Involvement  of  basal  ganglia  transmitter 
systems  in  movement  initiation.  Prog.  Neurobiol.,  56 
(1998)  507-540. 

[14]  Kodsi,  M.H.  and  Swerdlow,  N.R.,  Prepulse  inhibition  in  the 
rat  is  regulated  by  ventral  and  caudodorsal  striato-pailidal 
circuitry.  Behav.  Neurosci.,  109(1995)912-928. 

[15]  Kodsi,  M.H.  and  Swerdlow,  N.R.,  Mitochondrial  toxin  3- 
nitropropionic  acid  produces  startle  reflex  abnormalities 
and  striatal  damage  in  rats  that  model  some  features  of 
Huntington's  disease.  Neurosci.  Lett.,  231  (1997)  103- 
107. 

[16]  Matthews,  R.T.,  Yang,  L.,  Jenkins,  B.G.,  Ferrante,  R.J., 


Rosen,  B.R.,  Kaddurah-Daouk,  R.  and  Beal,  M.F.,  Neuropro- 
tective  effects  of  creatine  and  cyclocreatine  in  animal 
models  of  Huntington's  disease.  J.  Neurosci.,  18  (1998) 
156-163. 

[17]  Nony,  P.A.,  Scallet,  A.C.,  Rountree,  R.L.,  Ye,  X.  and 
Binienda,  Z.,  3-nitropropionic  acid  (3-NPA)  produces 
hypothermia  and  inhibits  histochemical  labeling  of  succi¬ 
nate  dehydrogenase  (SDH)  in  rat  brain.  Metab.  Brain  Dis., 
14  (1999)  88-94. 

[18]  Schmued,  L.C.  and  Slikker  Jr,  W.,  Biack-Gold:  a  simple, 
high-resolution  histochemical  label  for  normal  and  patho¬ 
logical  myelin  in  brain  tissue  sections.  Brain  Res.,  837 
(1999)  289-297. 

[19]  WGIIer,  U.,  Young,  A.B.,  Penney,  J.B.  and  Beal,  M.F.,  3- 
Nitropropionic  acid  toxicity  in  the  striatum.  J.  Neurochem., 
63(1994)  1772-1781. 


INT.  J.  RADIAT.  BIOL  1999,  VOL.  75,  NO.  1,  115-120 


Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of 
mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 

VIJAYALAXMIt* * * §  R.  L.  SEAMANJ,  M.  L.  BELTJ,  J.  M.  DOYLE+  S.  P.  MATHUR+  and 
T.J.  PRIHODA§ 

(Received  15  May  1998;  accepted  18  August  1998) 


Abstract. 

Purpose .  To  investigate  the  extent  of  genetic  damage  in  the 
peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to 
ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation  (UWBR). 

Materials  and  methods :  CF-1  male  mice  were  exposed  to  UWBR 
for  15  min  at  an  estimated  whole-body  average  specific  absorption 
rate  of  37  mW kg^1 .  Groups  of  untreated  control  and  positive 
control  mice  injected  with  mitomycin  G  were  also  included  in 
the  study.  After  various  treatments,  half  of  the  mice  were  killed 
at  18h,  and  the  other  half  at  24  h.  Peripheral  blood  and  bone 
marrow  smears  were  examined  to  determine  the  extent  of 
genotoxicity,  as  assessed  by  the  presence  of  micronuclei  (MN)  in 
polychromatic  erythrocytes  (PCE). 

Results :  The  percentages  of  PCE  and  the  incidence  of  MN  per 
2000  PCE  in  both  tissues  in  mice  killed  at  1 8  h  were  similar  to 
the  frequencies  observed  in  mice  terminated  at  24  h.  There  were 
no  significant  differences  in  the  percentage  of  PCE  between 
control  and  the  mice  with  or  without  UWBR  exposure;  the 
group  mean  values  ( ±  standard  deviation)  were  in  the  range  of 
3.1  ±0.14  to  3.2±0.23  in  peripheral  blood,  and  49.0  +  3.56  to 
52.3  +  4.02  in  bone  marrow.  The  mean  incidence  of  MN  per 
2000  PCE  in  control  and  in  mice  with  or  without  UWBR 
exposure  ranged  from  7.7  +  2.00  to  9.7  +  2.54  in  peripheral  blood 
and  7.4  +  2.32  to  10.0  +  3.27  in  bone  marrow.  Pairwise  compar¬ 
ison  of  the  data  did  not  reveal  statistically  significant  differences 
between  the  control  and  mice  with  or  without  UWBR  exposure 
groups  (excluding  positive  controls). 

Conclusion :  Under  the  experimental  conditions  tested,  there  was 
no  evidence  for  excess  genotoxicity  in  peripheral  blood  or  bone 
marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWBR. 

1.  Introduction 

Electromagnetic  devices  capable  of  producing 
signals  with  pulse  widths  of  a  few  nanoseconds  and 
electric  field  amplitudes  exceeding  100  000 Vm"1 


*  Author  for  correspondence. 

| Department  of  Radiology,  Division  of  Radiation  Oncology, 
and  Center  for  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology,  The 
University  of  Texas  Health  Science  Center  at  San  Antonio,  7703 
Floyd  Curl  Drive,  San  Antonio,  TX  78284,  USA.  e-mail: 
vijay@uthscsa.edu 

J  McKesson  BioServices  and  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch, 
US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base, 
San  Antonio,  TX  78235,  USA. 

§  Department  of  Pathology,  The  University  of  Texas  Health 
Science  Center  at  San  Antonio,  7703  Floyd  Curl  Drive,  San 
Antonio,  TX  78284,  USA. 


are  being  considered  in  the  USA  and  elsewhere  for 
use  in  warfare  settings,  for  example  electronic  coun¬ 
termeasures  to  identify  and  track  incoming  armour- 
piercing  rounds  that  threaten  ground  vehicles  (Fuerer 
1991,  Taylor  1991,  Toevs  etal.  1992).  Ultra-wideband 
electromagnetic  radiation  (UWBR)  in  the  radiofre¬ 
quency  range  is  in  this  category  of  signal,  and  can 
be  characterized  as  having  a  large  band  spread  of 
up  to  2  GHz,  a  rapid  rise  time  of  less  than  0.2  ns, 
and  a  pulse  duration  of  a  few  ns.  It  is  conceivable 
that  personnel  could  be  exposed  to  such  signals  while 
operating  and/ or  working  in  the  vicinity  of  radar  or 
communications-jamming  equipment,  and/or  by 
similar  friendly  or  enemy  equipment  (Sherry  et  al. 
1995).  Such  potential  exposure  to  UWBR  raises 
issues  related  to  possible  bioeffects  and/or  possible 
human  health  hazards. 

Recently,  Albanese  et  al.  (1994)  described  possible 
useful  applications  of  ultra-short  electromagnetic 
pulses  in  medical  settings.  These  included  electropor¬ 
ation,  which  would  allow  chemotherapeutic  drugs  to 
enter  more  readily  and  kill  cancer  cells,  and  the 
development  of  new  techniques  for  imaging  tissue 
structures.  The  authors  also  associated  their  theoret¬ 
ical  considerations  with  undesirable  health  effects 
resulting  from  potential  tissue  damage  mechanisms, 
including  macromolecular  conformation  changes, 
alterations  in  chemical  reaction  rates,  membrane 
effects  and  temperature-mediated  adverse  responses. 
Merritt  et  al.  ( 1 995)  subsequently  challenged  most  of 
these  associations,  and  indicated  the  limited  availabil¬ 
ity  of  experimental  (biological)  data.  The  small 
number  of  published  scientific  reports  has  not  indi¬ 
cated  any  discernible  physiological  or  behavioural 
change  in  rats  and  monkeys  exposed  to  UWBR 
(Sherry  et  al  1995,  Walters  et  al.  1995). 

The  potential  of  UWBR  exposure  to  induce  gen¬ 
etic  damage,  if  any,  is  important  for  risk  assessment 
related  to  mutation  and  cancer  induction.  Recently, 
Pakhomova  et  al.  (1997,  1998)  reported  an  absence 
of  mutagenic  effects  of  UWBR  exposure  on  the  D7 
strain  of  the  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  As  far  as  is 
known,  an  examination  of  the  genetic  effects  of 


International  Journal  of  Radiation  Biology  ISSN  0955-3002  print/ISSN  1362-3095  online  ©  1999  Taylor  &  Francis  Ltd 

http://www.tandf.co.uk/JNLS/rab.htm 
http:/ / www.taylorandfrancis.com/JNLS/rab.htm 


116 


Vijayalaxmi  et  al. 


UWBR  exposure  of  mammalian  cells,  either  in  vitro 
or  in  vivo ,  has  not  been  reported  in  the  literature. 
The  rodent  micronucleus  (MN)  test  has  been  widely 
accepted  as  an  in  vivo  test  system  for  detecting 
genotoxic  agents,  and  has  become  a  standard  assay 
used  in  regulatory  testing  in  several  countries  (Auletta 
et  al  1993,  Health  Protection  Branch  Genotoxicity 
Committee  (Canada)  1993,  Kirkland  1993,  Sofuni 
1993).  The  objective  of  the  present  investigation  was 
to  assess  the  extent  of  genetic  damage,  as  determined 
from  the  incidence  of  MN,  in  peripheral  blood  and 
bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWBR  for 
15  min. 

2.  Materials  and  methods 

A  protocol  approved  by  the  Institutional  Animal 
Care  and  Use  Committee  of  the  United  States  Air 
Force  Armstrong  Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base 
was  followed.  The  Standard  Operating  Procedures 
were  compatible  with  the  requirements  of  the  United 
States  National  Toxicology  Program. 

2.1.  UWBR  exposure 

The  UWBR  exposure  facility  is  located  at  Brooks 
Air  Force  Base  in  San  Antonio.  Mice  were  exposed 
to  UWBR  pulses  in  a  giga-transverse-electromagnetic 
(GTEM)  cell  comprised  of  a  tapered  rectangular 
coaxial  transmission  line  with  a  square  cross  sec¬ 
tion  (originally  constructed  by  Sandia  National 
Laboratory,  Albuquerque,  NM,  USA).  The  outer 
ground  conductor  had  a  square  cross  section  measur¬ 
ing  11-71  cm  inside  the  cell  (the  range  results  from 
the  tapered  structure  of  the  cell).  The  centre  con¬ 
ductor  was  7.8-56.3  cm  wide  in  the  same  region, 
and  was  2.6  cm  thick  throughout  the  cell.  An  approxi¬ 
mate  volume  of  20  x  20  x  40  cm  was  available  on 
each  broad  side  of  the  centre  conductor  for  placing 
a  single  mouse  in  a  circular  plastic  holder.  A  modified 
RG-220  coaxial  cable  connected  the  GTEM  cell  to 
a  high  voltage  source.  Ionization  of  pressurized  nitro¬ 
gen  gas  in  a  spark  gap  in  the  cable  resulted  in  high 
voltage  pulses  that  led  to  UWBR  pulses  in  the  GTEM 
cell.  In  this  system,  the  electric  field  was  directed 
from  the  centre  conductor  to  the  ground  conductor. 

The  propagating  UWBR  pulses  in  the  GTEM  cell 
were  monitored  during  exposures  of  mice  using 
signals  from  a  time-derivative  (D-dot)  probe  mounted 
in  the  wall  of  the  cell.  Stored  wave  forms  were  later 
processed  using  a  correction  algorithm  to  give  the 
electric  field  strength  versus  time  (Bao  1997).  Pulses 
were  triggered  at  600  pulses  per  second  by  an  external 
pulse  generator.  The  peak  amplitude  of  the  UWBR 
pulse  was  91.l-102.9kVm”1  at  the  location  of  the 


centre  of  the  animal  holder.  The  pulse  rise  time 
was  146.6-166.1  ps  and  the  pulse  duration  was 
0.92-0.97  ns.  The  whole-body  specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR)  was  estimated  to  be  ^mWkg”1.  This 
was  done  by  integrating  the  product  of  the  power 
spectrum,  computed  from  the  corrected  UWBR  pulse 
field  strength,  and  the  normalized  SAR  (W  kg”1  per 
mWcm”2)  for  a  prolate  spheroidal  model  of  a 
medium-sized  mouse  (Durney  et  al  1986)  in  the 
frequency  domain.  The  average  for  k-  and  H- 
polarizations  of  the  animal  was  used  to  account  for 
the  movement  of  the  animal  in  the  UWBR  field. 


2.2.  Mice  and  maintenance 

CF-1  male  mice  aged  10-12  weeks  old,  weighing 
33-48  g,  were  obtained  from  Charles  River 
Laboratories  (Portage,  MI,  USA).  Upon  arrival  they 
were  housed  two  to  four  per  cage  in  an  animal 
facility  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base.  The  room  was 
maintained  at  a  temperature  of  22+l°C  and  a 
relative  humidity  of  50  +  5%,  with  an  air-flow  rate  of 
10-15  exchanges  per  hour.  A  time-controlled  system 
provided  a  daily  05.00-17.00  light  and  17.00-05.00 
dark  cycle.  All  mice  were  given  ad  libitum  access  to 
Purina  rodent  chow  and  to  tap  water. 

After  a  10  day  quarantine  period,  a  total  of  61 
mice  were  distributed  into  separate  groups  using  a 
randomized  block  design.  There  were  nine  mice  in 
the  untreated  control  group,  12  mice  in  the  positive 
control  group  and  10  mice  in  each  of  UWBR  expo¬ 
sure  groups.  Each  mouse  was  placed  in  a  circular 
plastic  holder  that  did  not  restrict  the  movement  of 
the  animal.  The  mouse  in  its  holder  was  placed  in 
the  GTEM  cell  for  UWBR  exposure  for  15  min  at 
600  pulses  per  second  ( +  UWBR),  or  to  no  pulses 
(  —  UWBR);  the  exposure  was  carried  out  at  room 
temperature,  one  mouse  at  a  time.  The  selection  of 
the  15  min  duration  of  the  UWBR  exposure  was 
based  on  an  earlier  observation  (unpublished),  which 
indicated  a  potential  UWBR  exposure  time-related 
effect  on  morphine-induced  analgesia  in  these  mice. 
After  each  UWBR  exposure,  the  holder  was  removed 
from  the  GTEM  cell  and  the  mouse  was  taken  out. 
All  mice  were  returned  to  their  cages  and  kept  in  the 
animal  facility  until  sacrifice  at  18  or  24  h  when  the 
peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  were  col¬ 
lected  for  the  genetox  study  reported  here. 

2.3.  Positive  controls 

Mice  in  this  group  were  given  an  i.p.  injection  of 
mitomycin  G  (MMC;  1  mg  kg” 1  body  weight)  (Sigma; 
St  Louis,  MO,  USA)  at  18  or  24  h  before  sacrifice. 


Micronuclei  in  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 


117 


MMG  is  a  known  clastogen  that  has  been  shown  to 
induce  MN  (Heddle  et  ai  1984). 

2.4.  Peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  smears 

From  each  group,  half  of  the  mice  were  killed  at 
18h,  and  the  remaining  half  at  24  h.  From  each 
mouse,  before  sacrifice,  a  small  drop  of  peripheral 
blood  was  collected  on  a  clean  microscope  slide  by 
snipping  the  end  of  the  tail.  A  thin  smear  was  made 
over  an  area  of  2-3  cm  by  pulling  the  blood  behind 
a  coverglass  held  at  a  45°  angle.  Following  sacrifice, 
bone  marrow  from  both  femurs  was  flushed  with 
0.5  ml  of  foetal  calf  serum  into  a  microfuge  tube 
using  a  1  ml  syringe  fitted  with  a  22  G  needle.  The 
cells  were  concentrated  by  gentle  centrifugation  at 
600£  for  1-3  min  and  a  small  drop  of  resuspended 
cells  was  placed  on  a  clean  microscope  slide  to  make 
a  smear  as  described  above.  All  smears  were  air- 
dried,  fixed  in  absolute  methanol  and  stained  using 
acridine  orange. 

Coded  slides  were  examined  under  x  1 000  magni¬ 
fication  using  a  fluorescence  microscope  equipped 
with  appropriate  filters.  Immature  erythrocytes  (PCE) 
were  identified  by  their  orange-red  colour,  mature 
erythrocytes  by  their  green  colour  and  the  MN  by 
their  yellowish  colour.  For  each  mouse,  1000  erythro¬ 
cytes  in  peripheral  blood  and  200  erythrocytes  in 
bone  marrow  were  examined  to  obtain  the  percent¬ 
age  of  PCE.  In  addition,  for  each  mouse,  2000 
consecutive  PCE  were  examined  in  peripheral  blood 
and  in  bone  marrow  to  determine  the  incidence 
of  MN.  Decoding  of  the  slides  was  done  after 
completing  the  microscopic  analysis. 

2.5.  Statistical  analysis 

The  statistical  methods  used  were  descriptive  stat¬ 
istics  of  mean,  standard  deviation  and  analysis  of 
variance  of  the  groups  used  in  the  experiment. 
Pairwise  multiple  comparisons  of  individual  means 
of  different  groups  were  done  to  compare  the  con¬ 
trols,  +  UWBR  and  —  UWBR  exposures,  and  MMC 
group  for  sacrifice  times  at  18  and  24  h.  Residuals 
were  analysed  to  determine  whether  the  best  skewness 
and  kurtosis  were  with  the  raw  data  or  the  usual 
transformations  for  small  percentages  and  for  small 
frequency  counts  (Zar  1974).  In  addition,  deleted 
residuals  versus  raw  residuals  were  plotted  to  verify 
that  no  one  observation  had  undue  influence  on  the 
results.  A  final  plot  of  residuals  versus  predicted 
values  was  used  to  verify  normality  of  distribution, 
homogeneity  of  variance  and  lack  of  outliers,  yielding 
a  valid  analysis. 


3,  Results 

The  mean  percentages  of  PCE  and  the  average 
incidence  of  MN  per  2000  PCE  for  the  mice  in  the 
control,  +  UWBR/  —  UWBR-exposed  and  positive 
control  groups  (killed  at  18  and  24  h)  are  shown 
in  table  1 . 

3.1.  Peripheral  blood 

The  percentages  of  PCE  in  the  control,  +UWBR 
and  —UWBR  mice  killed  at  18  and  24 h  were  all 
within  the  range  of  3.1+0.14  to  3.2  +  0.23  [p~ 
0.1326  for  the  overall  effect  of  UWBR).  The  positive 
control  mice  injected  with  MMC  exhibited  decreased 
percentages  of  PCE  when  killed  at  18  h  (2.9  +  0.14) 
and  at  24  h  (2.6  +  0.17). 

The  frequencies  of  MN  per  2000  PCE  in  control 
mice  killed  at  18  and  24  h  were  8.3  +  3.30  and  9.2 
+  2.68,  respectively.  The  indices  for  MN  per  2000 
PCE  in  +  UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice  killed 
at  18  and  24 h  were  similar,  ranging  from  7.7  +  2.00 


Table  1 .  The  percentages  of  polychromatic  erythrocytes  (PCE) 
and  the  incidence  of  micronuclei  (MN)  in  the  peripheral 
blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  radiation  (UWBR)  for  15  min. 


Group 

Group  mean*  Group  mean 

%  PCE  MN  per  2000  PCE 

(±SD)  (±SD) 

Peripheral  blood 

Mice  sacrificed  at  18  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

3.1  (0.17) 

8.3 

(3.30) 

UWBR- 

3.2  (0.23) 

7.7 

(2.00) 

UWBR  + 

3.1  (0.17) 

9.7 

(2.54) 

Mitomycin  C 

2.9  (0.14) 

99.2 

(3.31) 

Mice  sacrificed  at  24  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

3.1  (0.14) 

9.2 

(2.68) 

UWBR- 

3.2  (0.23) 

8.8 

(2.20) 

UWBR  + 

3.1  (0.20) 

9.4 

(2.88) 

Mitomycin  C 

2.6  (0.17) 

107.3 

(8.07) 

Bone  marrow 

Mice  sacrificed  at  1 8  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

49.0  (3.56) 

8.8 

(2.06) 

UWBR- 

51.4  (3.04) 

7.4 

(2.32) 

UWBR  + 

51.2  (2.61) 

8.7 

(2.00) 

Mitomycin  C 

44.6  (3.07) 

102.7 

(9.09) 

Mice  sacrificed  at  24  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

52.3  (4.02) 

9.8 

(2.86) 

UWBR- 

50.5  (3.55) 

8.1 

(2.28) 

UWBR  + 

50.0  (1.42) 

10.0 

(3.27) 

Mitomycin  C 

42.3  (2.14) 

114.8(14.88) 

*  For  each  mouse,  1000  consecutive  erythrocytes  in  the  peri¬ 
pheral  blood  and  200  consecutive  erythrocytes  in  the  bone 
marrow  were  examined. 


118 


Vijayalaxmi  et  al. 


to  9.7  ±2.54  (p~  0.0975  for  the  overall  effect  of 
UWBR).  The  positive  control  mice  treated  with 
MMC  exhibited  a  significantly  increased  incidence 
of  MN  per  2000  PGE  when  killed  at  both  18  h 
(99.2  +  3.31)  and  24h  (107.3  +  8.07)  (/>  =  0.0001). 

3.2.  Bone  marrow 

The  percentages  of  PGE  in  control  mice  killed  at 
18  and  24  h  were  49.0  +  3.56  and  52.3  +  4.02,  respect¬ 
ively.  In  +UWBR  and  —  UWBR-exposed  mice,  the 
percentage  of  PGE  (at  both  times  of  sacrifice)  ranged 
between  50.0+1.42  and  51.4  +  3.04  (/>  =  0.705  for 
the  overall  effect  of  UWBR).  The  positive  control 
mice  exhibited  a  decrease  in  the  percentage  of  PCE 
when  killed  at  18 h  (44.6  +  3.07)  and  at  24h 
(42.3  ±2. 14). 

The  frequencies  of  MN  per  2000  PCE  in  control 
mice  killed  at  18  and  24  h  were  8.8  +  2.06  and 
9.8  +  2.86,  respectively.  The  indices  for  MN  per  2000 
PCE  in  +UWBR  and  -UWBR-exposed  mice  ter¬ 
minated  at  18  and  24h  ranged  between  7.4  +  2.32 
and  10.0  +  3.27  (/>  =  0.072  for  the  overall  effect  of 
UWBR).  The  positive  control  mice  treated  with 
MMC  exhibited  significantly  increased  frequencies 
of  MN  per  2000  PCE  when  killed  at  both  18  h 
(102.7  +  9.09)  and  at  24h  (114.8+14.88)  (p  = 
0.0001). 

4.  Discussion 

In  mammals,  during  erythroblastosis,  for  a  still 
unknown  reason,  the  main  nucleus  is  expelled  and 
lagging  chromosomal  fragments  and/or  whole  chro¬ 
mosomes  that  are  not  incorporated  into  daughter 
nuclei  during  cell  division  persist  as  easily  recogniz¬ 
able  micronuclei  in  immature  erythrocytes  (PCE). 
The  first  appearance  of  MN  in  PCE  occurs  10-12  h 
after  a  clastogenic  exposure.  This  lag  period  results 
from  the  time  required  for  the  erythroblast  to  divide, 
to  expel  its  main  nucleus  to  become  the  polychro¬ 
matic  erythrocyte,  and  any  mitotic  delay  induced  by 
the  genotoxic  agent  (Heddle  et  al  1984).  Once 
induced,  the  MN  persists  in  the  PCE  for  about  30  h 
(Jenssen  and  Ramel  1978).  Hence,  the  clastogenic 
and/or  aneugenic  effect  of  a  given  treatment  can  be 
detected  at  any  point  during  this  time  interval 
(Heddle  et  al  1984).  The  main  requirement  of  the 
treatment  and/or  sampling  schedule  is  to  obtain  at 
least  one  sample  at  or  near  to  the  time  of  the 
maximum  incidence  of  micronucleated  PCE 
(MacGregor  et  al  1987).  In  the  present  study,  peri¬ 
pheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  were  examined 
at  18  and  24  h  following  UWBR  exposure. 

There  were  no  significant  differences  in  the 


percentage  of  PCE  between  the  controls  and  the 
+  UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice,  and  this 
indicates  that  the  time  required  for  nucleated  erythro¬ 
poietic  cells  to  become  PCE  is  not  altered  by  in  vivo 
exposure  of  mice  to  +UWBR  and  —UWBR  used 
in  this  study;  a  marked  reduction  in  the  frequency  of 
PCE  would  have  indicated  that  the  division  and 
maturation  of  the  nucleated  erythropoietic  cells  had 
been  inhibited  (MacGregor  et  al  1987). 

The  incidence  of  MN  observed  in  the  bone  marrow 
cells  of  control  mice  was  comparable  with  values 
reported  earlier  for  adult  CF-1  mice  (average  of 
4MN  per  1000  PCE)  (Okine  et  al  1983).  The 
influence  of  UWBR  exposure  on  the  incidence  of 
MN  per  2000  PCE  in  both  the  peripheral  blood  and 
bone  marrow  cells  determined  by  pairwise  analysis 
did  not  indicate  significant  differences  between  con¬ 
trol  and  +UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice.  In 
recently  published  genetoxicity  investigations, 
Pakhomova  et  al  (1997)  observed  no  significant 
difference  in  the  occurrence  of  chromosome  recomb¬ 
inations,  mutations  and  abnormal  colonies  (i.e. 
mitotic  crossovers,  segregations,  revertants  and  con- 
vertants)  between  the  UWBR-exposed  and  sham- 
exposed  D7  strain  of  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae;  in 
that  study,  the  UWBR  exposure  was  for  30  min,  with 
a  pulse  repetition  rate  of  16-600  Hz,  a  pulse  duration 
of  1.01-1.02  ns  and  a  pulse  rise  time  of  164-166  ps. 
This  gives  a  bandwidth  of  190%  (Foster  et  al  1995) 
and  a  peak  electric  field  strength  of  1 01-104  kV  m  ” 1 . 
In  a  subsequent  paper,  the  same  authors  reported 
no  significant  effect  of  similar  UWBR  exposure  on 
the  incidence  of  ultraviolet  light-  (UV;  2.25Jm-2 
s~l  and  a  total  exposure  of  100Jm~2)  induced 
reciprocal  and  non-reciprocal  recombination  or 
mutagenesis,  or  on  UV-induced  cytotoxicity 
(Pakhomova  et  al  1998). 

Earlier  investigations  in  rats,  mice  and  monkeys 
exposed  to  UWBR  did  not  demonstrate  any  altered 
physiological  responses.  Walters  et  al  (1995)  reported 
no  significant  differences  in  a  swimming  performance 
test,  in  blood  chemistry,  or  in  the  expression  of  c-fos 
protein  in  brain  cells,  between  control  rats  and 
those  exposed  to  UWBR  for  2  min  (pulse  repetition 
rate  60  Hz,  pulse  duration  7-8  ns,  bandwidth 
0.25-2.5  GHz,  peak  E-field  strength  250 kVm-1, 
and  far  field  equivalent  peak  power  density  of 
1.7  x  109  W  cm"2).  In  a  recent  report,  Jauchem  et  al 
(1997)  indicated  no  significant  differences  in  heart 
rate  and  arterial  blood  pressure  between  UWBR- 
exposed  (pulse  repetition  rate  1  kHz,  pulse  rise  time 
300  ps  and  E-field  strength  21kVm“1)  and  control 
rats.  Sherry  et  al  (1995)  exposed  six  monkeys  to 
UWBR  for  2  min  (pulse  frequency  60  Hz,  pulse 
duration  5-10  ns,  a  total  of  7200  pulses,  bandwidth 


Micronuclei  in  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 


119 


100  MHz  to  1.5  GHz,  peak  E-field  strength  of 
250  kVm-1,  and  a  whole-body  SAR  calculated  to 
be  0.5mWkg-1).  Each  monkey  was  exposed  to 
UWBR  twice,  with  an  interval  of  6  days  between 
exposures.  The  mean  primate  equilibrium  platform 
performance  for  all  monkeys  after  UWBR  exposure 
was  not  different  from  that  observed  before  each 
UWBR  exposure.  Seaman  et  al  (1998)  reported  that 
exposure  of  mice  to  UWBR  for  30  min  (60-600 
pulses  per  second,  pulse  duration  1.0  ns,  rise  time 
200  ps,  pulse  amplitude  1 00  kV  m  “ 1  and  a  calculated 
bandwidth  of  184.3%  (Foster  et  al  1995))  did  not 
result  in  significant  changes  in  normal  or  morphine- 
induced  nociception  and  locomotor  activity.  In  con¬ 
trast,  an  in  vitro  exposure  of  murine  macrophages  to 
UWBR  (with  similar  exposure  conditions),  under 
certain  conditions  of  macrophage  stimulation, 
resulted  in  an  increase  in  the  production  of  nitric 
oxide  (Seaman  et  al  1996). 

The  results  from  this  investigation  did  not  indicate 
excess  genotoxicity  in  both  peripheral  blood  and 
bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWBR  for 
15  min. 


Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  United  States 
Army  Medical  Research  and  Material  Command 
under  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to 
McKesson  BioServices,  and  by  the  United  States  Air 
Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research  grant  No. 
F49620-95- 1-0337.  The  authors  thank  T.-S.  Lu  for 
discussions  on  the  estimate  of  SAR  and  and  W.  D. 
Hurt  for  SAR  calculation. 

The  views,  opinions  and/ or  findings  contained  in 
this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not 
be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  the  Army 
position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by 
other  documentation. 

In  conducting  the  research  using  animals,  the 
investigator(s)  have  adhered  to  the  ‘Guide  for  the 
Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals’  prepared  by 
the  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
Animals  of  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal 
Resources,  National  Research  Council  (NIH 
Publication  §  86-23,  Rev.  1985). 

References 

Albanese,  R.,  Blaschak,  J.,  Medina,  R.  and  Penn,  J.,  1994, 
Ultrashort  elecromagnetic  signals:  biophysical  questions, 
safety  issues,  and  medical  opportunities.  Aviation  Space  and 
Environmental  Medicine,  65,  A116-A120. 

Auletta,  A.  E.,  Dearfield,  K.  L.  and  Cimino,  M.  C.,  1993, 
Mutagenicity  test  schemes  and  guidelines:  US  EPA  Office 


of  Pollution  Prevention  and  Office  of  Pesticide  Programs. 
Environmental  and  Molecular  Mutagenesis ,  21,  38-45. 

Bao,  J.-H.,  1997,  Picosecond  domain  electromagnetic  pulse 
measurements  in  an  exposure  facility:  an  error  compensa¬ 
tion  routine  using  deconvolution  techniques.  Review  of 
Scientific  Instruments,  68,  2221-2227. 

Durney,  C.  H.,  Massoudi,  H.  and  Iskander,  M.  F.,  1986, 
Radiofrequency  Radiation  Handbook ,  4th  edition,  Report 
TR-85-73  (San  Antonio,  TX:  USAF  School  of  Aerospace 
Medicine,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base). 

Foster,  P.  R.,  Halsey,  J.  D.  and  Hussain,  G.  M.,  1995, 
Ultra-wideband  antenna  technology.  In  Introduction  to 
Ultra-Wideband  Radar  Systems ,  edited  byj.  D.  Taylor  (Boca 
Raton,  FL:  GRG  Press),  pp.  145-286. 

Fuerer,  D.,  1991,  Electronic  countermeasures  in  wideband 
spectrum  systems.  In  Propagation  Limitations  for  Systems  Using 
Band  Spreading ,  (Neuilly  Sur  Seine:  AGARD)  LS-172, 
pp.  l-n. 

Health  Protection  Branch  Genotoxicity  Committee 
(Canada),  1993,  The  assessment  of  mutagenicity:  Health 
Protection  Branch  Mutagenicity  Guidelines.  Environmental 
and  Molecular  Mutagenesis ,  21,  15-37. 

Heddle,  J.  A.,  Stuart,  E.  and  Salamone,  M.  F.,  1984,  The 
bone  marrow  micronucleus  test.  In  Handbook  of  Mutagenicity 
Test  Procedures ,  edited  by  B.  J.  Kilbey,  M.  Legator,  W. 
Nichols  and  C.  Ramel  (Amsterdam:  Elsevier), 
pp.  441-457. 

Jauchem,  J.  R.,  Frei,  M.  R.,  Ryan,  K.  L.,  Merritt,  J.  H.  and 
Murphy,  M.  R.,  1997,  Lack  of  effects  on  heart  rate  and 
blood  pressure  in  ketamine-anesthetized  rats  briefly 
exposed  to  ultrawideband  electromagentic  pulses.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering  (in  press). 

Jenssen,  D.  and  Ramel,  C.,  1978,  Factors  affecting  the  induction 
of  micronuclei  at  low  doses  of  X-rays,  MMS  and  dimethyl- 
nitrosamine  in  mouse  erythroblasts.  Mutation  Research , 
58,  51-65. 

Kirkland,  D.  J.,  1993,  Genetic  toxicology  testing  requirements: 
official  and  unofficial  views  from  Europe.  Environmental 
and  Molecular  Mutagenesis ,  21,  8-14. 

MacGregor,  J.  T.,  Heddle,  J.  A.,  Hite,  M.,  Margolin,  B.  H., 
Ramel,  C.,  Salamone,  M.  F.,  Tice,  R.  R.  and  Wild,  D., 
1987,  Guidelines  for  the  conduct  of  micronucleus  assays 
in  mammalian  bone  marrow  erythrocytes.  Mutation 
Research ,  189,  103-112. 

Merritt,  J.  H.,  Kiel,  J.  L.  and  Hurt,  W.  D.,  1995, 
Considerations  for  human  exposure  standards  for  fast- 
rise-time  high-peak-power  electromagnetic  pulses.  Aviation 
Space  and  Environmental  Medicine ,  66,  586-589. 

Okine,  L.  K.  N.,  Ioannides,  C.  and  Parke,  D.  V.,  1983,  Studies 
on  the  possible  mutagenicity  of  b-adrenergic  blocker 
drugs.  Toxicology  Letters,  16,  167-174. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C. 
and  Akyel,  Y.,  1997,  Lack  of  genetic  effects  of  ultrawide¬ 
band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  yeast.  Electro-  and 
Magnetobiology ,  16,  195-201. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C. 
and  Akyel,  Y.,  1998,  Ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic 
radiation  does  not  affect  UV-induced  recombination  and 
mutagenesis  in  yeast.  Bioelectromagnetics ,  19,  128-131. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.  and  Mathur,  S.  P., 
1998,  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses  and  mor¬ 
phine-induced  changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in 
mice.  Physiology  and  Behavior  (in  press). 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Kiel,  J.  L.,  Parker,  J.  E.,  Grubbs,  T.  R.  and 
Prol,  H.  K.,  1996,  Effects  of  ultra-wide-band  pulses  on 
nitric  oxide  production  in  murine  macrophages.  Eighteenth 


120 


Micronuclei  in  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 


Annual  Meeting  of  The  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  (Frederick, 
MD,  The  Bioelectromagnetic  Society),  p.  213. 

Sherry,  C.  J.,  Buck,  D.  W.,  Walters,  T.  J.,  Brown,  G.  G. 
and  Murphy,  M.  R.,  1995,  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in 
non-human  primates  after  exposure  to  ultrawideband 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave  frequency 
range.  Radiation  Research ,  143,  93-97. 

Sofuni,  T.,  1993,  Japanese  guidelines  for  mutagenicity  testing. 
Environmental  and  Molecular  Mutagenesis ,  21,  2-7. 

Taylor,  J.  D.,  1991,  Ultrawideband  radar.  IEEE  International 
Microwaves  Symposium  Digest ,  MTT-S-1,  367-370. 


Toevs,  J.  W.,  Smith,  D.  R.,  Byrne,  D.  P.  and  Ross,  G.  F., 
1992,  UWB  radar  for  ground  vehicle  self  protection. 
IEEE  International  Microwaves  Symposium  Digest ,  MTT-S-3, 
1492-1494. 

Walters,  T.  J.,  Mason,  P.  A.,  Sherry,  C.  J.,  Steffen,  C.  and 
Merritt,  J.  H.,  1995,  No  detectable  bioeffects  following 
acute  exposure  to  high  peak  power  ultra-wide  band 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats.  Aviation  Space  and 
Environmental  Medicine ,  66,  562-567. 

Zar,  J.  H.,  1974,  Biostatistical  Analysis  (Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 
Prentice  Hall). 


RETINAL  EFFECTS  OF  HIGH  PEAK  POWER 
MICROWAVES  IN  RHESUS  MONKEYS 


177* 


;  HI 


U.S.  ARMY  MEDICAL  RESEARCH  DETACHMENT 
NAVAL  HEALTH  RESEARCH  CENTER  DETACHMENT 
U.S.  AIR  FORCE  RESEARCH  LABORATORY 


USAMRD  WRAIR  9907  006  TX 
NHRC-DET  99-01 
AFRL-HE-BR-TR-1 999-0231 


OF  Ttrb 


TRI-SERVICE  DIRECTED  ENERGY  BIOEFFECTS  COMPLEX 
BROOKS  AIR  FORCE  BASE 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


'  0?J 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


NOTICES 

This  research  was  in  part  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel 
Command  under  contract  No.  D AMD  1 7-94-C-4069  with  the  McKesson  BioServices,  by  funding 
from  the  Naval  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command,  Work  Unit  #63706.M00096, 
DN241243,  by  funding  from  the  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  Work  Unit  7757B330,  and  by 
U.S.  Air  Force  Contract  #41624-96-C-9009  with  Veridian. 

When  U.S.  Government  drawings,  specifications,  or  other  data  are  used  for  any  purpose 
other  than  in  connection  with  a  definitely  Government-related  procurement,  the  United  States 
Government  incurs  no  responsibility  or  any  obligation  whatsoever.  The  fact  that  the  government 
may  have  formulated  or  in  any  way  supplied  the  said  drawings,  specifications,  or  other  data,  is 
not  to  be  regarded  by  implication,  or  otherwise  in  any  manner  construed,  as  licensing  the  holder 
or  any  other  person  or  corporation;  or  as  conveying  any  rights  or  permission  to  manufacture,  use, 
or  sell  any  patented  invention  that  may  in  any  way  to  related  thereto. 

The  views,  opinions  and/or  finding  contained  in  this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and 
should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  the  Army,  Navy,  Air  Force  and  Defense 
position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by  other  documentation. 

The  animals  involved  in  this  study  were  procured,  maintained,  and  used  in  accordance 
with  Federal  Animal  Welfare  Act  and  the  "Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals," 
prepared  by  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal  Resources  —  National  Research  Council. 

Trade  names  of  materials  and/or  products  of  commercial  or  nongovernmental 
organizations  are  cited  as  needed  for  precision.  These  citations  do  not  constitute  official 
endorsement  or  approval  of  the  use  of  such  commercial  materials  and/or  products 

Reproduction  in  whole  or  in  part  is  permitted  for  any  purpose  of  the  United  States 
Government. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


CONTENTS 

Notices . i 

Contents . iii 

Summary . 1 

1 .  Background . 2 

2.  Material  and  Methods  . 9 

2. 1  Animal  Model . 9 

2.2  General  Procedures . 9 

2.3  Microwave  Exposures . 11 

2.4  Exposure  Facility . 11 

2.5  Ocular  Thermometric  Dosimetry  . 16 

2.6  Electroretinogram . 17 

2.7  Fundus  Photography,  Fluorescein  Angiography  (FA)  and  Indocyanine  Green 

Angiography  (ICG)  . 19 

2.8  Euthanization  and  Retinal  Histopathology  . 20 

2.9  Microdensitometry  of  the  Optical  Density  of  PAS  Reaction . 21 

2.10  Body  Temperature  Measurements  and  Exposure  Tolerance  . 21 

3.  Results  . 23 

3.1  Dosimetry . 23 

3.2  Behavioral  Responses  and  Signs  of  Intolerance  During  Microwave  Exposure . 25 

3.3  Thermal  Responses . 26 

3.4  Funduscopy  . 27 

3.5  Angiography . 28 

iii 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


3.6  Electroretinogram  . 30 

3.6.1  Rod  Response  . 34 

3.6.2  Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response . 36 

3.6.3  Oscillatory  Potentials  . 36 

3.6.4  30  Hz  Flicker  Response . 39 

3.6.5  Cone  Response . 39 

3.6.6  Naka-Rushton  Constants  . 44 

3.7  Histopathology  and  Optical  Density  of  PAS  reactions . 44 

3.8  Special  Cases,  B06Z  and  748Z . 49 

3.8.1  Monkey B06Z  . 49 

3.8.2  Monkey  748Z . 51 

4.  Discussion . 54 

4. 1  The  Present  Study . 54 

4.2  Effects  in  Current  Experiment . 54 

4.2.1  Enhanced  ERG  Amplitudes . 54 

4.2.2  Enhanced  PAS  Reactivity . 55 

4.3  Kues'  Results . 57 

4.4  SAR  versus  Peak-Power  to  Pulse-Length  Ratio . 57 

4.5  Present  Methods  and  Kues'  Methods . 59 

4.5.1  Dosimetry . 60 

4.5.2  Ketamine . 60 

4.5.3  Fluorophotometry . 61 

4.5.4  Transportation . 63 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


4.6  Conclusion . 63 

5.  References  . 64 

6.  Acknowledgement  and  Appendices . 71 

Acknowledgement . 71 

Appendix  1.  Results  of  Ocular  Dosimetry  in  A35Z . 72 

Appendix  2.  Results  of  Ocular  Dosimetry  in  A47Z . 73 

Appendix  3.  ERG-Rod  Response,  b-wave  Amplitude . 74 

Appendix  4.  ERG-Rod  Response,  b-wave  Implicit  Time . 76 

Appendix  5.  ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  b-wave  Amplitude  . 78 

Appendix  6.  ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  b-wave  Implicit  Time . 80 

Appendix  7.  ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  a-wave  Amplitude . 82 

Appendix  8.  ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  a-wave  Implicit  Time . 84 

Appendix  9.  ERG-Oscillatory  Pontentials . 86 

Appendix  10.  ERG-30  Hz  Flicker  Amplitude  . 88 

Appendix  11.  ERG-Cone  Response,  b-wave  Amplitude  . 90 

Appendix  12.  ERG-Cone  Response,  b-wave  Implicit  Time . 92 

Appendix  13.  ERG-Cone  Response,  a-wave  Amplitude . 94 

Appendix  14.  ERG-Cone  Response,  a-wave  Implicit  Time . 96 

Appendix  15.  Naka-Rushton  Function  Parameters  of  the  ERG  Scotopic  b-waves  . 98 

Appendix  16.  Summary  of  Histopathologic  Changes . 102 

Appendix  16  A.  Histopathology  (Sham) . 104 

Appendix  16B.  Histopathology  (4  W/kg) . 105 

Appendix  16C.  Histopathology  (8  W/kg) . 106 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16D.  Histopathology  (20  W/kg)  . 107 

Appendix  17.  PAS  Microdensitometry  and  Post-exposure  ERG  Photopic 

White  b-wave  Amplitude . 108 

Appendix  18.  Normal  Ranges  for  Standard  Flash  Electroretinogram 

in  Rhesus  Monkeys . 109 

Appendix  19.  Necropsy  Report  (B06Z)  . 110 

Appendix  20.  Summary  of  Rues'  Final  Report . 114 

Appendix  21.  Assessment  of  ERG  Amplitude  Reduction  in  Relation  to 

Histopathologic  Findings . 116 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


SUMMARY 

This  report  summarizes  the  Tri-Services  research  efforts  on  the  retinal  effects  of  1.25  GHz  high 
peak  power  microwave  exposure  in  Rhesus  monkeys.  Fundus  photographs,  retinal  angiograms, 
and  electroretinograms  (ERG)  were  used  prior  to  exposures  to  screen  for  normal  ocular  structure 
and  function,  and  after  exposures  as  endpoints  of  the  experiment.  Histopathology  of  the  retina 
was  used  as  an  additional  endpoint.  Nineteen  monkeys  were  randomized  to  receive  sham 
exposure  or  pulsed  microwave  exposures.  Microwaves  were  delivered  anteriorly  to  the  primate 
face  at  4,  8,  or  20  W/kg  spatially  averaged  retinal  specific  absorption  rates  (R-SAR).  The  pulse 
characteristics  was  1.04  MW  («  1.30  MW/kg  temporal  peak  R-SAR),  5.59  ps  pulse  length  at 
pulse  repetition  rates  of  0,  0.59,  1.18  and  2.79  Hz.  The  exposure  was  4  hours  per  day,  3  days  per 
week  for  3  weeks  for  a  total  of  9  exposures.  The  following  results  and  conclusions  are  a  synopsis 
of  data  from  17  monkeys;  the  remaining  2  monkeys  due  to  illness  or  high  ketamine  dose  used 
will  be  treated  as  special  cases  for  separate  evaluation  and  discussion.  The  pre-exposure  and 
post-exposure  fundus  pictures  and  angiograms  were  all  within  normal  limits  regardless  of 
treatment.  The  response  of  cone  photoreceptors  to  light  flash  was  enhanced  in  monkeys  exposed 
at  8  or  20  W/kg  R-SAR,  but  not  in  monkeys  exposed  at  4  W/kg  R-SAR.  In  addition,  increased 
Naka-Rushton  Rmax  of  scotopic  b-waves  and  decreased  log  k  were  noted  in  monkeys  exposed  at 
20  W/kg  R-SAR  indicating  increases  in  number  of  rod  ERG  generators  and  a  decrease  in  rod 
photoreceptor  sensitivity  to  light  flashes.  Retinal  histopathology  revealed  the  presence  of  an 
enhanced  glycogen  storage  in  photoreceptors  which  was  distributed  evenly  among  sham  (2/5),  8 
W/kg  (3/3)  and  20  W/kg  (2/5)  exposed  monkeys  with  the  exception  of  4  W/kg  (0/4)  exposed 
monkeys.  Supranormal  cone  photoreceptor  b-wave  was  R-SAR  dependent,  and  may  be  an  early 
indicator  of  mild  injury.  However,  no  evidence  of  degenerative  changes  and  ERG  depression 
was  seen  in  these  animals.  Thus,  we  concluded  that  retinal  injury  is  very  unlikely  at  4  W/kg,  and 
function  changes  that  occurred  at  higher  R-SAR  were  probably  reversible  since  we  saw  no 
histopathologic  correlation  with  ERG  changes. 


1 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


1.  BACKGROUND 

Personnel  in  both  civilian  and  military  occupational  settings  operate  a  vast  array  of  radio 
frequency  (RF,  frequency  =  300  kHz  to  300  GHz)  and  microwave  (frequency  =  300  MHz  to  300 
GHz)  emitting  devices.  Considering  the  number  and  kind  of  RF  emitting  devices  in  the  Army, 
Navy,  Air  Force,  and  civilian  sector,  the  possibilities  for  accidental  exposure  to  RF  radiation  can 
be  substantial.  Technological  advances  have  increased  the  output  power  of  RF  emitters  several 
fold  during  the  past  30  years  enhancing  concerns  over  the  inadvertent  human  exposure. 
Promulgating  safe  exposure  levels  for  personnel  working  with  high  power  RF  emitters  requires 
an  extensive  scientific  database.  At  the  present  time,  safe  exposure  standards  [IEEE  1999]  are 
based  on  in  vivo  effects  of  the  RF  radiation  on  rodents  and  non-human  primates.  Specifically, 
thresholds  to  disrupt  simple  operant  behaviors  during  acute  whole-body  RF  exposure  were 
determined  [D1  Andrea  et  al.  1977;  deLorge  1976;  deLorge  1979;  deLorge  and  Ezell  1980], 
Modifiers  (factor  of  10  and  50)  are  then  applied  to  the  behavior  disruption  threshold  to  derive  the 
current  two  tier  personnel  protection  guidelines. 

Previous  research  has  shown  that  exposure  to  microwave/RF  radiation  can  cause 
behavioral  changes  in  man  as  well  as  in  laboratory  animals.  The  changes  can  range  from 
perceptions  of  warmth  and  sound  to  high  body  temperature  resulting  in  grand  mal  seizures  and 
eventually  death.  Between  these  two  extremes,  trained  behavior  in  the  laboratory  can  be  either 
perturbed  or  stopped  outright.  Under  certain  conditions,  animals  will  escape  and  subsequently 
avoid  microwave/RF  exposure,  but  they  will  also  work  to  obtain  a  brief  burst  of  microwave/RF 
exposure  in  a  cold  environment.  During  the  past  two  decades,  much  research  has  been  devoted 
toward  gaining  an  understanding  of  biological  effects  of  microwave/RF  radiation  and 
mechanisms  that  produce  biological  effects. 

Generally,  microwave/RF-induced  alteration  of  biological  endpoints  other  than 
behavioral  disruption  requires  specific  absorption  rates  (SARs)  greater  than  the  4  W/kg  threshold 
known  to  disrupt  ongoing  behaviors.  The  eye  is  one  of  the  critical  organs  which  can  potentially 
be  injured  by  microwave  and  RF  radiation  exposure,  and  has  been  an  extensively  studied  organ 
[Paulsson  et  al.  1979],  The  eye  is  composed  of  three  major  components:  the  cornea,  lens  and 
retina.  Cornea  damage  is  a  painful  injury  while  lenticular  and  retinal  damage  can  lead  to 
blindness.  The  primary  mechanism  of  lenticular  injuries  caused  by  microwave  radiation  is 
heating  of  the  lens. 

To  date,  most  microwave  eye  research  has  concentrated  on  damage  to  the  lens  in  the  form 
of  lenticular  opacities  (cataracts).  Most  investigators  assumed  that  the  lens  is  more  susceptible  to 
microwave  induced  damage  than  other  parts  of  the  eye  due  to  its  lack  of  a  vascular  system.  It 
was  believed  that  the  lack  of  a  vascular  system  prevented  adequate  heat  loss  thus  exaggerating 
the  temperature  rise  in  the  lens  [Michaelson  and  Lin  1987],  Conclusions  drawn  from  quantitative 
data  collected  by  Carpenter  et  al.  [1979]  and  Guy  et  al.  [1975]  indicated  that  the  threshold  for 
lenticular  opacity  was  an  intra-lenticular  temperature  of  43  °C.  Depending  on  the  wavelength  of 
the  RF  radiation,  the  threshold  power  density  was  150  mW/cm2  or  higher  (estimated  lenticular 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


SARs  =  33  to  >100  W/kg)  for  100  minutes.  This  threshold  exposure  intensity  is  two  orders  of 
magnitude  higher  than  the  current  personnel  protection  guidelines  [ANSI  1982;  IEEE  1999], 
Michaelson  and  Lin  [1987]  concluded  in  a  review  that  similar  lenticular  effects  were  induced  by 
continuous  wave  (CW)  and  pulsed  microwaves  of  the  same  average  intensity,  i.e.,  no  difference 
between  pulsed  and  CW  exposures. 

A  series  of  experiments  was  performed  using  isolated  rat  lenses  exposed  in  vitro  to  24 
kW  918  MHz  pulses  at  various  pulse  repetition  rates  [Stewart-DeHaan  et  al.  1983;  1985; 
Creighton  et  al.  1987],  They  found  an  absolute  threshold  for  inducing  holes  in  lens  fibers  at  231 
W/kg  for  6  minutes.  It  has  been  suggested  that  the  mechanism  for  this  lenticular  damage  by  high 
power  pulsed  microwaves  was  due  to  a  thermal  elastic  expansion  and  the  resultant  pressure 
waves  in  the  lens  [Creighton  et  al.  1987],  However,  the  threshold  of  this  lenticular  cavitation 
(which  resulted  in  lenticular  opacity,  or  cataract)  was  approximately  29  times  higher  than  the 
ANSI  allowable  local  SAR  or  the  IEEE  allowable  local  SAR  in  a  controlled  environment  (8 
W/kg)  [ANSI  1982;  IEEE  1999], 

Corneal  endothelial  abnormalities  were  observed  by  Kues  et  al.  [1985],  in  cynomolgus 
monkeys.  They  concluded  that  pulsed  microwave  radiation  (2.45  GHz,  10  ps  pulse  width,  100 
pulses  per  second)  was  twice  as  effective  in  inducing  abnormalities  as  CW  microwaves  of  the 
same  average  power  density.  This  conclusion  was  based  on  a  dose-response  curve  from  one 
animal  for  each  microwave  treatment  lasting  4  hours,  a  variable  number  of  microwave 
treatments,  variable  intervals  between  exposures  and  repetitive  use  of  chemical  restraints 
(ketamine)  and  inhalation  anesthetics  (halothane).  It  was  also  apparent  from  the  description  of 
materials  and  methods  of  this  publication  that  the  control  animals  did  not  receive  an  adequate 
sham  treatment,  which  should  simulate  the  microwave  exposure  procedure  in  the  absence  of  a 
microwave  field.  Because  of  these  deficits,  the  latency  and  threshold  corneal  endothelial 
degeneration  could  not  be  derived  reliably. 

Kues  et  al.  [1992]  reported  increased  sensitivity  of  the  non-human  primate  to  microwave 
radiation  following  ophthalmic  drug  pretreatment,  such  as  0.5%  Timolol  maleate  and  2% 
pilocarpine.  Intactness  of  iris  vascularity  (assessed  by  fluorescein  angiography)  and  of  corneal 
endothelium  (assessed  by  specular  microscopy)  were  studied  in  monkeys  exposed  to  2.45  GHz 
pulsed  microwaves  (10  ps  pulse  width,  100  pulses  per  second  and  variable  peak  powers,  duty 
cycle  =  0.001)  between  0  and  3.9  W/kg  and  4  hours  daily  for  3  days.  The  absolute  threshold  for 
microwave  ocular  injuries  (both  increased  iris  vascular  leakage  and  corneal  endothelial  injury) 
decreased  by  10  fold  from  2.6  W/kg  (10  mW/cm2)  to  0.26  W/kg  (1  mW/cm2)  in  eyes  pretreated 
with  the  ophthalmic  drug.  As  in  Kues’  previous  experiment  [Kues  et  al.  1985],  the  exposure  was 
performed  in  monkeys  treated  with  ketamine  immobilization  (30-40  mg  per  4-7  kg  body  weight) 
and  halothane  anesthesia. 

The  microwave  dosimetry  in  these  experiments  was  in  error.  A  description  of  the 
dosimetric  method  can  be  found  in  their  publication  [Kues  et  al.  1985],  A  nonperturbing 
temperature  sensor  was  used  in  the  anterior  chamber  of  the  monkey's  eye  under  anesthesia.  The 
steepest  portion  of  the  temperature  rise  in  4  hours  was  used  to  calculate  the  ocular  SAR  (0.09 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


°C/min  at  20  mW/cm2).  This  procedure  did  not  account  for  heat  loss  during  a  prolonged 
exposure.  Calculation  of  SARs  would  have  required  a  correction  for  the  cooling  rate  of  the 
specimen.  A  steady-state  heating  and  cooling  analysis  method  was  described  by  Allis  et  al. 
[1977],  An  alternative  method  to  circumvent  this  time-consuming  procedure  was  developed  and 
validated  [Gambrill  et  al.  1993;  Lu  et  al.  1993],  Initial  calculations  indicated  that  50  to  64  %  of 
the  microwave  energy  was  dissipated  from  the  rabbit  in  one  hour.  To  obtain  an  error  less  than  1 
%,  the  dosimetry  exposure  should  be  limited  to  no  more  than  10  s.  Thus,  Kues  et  al.  [1985, 
1992]  probably  underestimated  the  ocular  SAR.  The  extent  of  underestimation  can  not  be 
evaluated  because  the  exposure  duration  for  deriving  the  steepest  portion  of  the  heating  curve 
was  not  reported. 

Corneal  endothelial  (inner  lining  cells  of  the  cornea)  degeneration  was  described  by  Kues 
et  al.  [1985]  as  indicated  by  cell  loss,  intracellular  vacuolization,  and  the  ability  of  endothelial 
nuclei  to  take  up  vital  stain.  However,  microwave  induced  corneal  epithelial  (outer  lining  of  the 
cornea)  injury  was  not  reported  by  this  group  of  investigators.  The  corneal  endothelial  injury 
appears  to  be  different  from  a  typical  keratitis,  an  inflammation  of  the  cornea  which  usually 
involves  exfoliation  or  ulceration  of  the  corneal  epithelium  rather  than  endothelium.  Trevithick 
et  al.  [1987]  determined  in  rabbits  that  the  threshold  for  destruction  of  a  single  corneal  epithelial 
cell  was  33  W/kg  from  a  35  GHz  pulsed  microwave  source.  However,  keratitis  was  not  found  by 
Rosenthal  et  al.  [1976]  in  rabbits  exposed  to  35  GHz  (175  W/kg)  or  107  GHz  (238  W/kg) 
microwaves  for  one  hour.  Apparently,  the  threshold  for  microwave  induced  corneal  epithelial 
damage  is  in  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  microwave-induced  lens  opacity  (cataract)  but 
is  an  order  of  magnitude  higher  than  the  purported  threshold  of  the  microwave-induced  retinal 
injury  («  4  W/kg)  reported  by  Kues  et  al  [1989b,  1990], 

Tengroth  and  Aurell  [1974]  reported  an  increased  incidence  of  chorioretinal  scar  in 
microwave  workers.  Ninety-eight  persons  employed  in  developing  radar  equipment  were 
investigated.  The  exposed  group  was  composed  of  68  persons  testing  radar  equipment  and 
measuring  microwave  radiation  or  working  in  experimental  laboratories.  The  control  group 
consisted  of  30  persons  from  the  same  pool  who  were  not  involved  with  testing.  The  incidence  of 
chorioretinal  scar  was  25%  (17/68)  in  the  exposed  group  and  3%  (1/30)  in  the  control  group.  The 
frequency/wavelength  of  the  microwave,  exposure  intensity,  retinal  SAR,  duration  of  exposure, 
duration  of  employment,  and  characteristics  of  microwave  pulses  were  not  reported. 

Microwave-induced  retinal  injury  was  noted  by  Paulsson  et  al.  [1979]  as  neuronal 
degeneration  in  the  rabbit  and  by  Kues  et  al.  [1989a;  1989b;  Kues  and  McLeod  1990;  Kues  and 
Monahan  1992]  as  submacula  detachment,  degenerative  changes  in  photoreceptor  outer 
segments,  vacuolization  of  the  outer  retinal  layers,  focal  retinal  detachments,  karyolysis  of 
photoreceptors  and  pyknotic  changes  of  the  pigmented  epithelium  in  the  monkey.  These 
investigators  observed  retinal  degeneration  in  experimental  animals  subjected  to  repetitive 
exposure  to  pulsed  microwaves.  It  could  be  implied  that  a  cumulative  effect  was  observed.  A 
cumulative  effect  is  the  accumulation  of  minor  injuries,  which  are  not  repaired  between  insults, 
and  develop  into  an  observable  effect.  None  of  these  reports  attempted  to  prove  the  existence  of 
a  cumulative  effect  in  the  microwave  induced  retinal  injuries.  Paulsson  et  al.  [1979]  did  not 


4 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


present  the  dosimetric  data.  Thus,  a  common  denominator  for  inter-frequency  and  inter- 
laboratory  extrapolation  is  not  available.  Kues  et  al.  [1989a;  1989b;  Kues  and  Monahan  1992] 
noted  that  the  threshold  SAR  for  primate  retinal  degeneration  was  3.9  W/kg  for  2.45  GHz  pulsed 
microwave  (10  (is  pulse  width,  100  pulses  per  second,  15  mW/cm2  average  power  density,  or  15 
kW/cm2  peak  power  density)  and  3.6  W/kg  at  1.25  GHz  (10  ps  pulse  width,  0.225  pulses  per 
second,  12.5  mW/cm2  average  power  density,  5.56  kW/cm2  peak  power  density)  microwaves. 
Timolol  maleate  pretreatment  was  noted  to  enhance  the  severity  of  the  retinal  injuries  in 
monkeys  in  a  series  of  27  four-hour  2.45  GHz  pulsed  microwave  (10  (is,  100  pulses  per  second, 

5  or  10  mW/cm2,  SARs  «  1  or  2  W/kg)  exposures  [Kues  and  McLeod  1990],  These  threshold 
SARs  were  lower  than  the  permissible  local  SAR  (8  W/kg  spatial  average  over  one  gram  of 
tissue)  according  to  ANSI  [1982]  or  IEEE  [1991].  However,  Kues'  experiment  suffered  from 
similar  deficiencies  as  those  studies  on  microwave-induced  corneal  injuries.  The  monkeys  were 
exposed  under  ketamine  immobilization  (0.3  ml  or  30  mg)  and  halothane  anesthesia  (2.5  % 
halothane  in  97.5  %  oxygen,  0.5  l/min). 

Because  of  criticism  from  the  scientific  community  concerning  the  use  of  halothane 
anesthesia  during  microwave  exposures,  Kues'  group  subsequently  exposed  unanesthetized 
monkeys  [Kues  and  Monahan  1992,  Kues  et  al.  1991;  1993],  Degenerative  cones  were  observed 
in  monkeys  exposed  to  7  four-hour  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  (0.5  ps,  16  pulses  per  second, 
average  ocular  SAR  3. 5-4.0  W/kg)  [Kues  et  al.  1991],  9  four-hour  1.25  GHz  (0.5  ps,  16  pulses 
per  second,  ocular  SAR  4.0  W/kg)  [Kues  and  Monahan  1992;  Kues  et  al.  1993],  and  30  (duration 
of  each  exposure  was  not  specified)  2.7  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  (1  ps,  20  pulses  per  second, 
ocular  SAR  2.6  W/kg)  [Kues  and  Monahan  1992],  However,  retinal  injuries  were  not  observed 
in  monkeys  subjected  to  2.85  GHz  pulsed  microwave  exposure  (1  ps,  20  pulses  per  second, 
ocular  SAR  3.5  W/kg,  3  times  per  week  for  10  weeks)  [Kues  et  al.  1993;  1994],  Differences  in 
specific  pulse/frequency  parameters  and  in  the  SAR  due  to  frequency  dependent  absorption  by 
the  photopigments  were  suggested  by  Kues  et  al.  [1993]  as  the  cause  of  the  difference  in  the 
effectiveness  of  various  pulsed  microwave  exposures. 

Contrast  sensitivity  functions  are  used  widely  as  a  measure  of  basic  visual  performance. 
Visual  contrast  sensitivity  was  not  altered  during  repeated  exposures  to  5.6  GHz  microwaves 
[D' Andrea  et  al.  1992],  The  microwave  pulses  (2.3  ps  pulse  width,  100  pulses  per  second,  18- 
108  mW/cm2  averaged  power  density,  1-6  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR)  were  delivered  in 
daily  sessions  lasting  30  minutes  per  session.  The  pulse  parameters  in  this  visual  function  test 
were  quite  different  from  pulsed  microwaves  used  by  Kues.  In  a  follow-up  study,  the  pulse 
parameters  were  similar  to  those  used  by  Kues  and  visual  contrast  sensitivity  was  again  unaltered 
during  repeated  exposures  to  1.3  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  [D' Andrea  et  al.  1993],  The  study  was 
conducted  at  an  SAR  of  4  W/kg  at  the  eye  (1  W/kg  whole-body  average  SAR)  with  intermittent 
exposure  (36  hours  total,  4  hours  per  session,  9  sessions  total)  to  1.3 -GHz  pulsed  microwaves. 
The  pulse  characteristics  were  0.5  ps  pulse  width,  16  pulses  per  second,  and  a  1  MW  peak  power 
output  of  the  transmitter. 

Yee  [1983]  reported  a  reduction  of  b-wave  amplitude  and  increased  c-wave  amplitude  of 
the  scotopic  adapted  single  flash  electroretinogram  (ERG)  in  rabbits  exposed  to  3  GHz  pulsed 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


microwaves  with  6  (is  pulse  width  and  1875  pulses  per  second.  The  average  power  density  was 
0.7  mW/cm2  and  the  peak  power  density  was  622  mW/cm2  (equivalent  to  1.53  kV/m  peak 
electric  field).  The  average  power  density  is  less  than  the  IEEE's  [1999]  maximum  permissible 
exposure  limits  for  controlled  environments  (10  mW/cm2)  and  uncontrolled  environments  (2 
mW/cm2)  or  the  IEEE's  maximum  allowable  peak  electric  field  (100  kV/m).  The  ERG  changes 
became  apparent  after  3  to  4  hours  of  exposure  and  the  magnitude  of  change  increased  with  the 
duration  of  exposure.  Recovery  occurred  in  half  an  hour  after  the  exposure.  The  data  presented 
was  normalized  to  the  pre-exposure  baseline.  Data  from  a  sham-exposed  group  was  not  included. 

Kues  et  al.  [1991]  examined  ERG  changes  in  adult  Rhesus  monkeys  before  and  after  7 
four-hour  exposures  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  (5  pis,  16  pulses  per  second,  3. 5-4.0  W/kg 
ocular  SAR).  They  noted  a  50%  reduction  in  the  scotopic  single  flash  response  and  a  90% 
reduction  in  the  30-Hz  flicker  response  following  these  repetitive  exposures.  The  single  flash 
photopic  response  was  completely  extinguished  in  the  post-exposure  examination.  They 
attributed  the  ERG  changes  to  the  degeneration  of  cone  photoreceptors.  The  ERG  returned  to 
normal  one  week  after  microwave  exposures.  However,  histopathological  evidence  was  not 
discussed.  A  slightly  different  description  of  the  ERG  changes  was  given  in  their  1992  report 
[Kues  and  Monahan  1992],  They  reported  a  60%  reduction  in  scotopic  single  response  (rod 
response)  and  a  90%  reduction  in  the  30-Hz  flicker  test  (cone  response)  in  monkeys  exposed  to 
1 .25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  for  4  hours  on  three  consecutive  days  for  three  consecutive  weeks 
(total  of  9  exposures)  at  4  W/kg  ocular  SAR  (0.5  ps,  16  pulses  per  second). 

Kues'  reports  on  microwave-induced  retinal  injuries  in  the  monkey  have  appeared 
primarily  in  meeting  abstracts.  As  such,  detailed  descriptions  of  experiments  were  usually 
lacking.  It  is  very  difficult  to  determine  the  actual  microwave  treatments  from  anecdotal  accounts 
of  exposure  history.  In  addition,  the  incidence  of  the  retinal  injuries  indicated  either  as 
histopathological  changes  or  ERG  changes  was  never  clearly  indicated.  The  number  of  sham- 
exposed  monkeys  and  their  incidence  of  histopathological/ERG  changes  were  never  reported. 
This  lack  of  experimental  detail  and  quantitative  data  makes  the  task  of  risk  analysis  very 
difficult,  if  not  impossible. 

Kues  also  failed  to  mention  that  the  1.25  GHz  experiments  involved  weekly  transport  of 
the  monkeys  between  facilities  in  Baltimore  and  in  Silver  Spring,  Maryland,  a  distance  of  30 
miles  each  way.  Chemical  immobilization  (30-40  mg  ketamine  per  4-7  kg  body  weight)  was 
used  before  and  after  each  microwave  exposure.  A  host  of  non-invasive  diagnostic  evaluations 
was  also  performed  before  and  after  microwave  exposure.  These  evaluations  included  slit-lamp 
examination,  fundus  photography,  fluorophotometry,  wide-field  specular  microscopy  and 
electroretinography.  During  these  procedures,  ketamine  immobilization  was  used.  It  is  unclear 
whether  these  procedures  were  applied  uniformly  in  every  monkey  inducted  into  the 
experiments. 

Based  on  Kues’  data,  one  is  lead  to  conclude  that  the  threshold  for  microwave-induced 
retinal  injuries  appeared  to  be  lower  than  the  threshold  whole-body  average  SAR  (4  W/kg)  and 
the  permissible  local  SAR  (8  W/kg)  for  personnel  protection.  In  addition,  pulsed  microwaves 


6 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


appeared  to  be  more  potent  in  inducing  ocular  injuries  than  continuous  wave  microwaves.  Due  to 
the  potential  importance  of  microwave  ocular  hazards  in  relation  to  health  and  safety  of  soldiers, 
sailors,  airmen,  and  general  public,  an  ocular  study  using  rhesus  monkeys  was  requested  by  the 
Tri-Service  Electromagnetic  Radiation  Panel  (TERP).  This  research  program  represents 
collaboration  and  resource  sharing  among  the  Army,  Navy,  and  Air  Force  with  the  assistance  of 
expertise  from  Wilmer  Eye  Institute,  Johns  Hopkins  University  and  University  of  Maryland. 

The  objectives  of  the  research  were  to  identify  the  presence  or  the  absence  of  high  peak 
power  microwave-induced  retinal  injuries  by  studying  changes  in  fundus  photographs, 
angiography,  electroretinograms,  and  histopathology  of  monkeys  exposed  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed 
microwaves  at  0,  4,  8  and  20  W/kg  retinal  SAR.  The  following  special  considerations  were 
incorporated  into  the  experimental  design  in  the  present  study: 

1) .  Extensive  densitometry  and  dosimetry  were  performed  prior  to  experimentation. 

2) .  Transmitter  output  was  continuously  monitored  and  recorded  using  redundant 

instrumentation. 

3) .  Extensive  pre-exposure  screenings  were  used  to  assure  the  retinal  normality 

prior  to  the  acceptance  of  experimental  subjects  into  the  study. 

4) .  Efforts  were  made  to  apply  all  diagnostic  procedures  uniformly  to  all  subjects 

regardless  of  microwave  treatments. 

5) .  Graded  multiple  retinal  doses  were  used  to  maximize  the  probability  of  observing 

retinal  changes  caused  by  microwave  exposures. 

6) .  Pre-exposure  baselines  were  used  for  individual  control. 

7) .  Data  obtained  in  the  exposed  monkeys  were  further  compared  to  those  of 

sham-exposed  monkeys. 

8) .  Concurrent  shams  were  used. 

9) .  Ketamine  restraint  and  general  anesthesia  were  not  used  during  the  exposure. 

10) .  A  minimum  of  a  72  hour  recovery  period  was  mandatory  between  pre-screenings 

and  beginning  of  the  repeated  exposures. 

11) .  Fluorophotometry  was  not  used. 

12) .  Exposures  were  randomized. 

13) .  All  investigators  except  one  (code  keeper)  were  blind  to  the  experimental  treatments. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


14) .  Long  distance  transportation  was  avoided. 

15) .  Transportation  of  experimental  subjects  was  accomplished  in  a  metal  cage  with 

opaque  plastic  cover  and  in  an  enclosed  air-conditioned  van  for  this  purpose. 

All  these  procedures  were  necessary  to  assure  data  quality  and  to  avoid  introducing  unidentified 
confounding  factors  and  unintentional  biases  by  investigators.  The  rationale  for  each  of  these 
considerations  is  explained  further  in  discussion  section. 


8 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


2.  MATERIAL  AND  METHODS 


2.1  Animal  Model 

Adult  male  and  female  Rhesus  monkeys  (Macaca  mulatta)  were  used.  Their  ages  were 
between  4.0  and  9.5  years  and  body  weights  between  4.3  and  8.8  kg.  They  were  received  as 
clinically  healthy  animals  free  of  physical  defects  and  tested  negative  for  tuberculosis  and 
Herpesvirus  Simiae  (B  virus).  Monkeys  were  housed  individually  in  standard  stainless  steel 
primate  cages  in  air  conditioned  rooms.  Standard  feed  (Monkey  Diet  #5038,  PM3  Feeds  Inc.)  and 
water  were  available  ad  libitum.  The  ambient  environment  inside  the  animal  room  was 
maintained  at  22  ±  1  °C,  relative  humidity  between  50  and  55  %  and  a  minimum  of  10  air 
exchanges  per  hour  of  100  %  conditioned  fresh  air.  The  photoperiod  was  12L:12D  (light  on 
between  0600  and  1800  hours). 

Prior  to  acceptance  into  the  protocol,  monkeys  were  screened  against  ocular 
abnormalities  by  fundus  photograph,  fluorescein,  and  indocyanine  green  angiographies  under 
scanning  laser  ophthalmoscope  (SLO/ Angiogram)  and  electroretinogram  (ERG).  Twenty  five 
monkeys  were  screened.  Two  monkeys  each  were  rejected  due  to  abnormal  SLO/angiograms  and 
ERG  b-wave  amplitudes.  One  monkey  was  rejected  out  of  protocol  due  to  hypersensitivity  to 
ketamine  xylazine  anesthesia.  One  additional  monkey  was  rejected  out  of  protocol  with  normal 
ocular  morphology  and  function  due  to  a  quarantine  requirement  involving  an  accident  with 
potential  zoonotic  significance.  A  total  of  19  monkeys  was  either  sham  or  microwave  exposed 
without  anesthesia.  Two  additional  monkeys  were  used  for  dosimetry. 


2.2  General  Procedures 

Each  monkey  was  subjected  sequentially  to  stepwise  procedures  grouped  into  pre¬ 
exposure  ocular  screening,  chair  acclimation,  microwave/sham  exposure,  post-exposure 
evaluation,  and  euthanization/histopathology  evaluation.  The  pre-exposure  screening  included 
ERG  evaluation  under  ketamine  (20  mg/kg  i.m.)  and  xylazine  (2  mg/ml,  i.m.)  and  on  a  separate 
day  funduscopy  under  ketamine  (20  mg/ml,  i.m.)  and  xylazine  (2  mg/ml,  i.m.)  anesthesia, 
followed  immediately  by  SLO/angiogram  under  sodium  pentobarbital  anesthesia  (12-15  mg/kg, 
i.v.)  and  acepromazine  maleate  (0.5- 1.0  mg/kg,  i.v.)  to  prevent  vomiting. 

The  chair  acclimation  and  microwave/sham  exposures  were  performed  after  acceptance 
of  the  monkey.  They  were  performed  without  anesthesia  in  an  anechoic  chamber.  Chair 
acclimation  included  placement  of  the  monkeys  in  a  restraining  chair  fabricated  entirely  from  a 
plastic  material  (PVC,  polyvinyl  chloride)  with  head  restraints  to  limit  head  movements.  The 
chair  acclimation  was  gradually  increased  to  four  hours  daily  for  a  minimum  of  5  days.  A 
monkey  was  successfully  acclimated  when  it  could  sit  quietly  in  the  chair  for  4  hours  (Fig.  1). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  1.  The  exposure  setup  showing  the  head  restraint,  upper 
portion  of  the  restraining  chair  and  open-end  waveguide  antenna 


Three  to  4  days  after  the  chair  acclimation,  monkeys  were  exposed  individually,  4  hours 
daily,  3  days  per  week  for  3  weeks  for  a  total  of  9  exposures.  All  procedures  required  a 
maximum  of  4  hours  per  day  over  a  4-week  period.  This  allowed  two  monkeys  to  be  run  through 
the  experimental  procedures  at  one  time.  Two  monkeys  were  exposed  separately,  one  in  the 
morning  (0800  to  1200  hours)  and  one  in  the  afternoon  (1230  to  1630  hours).  The  morning  and 
afternoon  exposures  were  selected  randomly  from  the  4  microwave  exposures  with  the  provision 
that  different  exposure  conditions  would  be  selected  for  each  monkey  in  a  pair. 

Twenty-four  hours  after  the  last  of  9  exposures,  the  monkey  was  subjected  to  post¬ 
exposure  evaluations  which  in  sequence  included  ERG  under  ketamine-xylazine  anesthesia,  and 
Fundus  Photograph  and  SLO/ Angiograms  under  sodium  pentobarbital  anesthesia.  Immediately 
after  the  last  procedure,  the  animal  was  euthanized  with  3  ml  (300  mg)  of  sodium  pentobarbital. 
Enucleation  was  performed  immediately  after  the  euthanization.  Eyeballs  were  slit  at  the  limbus 
and  immersion  fixed  in  25  %  Karnovsky's  fixative  (1  %  paraformaldehyde  and  1.25  % 
glutaraldehyde  in  0.1  M  cacodylate  buffer  pH  7.2).  The  eyeball  was  processed  and  sectioned  at 
2.5  pm  from  glycol  methacrylate  block  through  the  disk  and  macula  and  stained  with  periodic 
acid  Schiffs  and  Harris'  hematoxylin.  The  endpoints  of  this  study  included  fundus  pictures, 
retinal  angiograms,  ERGs  (photopic  a-,  b-  wave  amplitudes,  scotopic  a-,  b-wave  amplitudes,  30 
Hz  flicker  amplitude  and  scotopic  oscillatory  potential). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


2.3  Microwave  Exposures 

^  The  pulsed  microwave  was  generated  from  an  FPS-7  transmitter  operated  at  1.25  GHz, 

1.04  MW  peak  power,  5.59  p.s  pulse  width  at  0,  0.59,  1.18  and  2.79  Hz  pulse  repetition  rates. 
The  retinal  specific  absorption  rates  (R-SAR)  were  0,  4.28  ±0.1  (S.D.,  n=  4),  8.44  ±  0.32  (S.D., 
n=  3)  and  20.16  ±  0.43  (S.D.,  n=  5)  W/kg  (See  section  2.5).  The  distance  between  the  frontal 
orbital  ridge  of  the  monkey  to  the  geometric  center  of  the  open-end  waveguide  was  7.6  cm  even 
if  the  sham  exposure  was  performed. 

• 

2.4  Exposure  Facility 

The  microwave  pulses  were  transmitted  through  a  WR650  waveguide  system  into  an 
anechoic  chamber.  An  open-end  WR650  waveguide  was  used  as  an  antenna.  The  antenna  was 
•  configured  to  provide  vertical  E  and  horizontal  H  polarization.  Details  of  the  facility  are 

illustrated  in  Figure  2. 


11 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


A  four-port  36  dB  bi-directional  coupler  was  used  to  sample  forward  and  reflected 
powers  of  the  transmission  line.  For  pulse  measurements,  additional  attenuators  (70  to  81  dB) 
were  placed  on  the  incident  and  reflected  ports  of  the  bi-directional  coupler.  The  pulse-to-pulse 
forward  and  reflected  powers  were  monitored  by  crystal  detectors  (HP  423B)  connected  by  a 
feed-thru  terminator  (Midwest  Microwave,  model  2050)  to  an  oscilloscope  (Tektronix  2430A). 
The  forward  power  was  also  fed  to  a  universal  counter  (HP  5334A)  for  measuring  pulse 
repetition  rate.  The  peak  powers  from  one  of  the  forward  ports  of  the  bi-directional  coupler  were 
attenuated  and  fed  to  a  power  head  (General  Microwave  Corp.  436A)  of  an  automatic  peak 
power  meter  (General  Microwave  Corp.  Model  478A).  Therefore,  peak  powers  were  monitored 
by  redundant  measurement  systems  which  provided  a  cross  check  for  the  performance  of  each 
measurement  system.  In  addition,  the  pulse  spectrum  was  monitored  continuously  with  a 
spectrum  analyzer  (HP  8566B).  An  E-H  tuner  inserted  between  the  antenna  and  the  bi-directional 
coupler  were  used  to  minimize  the  mismatch  among  various  waveguide  components.  During 
routine  operation,  the  reflected  powers  were  usually  tuned  to  13  to  15  dB  or  more  down  from  the 
forward  powers.  Any  unused  ports  were  terminated  with  matching  terminators  or  loads.  The 
ambient  temperature  of  the  anechoic  chamber  was  monitored  continuously  with  a 
telethermometry  system  (YSI  405  probe  and  Cole-Parmer  Thermistor  Thermometer  E-08502- 
14).  An  independent  air  conditioner  unit  was  used  to  provide  freshly  conditioned  air  to  the 
anechoic  chamber  and  to  provide  isolation  and  independence  for  the  anechoic  chamber  from  the 
building  environment  during  the  experiment. 

For  quality  assurance,  all  the  power  measurements  components,  such  as  directional 
coupler,  attenuators,  connectors,  and  cables  were  periodically  calibrated  and  recorded  with  a 
scalar  network  analyzer  (HP  8757C)  with  matching  detectors  (HP  85025A)  and  cables.  A  sweep 
oscillator  (HP  8350B)  with  RF-plug  in  (HP  83525B)  was  used  as  a  calibrated  source.  A 
calibrated  bridge  (HP  85027)  and  connector  kits  were  used  during  component  calibration.  All  the 
power  measurement  instruments  were  factory  calibrated  annually.  All  the  temperature 
measurement  devices  were  calibrated  in  a  water  bath  against  a  NIST  traceable  ASTM  mercury- 
in-glass  thermometer.  The  following  illustrations  provide  examples  of  typical  wave  forms  from 
the  crystal  detector  output  (Fig.  3),  the  automatic  peak  power  meter  (Fig.  4),  and  the  spectrum 
analyzer  (Fig.  5). 

The  FPS-7  transmitter  produced  trapezoidal  pulses  with  rise-  and  fall-time  of 
approximately  0.9  ps  and  a  50  %  width  in  6-ps  range.  These  pulse  characteristics  could  vary 
slightly  due  to  the  transmitter  settings  and  tuning.  For  routine  operation,  the  average  power 
transmitted  was  calculated  to  compensate  for  the  wave  shape  from  the  net  pulse  energy 
(calculated  from  peak  power  measurement  by  trapezoidal  rule  and  transmission  efficiency 
determined  from  forward  and  reflected  powers)  and  the  pulse  repetition  rate.  The  square  wave 
equivalent  pulse  width  calculated  from  pulse  energy  and  peak  power,  was  5.59  fis.  These  pulse 
parameters  were  recorded  every  15  minutes  during  all  the  exposures  throughout  the  entire  study. 


12 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  3.  An  Example  of  Crystal  Figure  4.  An  Example  of  Power 

Detectors  ’  Outputs  Profile  of  the  FPS-  7  Pulses 


It  was  apparent  that  the  FPS-7  can  produce  1250  MHz  (1.25  GHz)  pulses  without 
significant  side  bands.  The  bandwidth  of  the  FPS-7  pulses  was  also  very  narrow.  The  entire 
bandwidth  of  the  pulses  shown  in  Figure  5  was  less  than  20  MHz. 


Figure  5.  An  Example  of  the  Pulse  Spectrum 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Because  the  monkey  was  to  be 
placed  7.6  cm  in  front  of  the  open-end 
waveguide  antenna,  the  power  densities 
of  the  E-H  plane  and  power  densities  at 
various  distances  from  the  antenna  were 
measured  with  Narda  8721  probe  and 
8716  meter  positioned  by  a  tri-axial 
scanner.  Instead  of  the  FPS-7  transmitter, 
a  continuous  wave  microwave  source  was 
used  to  determine  the  spatial  distribution 
of  the  power  density.  Further 
characterization  of  the  microwave  field 
was  performed  along  the  beam  path.  As 
expected,  power  density  decreased  with 
the  distance  from  the  antenna  aperture 
(Fig.  6).  Figures  7  and  8  illustrates  the 
power  density  profile  and  power  density 
contour  7.6  cm  from  the  open-end 
waveguide  antenna. 


It  was  apparent  from  the  profile 
and  contour  plots  that  the  power  density 
decreased  rapidly  from  the  geometric 
center  of  the  E-H  plane.  The  3-dB  beam 
size  was  approximately  6  cm  at  7.6  cm 
from  the  antenna.  The  power  density 
decreased  to  less  than  1  %  at  1 5  cm  from 
the  center  of  the  E-H  plane.  The  spatial 
peak  power  density  was  2.79  mW/cm2 
per  W  of  transmitted  power.  The 
exposure  configuration  was,  therefore,  a 
localized  exposure  limited  to  head  and 
neck  of  the  monkey.  To  obtain  a 
consistent  exposure,  care  in  positioning 
the  monkey,  chair  training  and  head 
immobilization  were  extremely 
important.  All  these  requirements  were 
incorporated  into  the  design  of  the 
present  experiment. 

Figure  7.  Power  Density  Profile  of  the 

Exposure  System  at  7. 6  cm 


Figure  6.  Power  Density  at  the  Beam  Path 


14 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  8.  Power  Density  Contour  of  the  Exposure  System  at  7. 6  cm 
from  the  waveguide. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


2.5  Ocular  Thermometric  Dosimetry 

Based  on  rate  of  temperature  change,  a  thermometric  dosimetry  procedure  [Gambrill  et 
al.  1993;  Lu  et  al.  1993]  with  RF  transparent  temperature  probes  was  used  to  determine  the 
ocular  SAR  in  monkeys.  An  8  channel  Luxtron  3000  Fluoroptic  Thermometer  and  2  Luxtron 
MAM-05  fiber  optic  temperature  probes  (4  sensors  each  at  5-mm  spacing)  were  used.  The 
fluoroptic  thermometer  system  was  operated  at  10  Hz.  The  analog  outputs  (500  mV/°C)  of  the 
fluoroptic  thermometer  were  filtered  with  4  Krohn-Hite  3322  filters  (2  channels  each)  operated 
at  1  Hz  low  pass.  The  filtered  signal  was  stored  digitally  with  a  computerized  data  acquisition 
system  operated  at  2  Hz  acquisition  rate.  The  rate  of  temperature  change  (dT/dt  in  °C/s)  was 
evaluated  from  the  acquired  data. 

The  rate  of  temperature  change  during  dosimetric  exposure  (dT/dteXp,  40  s)  was  adjusted 
by  the  average  of  the  rates  of  temperature  change  during  pre-exposure  period  (dT/dtpre,  40  s)  and 
post-exposure  period  (dT/dtpost,  40  s)  as  follows: 

dT/dt  =  dT/dtexp  -  [  (dT/dtpre  +  dT/dtpost)  /  2] 

The  local  SAR  was  calculated  by  the  following  formula  by  using  average  specific  heat  of  tissues 
(C  =  3474  J/kg). 

SAR  (W/kg)  =  C  •  dT/dt 

Four  replications  were  performed  for  each  SAR  determination.  The  SAR  data  is  normalized  to 
W/kg  per  W  transmitted  power.  For  ocular  dosimetry,  the  FPS-7  transmitter  was  operated 
nominally  at  1  MW  peak  power,  6  ps  pulse  width,  17.5  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate  and  80  to  100  W 
average  transmitter  output. 

Two  6-year-old  female  monkey  carcasses  were  used  for  ocular  dosimetry.  Their  body 
weights  at  euthanization  by  intravenous  sodium  pentobarbital  were  4.5  and  4.9  kg.  In  order  to 
maintain  anatomical  intactness  of  the  ocular  globes,  a  fistula  was  created  surgically  at  each  of 
four  quadrants  of  the  ocular  globe  —  superior,  oral,  nasal  and  temporal  —  through  the  eyelids 
(Fig.  9).  Blunt  dissection  was  used  to  create  the  fistula  such  that  only  a  thin  layer  of  conjunctiva 
membrane  was  left  between  ocular  globe  and  fistula.  Fiber  optic  temperature  probes  were 
inserted  along  the  outer  contour  of  the  ocular  globe  until  the  last  sensor  of  the  probe  was  resting 
near  and  slightly  deeper  than  the  limbus.  The  probe  was  then  positioned  carefully  and  taped  to 
the  waveguide  surface  to  retain  the  contact  between  probe  and  tissue.  The  current  procedure 
represents  a  retinal  SAR  rather  than  an  intra-ocular  SAR.  Sixteen  retinal  SARs  per  globe  and  32 
retinal  SARs  per  carcass  were  determined.  The  sequence  of  SAR  determinations  is  indicated  in 
Fig.  9.  For  each  local  ocular  SAR,  four  replicates  were  obtained.  A  total  of  128  determinations 
was  obtained  from  each  carcass.  The  ocular  SAR  was  normalized  to  per  W  net  power  delivered 
to  the  open-end  waveguide  antenna  for  determination  of  the  net  power  required  for  experiments 
and  for  estimating  the  ocular  SAR  from  net  average  power  measured. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  9.  Location  and  Sequence  of  Peri-ocular  SAR  Determination, 

The  probe  was  inserted  through  the  eyelid  following  the  contour  of  the 
eye  to  a  desired  depth.  A  thin  layer  of  conjunctiva  separated  the  sensor 
from  the  eyeball. 


2.6  Electroretinogram 

Electroretinogram  (ERG)  was  used  as  pre-exposure  screening  for  ocular  health  and  post¬ 
exposure  endpoint.  The  pre-exposure  ERG  was  performed  3  to  4  weeks  before  the  scheduled 
sham/microwave  exposures.  The  post-exposure  ERG  was  performed  24  hours  after  the  last  of 
scheduled  sham/microwave  exposures.  All  the  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  ERGs  were 
performed  in  an  electronically  shielded  darkroom. 

An  Electro  physiologic  Personal  Interfaced  Computer  System  (LKC  Technologies,  Inc., 
EPIC-2000)  was  used.  The  system  was  composed  of  a  computer-assisted  data  acquisition  system 
and  controller.  Grass  Photic  Stimulator,  Bright  Flash  Unit,  and  a  Ganzfeld  globe  for  performing 
electroretinograms.  The  background  luminance  of  the  Ganzfeld  globe  was  28.8  cd/m2  at  1/4 
diaphragm  setting.  The  luminance  of  the  light  flash  in  Ganzfeld  globe  was  2.2325  cd-s/m2  if  the 
Grass  Photic  Stimulator  was  used  and  2641.1  cd-s/m2  if  the  Bright  Flash  Unit  was  used.  In 
addition,  the  Ganzfeld  globe  has  two  wheels  containing  neutral  density  filters  to  provide  light 
attenuation  from  0  to  -40  dB  at  -2  dB  intervals.  Three  types  of  electrodes  were  used.  They  were 
ground  (attached  to  inner  surface  of  the  leg),  indifference  (attached  to  forehead  skin  surface),  and 
contact  lens  (ERG-Jet,  Life-Tech,  Inc.  attached  to  corneal  surface)  electrodes. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


The  monkey  was  anesthetized  initially  with  ketamine  (20  mg/kg,  i.m.)  and  xylazine  (2 
mg/kg,  i.m.).  After  anesthetization,  eyes  were  covered  with  gauze  and  the  monkey  was 
transported  to  a  shielded  darkroom.  The  anesthetized  monkey  was  placed  in  an  infant  carrier 
with  seat  belts  for  holding  the  torso  and  Velcro  strip  for  holding  the  head  in  place.  The  infant 
carrier  was  mounted  on  a  pedestal  for  height  and  tilt  adjustments  such  that  both  eyes  could  be 
placed  in  the  center  of  the  opening  of  Ganzfeld  globe.  Electropaste  was  used  to  attach  the  ground 
electrode  to  the  inner  surface  of  leg  and  indifference  electrode  to  the  center  of  forehead.  Two  to 
three  drops  of  1  %  tropicamide  ophthalmic  solution,  and  2.5  %  phenylephrine  hydrochloride 
ophthalmic  solution  were  instilled  into  the  conjunctiva  pouch  for  numbing  the  cornea  and 
dilating  the  iris.  The  cornea  was  numbed  with  two  to  three  drops  of  0.5  %  proparacain 
hydrochloride  prior  to  attaching  the  cornea  electrode.  The  Jet  electrode  was  filled  with  2.5  % 
hydroxypropyl  methylcellulose  ophthalmic  demulcent  solution  (Gonisol)  and  then  attached  to  the 
cornea  surface.  The  eyes  were  adapted  to  the  darkness  (scotopic  adaptation)  in  the  shielded  dark 
room  for  30  minutes. 

The  electroretinogram  was  determined  after  scotopic  adaptation.  In  sequence,  scotopic 
intensity  response  curves,  scotopic  30  Hz  flicker  responses  and  photopic  responses  were 
obtained.  The  intensity  (luminance)  of  the  light  flashes  was  expressed  in  ratio  (dB,  10  times  log 
ratio)  to  the  base  of  2.2325  cd-s/m2.  Scotopic  intensity  responses  were  determined  using  both  the 
Grass  Photic  Stimulator  and  the  Bright  Flash  Unit.  The  light  intensities  used  in  determining 
scotopic  intensity  response  curves  were  between  -40.46  to  24.28  dB  at  2  to  4  dB  steps  from  the 
lowest  to  the  highest  intensities  covering  approximately  6  orders  of  magnitude.  The  scotopic  30 
Hz  flicker  responses  were  tested  next.  The  30  Hz  flicker  consisted  of  photic  pulses  operated  at 
2.2325  cd-s/m2  and  30  Hz.  The  photopic  response  test  was  performed  next  to  evaluate  the  cone 
photoreceptor  function.  Background  illumination  was  28.8  cd/m2  and  a  2.2325  cd-s/m2  photic 
pulse  was  used.  The  emphasis  of  the  ERG  testing  was  on  scotopic  and  photopic  0  dB  responses 
and  30  Hz  flicker  responses;  two  to  four  duplicates  were  obtained.  For  the  scotopic  intensity 
response  curve,  the  test  was  usually  not  repeated. 

It  has  been  recommended  [International  Standardization  Committee  1989]  that  "rod 
response"  should  be  first  after  dark  adaptation  with  a  dim  white  flash  of  strength  2.5  log  unit  of 
the  standard  white  flash  (1.5  to  3.0  cd-s/m2).  The  relationship  between  ERG  b-wave  amplitude,  R 
(in  (iV),  and  stimulus  intensity,  I  (in  cd-s/m2),  given  by  Naka  and  Rushton  [1966]  are  as  follows: 


rQ) 


r  +  k 


where  Rmax  is  the  asymptotic  amplitude  of  the  b-wave  (in  juV),  K  is  the  intensity  at  which  b-wave 
amplitude  is  half  of  its  asymptotic  value  (in  cd-s/m2),  and  n  determines  the  slope  of  the  function 
at  /  =  K.  The  RmaX  and  log  K  can  provide  additional  inference  about  the  pathophysiologic 
mechanisms  underlying  retinal  disease  [Massof  ei  al.  1984;  Peachey  et  al.  1992],  Because  of  the 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


additional  diagnostic  values  (inference  of  mechanisms  of  underlying  retinal  disease  versus 
change  in  rod  photoreceptor  function)  of  Naka-Rushton  constants,  the  b-wave  intensity  response 
data  were  used  to  derive  Naka-Rushton  constants  according  to  the  method  developed  by  Severns 
and  Johnson  [1993]. 

After  the  test,  Gonisol  was  washed  out  with  0.9  %  normal  saline.  If  another  procedure 
such  as  fundus  photography  or  angiogram  was  to  be  performed  subsequently,  a  booster  dose  (10 
mg/kg  ketamine,  i.m.)  was  administered  to  maintained  surgical  anesthesia.  Eyes  were  covered 
with  gauze  to  maintain  moisture  and  to  prevent  excessive  light  exposure  during  transportation.  If 
fundus  photography  or  angiogram  were  not  planned,  the  booster  dose  was  not  given  and  the 
monkey  was  returned  to  vivarium  for  recovery  from  anesthesia. 


2.7  Fundus  Photography,  Fluorescein  Angiography  (FA),  and  Indocyanine  Green 
Angiography  (ICG) 

These  procedures  were  used  both  as  pre-exposure  screening  for  ocular  health  and  as  post¬ 
exposure  endpoints.  Pre-exposure  screening  was  performed  independent  of  the  ERG  evaluation 
and  was  usually  performed  at  least  4  days  before  the  commencement  of  the  scheduled 
sham/microwave  exposures.  The  post-exposure  endpoint  studies  were  performed  24  hours  after 
the  last  sham/microwave  exposures  and  after  the  ERG  procedures. 

The  monkey  was  anesthetized  with  ketamine  (20  mg/kg,  i.m.)  and  xylazine  (2  mg/kg, 
i.m.).  The  monkey  was  then  transported  to  another  building.  During  transport,  the  eyes  were 
covered  with  gauze  and  the  body  with  a  clean  surgical  drape  to  avoid  excessive  photic  exposure 
and  to  prevent  hypothermia.  The  monkey  was  transported  to  the  procedure  room  for  intravenous 
cannulation.  The  skin  overlying  the  saphenous  vein  was  clipped  and  cleaned  with  70%  ethyl 
alcohol.  A  22-gauge  1"  plastic  catheter  needle  was  inserted  into  the  saphenous  vein  followed  by 
withdrawing  the  metallic  needle.  The  plastic  catheter  was  secured  with  tape.  Intravenous  infusion 
of  0.9%  normal  saline  drips  was  used  to  maintain  the  patency  at  the  rate  adequate  to  keep  the 
vein  "open."  The  monkey  was  subsequently  anesthetized  with  sodium  pentobarbital  (10-20 
mg/kg,  i.v.)  through  the  cannula.  Two  to  3  drops  of  0.5  %  proparacain  hydrochloride  ophthalmic 
solution,  1  %  tropicamide  ophthalmic  solution,  and  2.5  %  phenylephrine  hydrochloride 
ophthalmic  solution  were  instilled  into  the  conjunctiva  pouch  for  inducing  cycloplegia  and 
mydriasis.  To  reduce  the  incidence  of  post-injection  emesis,  acepromazine  maleate  (0.5-1. 0 
mg/kg,  i.v.)  was  administered  approximately  15  minutes  before  dye  injections  (fluorescein  and 
indocyanine  green).  When  examining  the  eyes,  the  eyelids  were  held  open  by  an  ophthalmic 
speculum,  and  the  cornea  was  irrigated  frequently  with  0.9  %  normal  saline  to  prevent  drying. 
The  anesthetized  subject  was  placed  on  an  adjustable  stage  in  front  of  the  examining  instrument. 
The  animal  was  secured  with  tape  and  Velcro  bands  to  a  holding  board  in  a  prone  position  with 
the  head  hyper-extended. 

Clinical  instruments  such  as  fundus  camera  and  scanning  laser  ophthalmoscope 
(Rodenstock)  were  used.  Fundus  photographs  were  taken  as  Polaroid  picture  and  as  color  slide 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


for  permanent  record  and  evaluation.  FA  was  accomplished  with  intravenous  injection  of  a  0.2 
ml  bolus  of  10  %  sodium  fluorescein  (Alcon  Labs.,  Inc.)  and  repeated  up  to  1  ml.  ICG  was 
accomplished  by  intravenous  injection  of  a  0.1  ml  bolus  of  indocyanine  green  (Becton  Dickinson 
and  Company).  Each  bolus  of  dye  injection  was  followed  by  1  ml  of  0.9  %  normal  saline  flush. 
The  FA  and  ICG  images  were  recorded  by  a  video  recorder  such  that  permanent  records  could  be 
maintained  and  reviewed.  If  the  animal  was  not  scheduled  to  be  euthanized,  it  was  returned  to  the 
vivarium. 


2.8  Euthanization  and  Retinal  Histopathology 

Immediately  after  the  completion  of  post-exposure  FA/ICG  angiograms,  the  monkey  was 
euthanized  with  intravenous  sodium  pentobarbital  (3  ml,  300  mg)  until  the  heart  stopped. 
Immediately  after  the  heart  stopped,  bilateral  enucleation  was  performed.  The  extirpated  eyes 
were  slit  at  the  limbus  and  immersed  in  the  1/4  strength  Karnovsky's  fixative  (1  % 
paraformaldehyde  and  1.25  %  glutaraldehyde)  in  0.1  M  cacodylate  buffer,  pH  7.2  at  room 
temperature  for  15  minutes.  After  the  initial  fixation,  the  anterior  segments  were  removed  and 
the  tissue  was  returned  to  fixative.  The  ocular  tissue  in  1/4  strength  Karnovskys  fixative  was 
transported  to  the  ocular  histology  laboratory  at  Wilmer  Eye  Institute  Johns  Hopkins  University. 
The  ocular  tissue  in  fixative  was  stored  refrigerated  at  4  °C  until  it  was  processed. 

Following  several  washes  in  0.1  M  cacodylate  buffer  pH  7.4  at  4  °C,  posterior  eyecups 
were  dehydrated  in  graded  concentration  of  ethyl  alcohol  (30,  50,  70,  80,  90,  95  and  95%  v/v)  for 
30  minutes  each  on  a  rotator  at  room  temperature.  Tissues  were  trimmed  in  70%  steps  to  a  size 
of  approximately  6x8  mm  which  included  the  disk  and  macular  region  of  the  posterior  pole.  The 
6-mm  dimension  was  along  the  inferior  to  superior  plane  while  the  8-mm  dimension  was  along 
the  temporal  plane  extending  from  the  nasal  aspect  of  the  nerve  head.  Trimmed  tissues  were 
imaged  using  a  calibrated  macroscopic  setup  which  included  gooseneck  fiber  optic  lighting,  and 
a  Hamamatsu  CCD  camera  with  a  50  mm  lens  and  20  mm  extension  tube.  Dehydration  in  70% 
alcohol  was  resumed  following  imaging.  The  remaining  peripheral  tissue  that  was  not  embedded 
for  histopathological  evaluation  was  stored  in  70  %  alcohol  at  4  °C.  Following  the  second  95  % 
alcohol  dehydration  step,  tissue  was  infiltrated  overnight  at  room  temperature  in  catalyzed  glycol 
methacrylate  polymer  (catalyzed  JB-4  solution  A,  Polysciences  Inc.).  The  infiltrate  was  replaced 
with  freshly  prepared  catalyzed  JB-4  solution.  Infiltration  was  resumed  in  the  following  morning 
for  3  additional  hours.  Tissues  were  then  embedded  in  24  mm  Wheaton  snap  cap  vial  lids  which 
had  pre-poured  bottoms  from  the  previous  day.  Blocks  were  polymerized  under  vacuum. 

Blocks  were  trimmed  so  that  the  macular  and  disk  regions  were  approached  from  the 
inferior  region  of  each  eye  and  would  be  included  in  the  same  plane.  Blocks  were  faced  until 
complete  sections  of  full  thickness  eyewall  were  obtained.  At  that  time  4  slides  containing  3 
sections  each  (2.5  pm  in  thickness)  were  collected  and  dried  on  a  slide  warmer.  The  process 
(collecting  4  slides  containing  3  sections  each)  was  repeated  at  250-pm  steps  until  the  foveal 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


slope  was  reached  at  which  time  8  slides  (24  serial  sections)  were  collected.  The  blocks  were 
then  sealed  with  clear  nail  polish  and  stored  desiccated  at  room  temperature  for  archival  storage. 

Slides  were  stained  using  periodic  acid  Schiff  s  (PAS)  and  Harris'  hematoxylin  several 
days  after  complete  drying  was  achieved.  One  slide  from  the  first  collection  step  of  each  eye  was 
used  to  verify  proper  timing  of  the  staining  procedure  prior  to  staining  the  remaining  slides.  In 
the  present  experiment,  2  hours  in  1  %  periodic  acid  followed  by  several  distilled  water  rinses 
and  2  hours  in  Schiffs  reagent  yield  satisfactory  results.  Counter  staining  was  carried  out  for  30 
minutes  in  freshly  filtered  Harris'  hematoxylin.  The  hematoxylin  is  blued  in  tap  water  for  2 
hours.  After  the  staining,  a  slide  was  allowed  to  dry  overnight  before  a  coverslip  was  placed  on 
the  stained  tissue  with  permount.  Two  slides  from  each  250-pm  steps  up  to  the  fovea  and  4  slides 
each  within  the  fovea  were  stained  and  evaluated  histologically. 


2.9  Microdensitometry  of  the  Optical  Density  of  PAS  Reaction 


Two  slides  (3  sections  each)  through  the  fovea  and  optic  nerve  from  each  monkey  were 
stained  with  PAS,  in  a  single  batch.  From  these  slides,  triplicate  sections  from  each  animal  were 
selected  for  microdensitometric  analysis  based  on  the  quality  of  the  section  free  of  sectioning 
artifacts,  uniformity  of  stain,  and  relative  staining  intensity.  Visually  detectable  thick  or  thin 
sections  were  avoided.  Digital  images  were  collected  from  the  temporal  and  nasal  retinal 
photoreceptor  layer  1  mm  from  the  fovea.  A  Hamamatsu  CCD  device  mounted  on  a  Zeiss 
photomicroscope  interfaced  with  a  Macintosh  Computer  was  used.  The  area  of  retina  imaged 
was  0.04  mm2.  A  didinium  filter  and  a  #45  blue  Kodak  Wratten  filter  were  used  in  the 
illumination  path  of  the  microscope  to  enhance  the  PAS  stain.  The  voltage  of  the  light  source 
was  adjusted  to  12  V  and  neutral  density  filters  were  used  to  avoid  overloading  the  detector.  The 
light  intensity  was  adjusted  slightly  when  collecting  images  to  set  the  lower  limit  of  the  plot 
profile  function  of  the  N.I.H.  Image  Software  (version  1.47)  to  a  relative  grey  scale  value  of  40- 
50.  The  value  reflected  the  background  staining  of  the  rod  inner  segments  (PAS  negative)  and 
was  used  to  correct  for  any  minor  differences  between  background  staining  density  due  to 
variation  of  section  thickness.  The  gain  and  offset  functions  of  the  CCD  controller  were  not 
adjusted.  Density  plot  profiles,  5x220  pm  (height  by  length)  were  obtained  through  the 
photoreceptor  inner  segment  layer.  The  mean  optical  density  of  the  plot  profiles  for  each  region 
and  each  animal  were  averaged  and  the  standard  error  of  the  mean  was  calculated. 


2.10  Body  Temperature  Measurements  and  Exposure  Tolerance 

Johnson  and  Guy  [1972]  noted  that  the  most  investigated  and  documented  effect  of  RF 
radiation  on  biological  tissue  was  the  transformation  of  energy  entering  the  tissues  into  increased 
kinetic  energy  of  the  absorbing  molecules,  thereby  producing  heat  in  the  tissues.  The  heating 
resulted  from  ionic  conduction  and  increased  oscillation  of  dipole  molecules  such  as  water  and 
protein.  The  power  absorbed  by  the  tissues  will  produce  a  temperature  rise  that  is  dependent  on 
the  cooling  rate  of  the  tissues  and  duration  of  exposure.  The  relation  between  power  absorption 


21 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


and  temperature  rise  is  extremely  complex.  The  SARs  employed  in  the  present  study  can 
potentially  impose  a  significant  thermal  load  to  the  experimental  subjects.  Because  localized  RF 
exposure  was  employed,  it  was  necessary  to  assess  the  temperature  at  the  local  exposure  area  and 
at  the  whole-body  level.  The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  identify  the  maximum  R-SAR  that 
could  be  administered  in  an  unanesthetized  monkey  under  the  exposure  configuration  employed. 
Behavioral  endpoints  (excessive  restlessness  and  vocalization)  and  facial  skin  (<  43.0  °C, 
approximately  2  °C  lower  than  the  known  threshold  for  thermal  burn)  and  rectal  temperatures  (< 
41.0  °C,  approximately  3  °C  above  that  of  a  sham-exposed  chaired  monkey)  were  used  to  define 
the  upper  limit  of  a  tolerable  SAR. 

A  calibrated  infrared  camera  (Amber,  Radiance  1)  was  used  to  measure  the  facial  skin 
temperatures  hourly  including  pre-exposure  baseline.  After  the  exposure,  a  YSI  401  thermistor 
probe  (Yellow  Spring  Instruments)  was  inserted  to  a  depth  of  5  cm  through  the  anal  orifice  and  a 
thermistor  thermometer  (Cole-Parmer  E-08502-14)  was  used  to  read  the  rectal  temperature. 
Rectal  temperature  measurement  was  also  performed  in  representative  monkeys  exposed  to  sham 
exposure,  4,  8,  and  20  W/kg  R-SAR. 

For  determination  of  the  upper  limit  of  tolerable  exposure,  a  5-year  old  female  monkey 
was  used.  The  monkey  was  chaired  trained  and  exposed  in  the  same  exposure  facility  as 
described  in  section  2.3.  Exposures  were  performed  on  4  consecutive  days  in  an  ascending  order 
of  10  and  12;  14  and  16;  18;  22  and  26  W/kg  R-SAR.  The  duration  was  2  hours  for  each 
exposure  except  the  26  W/kg  exposure,  which  was  terminated  at  5  minutes  into  the  exposure  due 
to  intolerance.  To  ascertain  that  20  W/kg  R-SAR  was  within  the  tolerance  limit  of  the  monkey, 
this  subject  was  also  exposed  at  20  W/kg  for  4  hours  while  the  facial  skin  and  rectal  temperatures 
were  monitored  hourly. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


3.  RESULTS 


3.1  Dosimetry 

It  was  clear  that  microwave  energy  deposition  from  the  exposure  system  was  not  uniform 
at  various  locations  surrounding  the  eyes  of  monkey  carcasses.  The  R-SAR,  expressed  in  W/kg 
per  W  transmitted  power,  is  shown  in  Figures  10  and  11.  Tabulated  data  are  included  in 
Appendix  I  and  II. 

The  retinal  absorption  was 
altered  by  the  anatomical 
structures  surrounding  the  eyes. 

In  A35Z,  supra-orbital  ridge 
shadowed  the  retinal  tissue  and 
resulted  in  a  lower  superficial  R- 
SAR  (0  and  0.5  cm)  in  the 
superior  quadrants  in  both  eyes 
(Fig.  10).  The  shadowing  effect  of 
the  supra-orbital  ridge  was  not  as 
readily  apparent  in  A47Z  (Fig. 

11).  At  the  same  time,  maximum 
absorption  occurred  at  the  surface 
of  the  nasal  quadrants.  The  nasal 
absorption  "hot  spot"  was 
confirmed  by  comparing  the 
thermographic  images  taken 
before  (Fig.  12,  pre-exposure)  and 
after  (Fig.  13,  post-exposure)  a  2- 
minute  exposure. 

The  retinal  absorption  of 
the  1.25  GHz  microwave  energy 
in  the  exposure  system  (spatially 
inhomogeneous  and  near-field, 

Figure  7)  deviated  significantly 
from  absorption  characteristics  of 
a  planar  homogeneous  tissue  in 
which  the  specific  absorption  rate 
decreased  exponentially  with  the 
distance  from  the  surface.  Four 
(right  nasal  and  right  oral  of 
A35Z,  and  left  nasal  and  right 
temporal  of  A47Z)  of  the  16 
quadrants  had  the  characteristics 


A35Z,  Female,  6  years,  4.45  kg  A35Z-SUM.SPG 


Figure  1 0.  Retinal  SAR  of  A35Z 


A47Z,  Female,  6  yeors.  4.90  kg  A47Z-SUM.SPG 


Figure  11.  Retinal  SAR  of  A47Z 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


of  a  depth  dependent  decrease  in  SAR.  The  penetration  depths  of  these  four  quadrants  were  1.80, 
1.95,  2.05,  and  1.86  cm,  respectively.  These  penetration  depths  were  shallower  than  the  reported 
penetration  depths  in  tissues  of  high  water  content  at  915  MHz  (3.04  cm)  and  1.50  GHz  (2.42 
cm)  [Johnson  and  Guy  1972],  Due  to  a  narrow  beam  width,  curvature  of  the  ocular  globe,  and 
complexity  of  structure  and  dielectric  properties  of  tissues  within  and  surrounding  the  ocular 
orbit,  these  penetration  depths  could  only  be  construed  as  an  end  result  of  many  possible 
combinations  of  attenuation,  refraction,  and  reflection  characteristics  of  the  microwave  in  a 
complex  object  exposed  to  the  1.25  GHz  microwaves.  Additional  absorption  inhomogeneity 
might  be  detected  if  a  finer  spacing  between  sensors  was  used. 

The  nasal  absorption  "hot  spot"  was  clearly  evident  by  comparing  the  thermographic 
images  taken  before  (Fig.  12,  pre-exposure)  and  after  98.5  W/kg  R-SAR  exposure  (Fig.  13,  2 
minute  exposure).  The  warm  spot  was  roughly  triangular  in  shape  with  the  apex  between  the 
medial  canthi  and  the  base  extended  downward  and  laterally  to  beyond  the  nostrils. 


Figure  12.  Pre-exposure  Thermographic 
Image.  The  ambient  temperature  was  19.5 
°C. 


Figure  13.  Thermographic  Image  After 
Two  Minute  Exposure.  The  pulse 
parameters  were  1.25  GHz,  1. 0  MW  peak 
power,  5.56  jus  pulse  width,  1 7.44  Hz  pps, 
and  78.8  W  averaged  transmitted  power. 
Estimated  R-SAR  was  98.5  W/kg. 


The  warmest  spot  around  A35Z  right  eye  (Fig.  10)  was  at  the  superficial  nasal  (2.75 
W/kg/W)  and  the  coldest  at  superficial  superior  (0.48  W/kgAV),  a  ratio  of  5.14.  Around  the  left 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


eye  of  A35Z,  the  warmest  spot  was  at  superficial  nasal  (2.09  W/kg/W)  and  the  coldest  was  at  the 
deepest  superior  spot  (0.58  W/kg/W),  a  ratio  of  3.61. 

On  the  other  hand,  locations  of  warmest  and  coldest  spots  in  A47Z  were  quite  different 
from  those  of  A35Z.  Around  the  right  eye  of  A47Z  (Fig.  11),  both  the  warmest  (2.01  W/kg/W, 
superficial)  and  coldest  (0.87  W/kg/W,  0.5  cm  in  depth)  spots  were  at  the  superior  quadrant.  The 
ratio  was  2.32.  Around  the  left  eye  of  A47Z,  the  warmest  spot  (3.14  W/kg/W)  occurred  at  0.5  cm 
from  the  surface  of  the  oral  quadrant  and  coldest  (0.63  W/kg/W)  at  deepest  of  the  nasal  quadrant. 
The  ratio  was  4.98. 

While  the  R-SAR  spatial  distribution  was  not  uniform  varying  between  eyes  and  among 
monkeys,  the  mean  R-SAR  over  the  entire  ocular  globe  was  relatively  constant  between  eyes  or 
among  animals  (Table  1).  In  fact,  the  largest  ratio  among  the  mean  R-SARs  of  4  eyes  was  1.21. 
Therefore,  the  mean  R-SAR  but  not  the  local  R-SAR  could  be  predicted  fairly  well. 


Table  1.  Summary  of  the  Retinal  Dosimetry  in  the  Monkey  * 


Monkey  Number 

Right  Globe 

Left  Globe 

A35Z 

1.30  ±0.64  (16) 

1.11  ±  0.43  (16) 

A47Z 

1.34  ±  0.35  (16) 

1.26 ±0.70  (16) 

Average 

1.25  ±0.10  (4) 

*  Values  are  Mean  ±  S.D.  (n)  in  W/kg per  W  net  power. 


3.2  Behavioral  Responses  and  Signs  of  Intolerance  During  Microwave  Exposure 

The  signs  of  intolerance  to  the  localized  exposure  were  unequivocal.  These  signs  of 
intolerance  were  exhibited  by  monkey  B55Z  who  was  reserved  for  the  tolerance  study  described 
in  the  materials  and  methods  section  at  graded  R-SAR  from  10  to  26  W/kg.  The  outward 
behavior  of  the  monkey  was  unremarkable  in  any  of  the  two-hour  exposures  from  10  to  22  W/kg 
R-SAR.  After  an  initial  restless  period,  the  monkey  spent  a  majority  of  the  time  resting  and 
napping.  In  fact,  these  were  the  only  outward  behaviors  observed  in  any  of  the  experimental 
groups  receiving  sham  exposures  and  facial  exposures  at  4,  8,  or  20  W/kg  R-SAR.  The 
behavioral  intolerance  was  manifested  by  B55Z  at  a  26  W/kg  exposure  in  about  5  minutes.  The 
behavioral  signs  were  arousal  from  sleep,  rapid  blinking,  and  restlessness  that  resulted  in  pulling 
the  head  out  of  head  holder.  Vocalization  was  not  noted.  The  microwave  exposure  was 
terminated  when  the  head  was  out  of  head  holder.  This  same  monkey  was  retested  at  20  W/kg  R- 
SAR  for  4  hours  the  next  day  and  no  intolerance  was  noted. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Because  the  monkeys  were  chair-trained,  their  usual  outward  behavior  consisted  of 
resting  and  sleeping  during  the  4-hour  exposure  once  they  settled  down  in  the  chair.  Resting  and 
sleeping  were  interspersed  by  occasional  wakefulness,  but  not  restlessness.  Struggling  against 
the  head  restrainer  never  occurred  regardless  of  the  R-SAR  even  in  those  animals  exposed  at  20 
W/kg.  Outward  behavior  could  not  be  correlated  with  R-SAR,  duration  of  exposure,  or  number 
of  exposures. 


3.3  Thermal  Responses 

Facial  surface  temperature  was  evaluated  with  a  thermographic  camera  between  10  and 
22  W/kg  R-SAR  for  1  to  2  hours  in  an  unanesthetized  monkey  (Fig.  14).  The  surface  temperature 
at  the  cornea  was  consistently  higher  than  that  at  the  nasal  surface  both  before  and  after 
microwave  exposure.  The  difference  in  corneal  surface  temperatures  between  two  eyes  was 
within  0.2  °C.  Large  daily  variation  of  the  pre-exposure  surface  temperature  was  noted.  The 
daily  variation  could  be  caused  by  a  combination  of  the  following  factors:  absence  of  an 
equilibration  period  before  exposure,  daily  variation  in  chamber  temperature,  cycling  of  the  air 
conditioning  unit  during  the  exposure,  and  position  of  the  animal.  The  maximum  increase  from 
pre-exposure  surface  temperature  was  in  the  order  of  4  to  5  °C  in  1  to  2  hour  exposures.  The 
increases  in  surface  temperature  assumed  a  complex  relation  with  the  absorption  rate.  It  could 
not  be  correlated  easily  with  the  surface  SAR  distribution  pattern  (Fig.  10  and  11)  nor  the 
estimated  R-SARs  (Fig.  14).  A  plateau  was  noted  at  the  nasal  and  the  corneal  surfaces  between 
12  to  18  W/kg  R-SAR  at  the  end  of  the  one-hour  exposure.  On  the  other  hand,  the  nasal  and 
corneal  surface  temperatures  appeared  to  correlate  better  with  R-SAR  in  a  linear  fashion  at  the 
end  of  the  2-hour  exposure. 


RETINAL  SPECIFIC  ABSORPTION  RATE  (W/kg) 


Figure  14.  Surface  Temperature  Changes  During 
Facial  Exposure 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


For  a  longer  duration  of  exposure  at  20  W/kg  R-SAR,  dynamic  change  in  local  body 
temperatures  also  varied  between  exposures  of  similar  intensity  (Fig.  15  and  16).  It  was  clearly 
evident  that  surface  temperatures  increased  significantly  while  rectal  temperature  was  maintained 
at  a  level  lower  than  the  pre-exposure  rectal  temperature.  The  nasal  surface  temperature  never 
exceeded  33.5  °C  and  corneal  surface  temperature  never  exceeded  34.5  °C  at  20  W/kg  R-SAR.  It 
would  require  a  larger  number  of  experiments  to  fully  characterize  the  surface  temperature 
response  of  the  animal  at  various  R-SAR  used  in  the  present  study. 

In  addition  to  an  elevation  of  surface  temperature  above  the  pre-exposure  baseline  level, 
rectal  temperatures  at  4  and  8  W/kg  R-SAR,  but  not  20  W/kg  R-SAR,  were  elevated  above  those 
maintained  by  the  sham-exposed  monkeys  at  the  end  of  4-hour  exposure  (Fig.  17).  Although  a 
statistically  significant  thermal  effect  was  detected,  none  of  the  rectal  temperatures  exceeded  the 
level  of  the  pre-exposure  rectal  temperature. 


Figure  15.  Temperature  Response  of  a 
Monkey  Exposed  at  20  W/kg  R-SAR  for  3 
hours. 


Figure  16.  Temperature  Response  of  a 
Monkey  Exposed  at  20  W/kg  R-SAR  for  4 
hours. 


3.4  Funduscopy 

Regardless  of  the  exposure  group,  pre-  and  post-exposure  fundus  pictures  were  all  within 
normal  limits.  Scar,  tear,  edema,  hemorrhage,  vascular  occlusion,  vascular  tortuousness, 
abnormal  pigmentation,  discolored  patch,  streaks,  or  hole  were  not  noted.  Figure  18  shows  the 
pre-  and  post-exposure  fundus  pictures  of  one  representative  monkey  selected  from  each  of  the 
four  experimental  groups. 


27 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  1 7.  Colonic  Temperature  Responses  to  Facial  Exposures  at  0, 
4,  8  and  20  W/kg  Retinal  SAR. 


Figure  18.  Representative  Fundus  Images  (=>).  Images  from  left  to  right  on  the  top  row  are 
sham  pre-exposure,  sham  post-exposure,  4.42  W/kg  pre-exposure  and  4.42  W/kg  post¬ 
exposure.  Images  on  the  bottom  row  are  8.14  W/kg  pre-exposure,  8.14  W/kg  post-exposure,  20 
W/kg  pre-exposure  and  20  W/kg  post-exposure.  The  monkey  numbers  are  the  first  four  letters 
of  the  file  name. 


3.5  Angiography 

Again,  the  pre-  and  post-exposure  angiographies  were  within  normal  limits. 


Technical  Report  Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


929ZOD1Jul97.tif  6  929ZOD24Jul97.tif  7  A72ZOD30Jul97.tif  8  A72ZOD21Aug97.tif 

8.14  W/kg  PRE  8.14  W/kg  POST  20  W/kg  PRE  20  W/kg  POST 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


3.6  Electrorctinogram  (ERG) 

After  30  minutes  of  dark  adaptation,  a-wave  and  b-wave  amplitudes  and  implicit  time 
varied  with  luminance  of  the  administered  light  flash.  Figure  19  illustrates  an  example  of  ERG 
responses  to  various  luminances  over  a  range  of  5.5  log  units.  The  recorded  voltage  oscillation 
was  expressed  as  the  voltage  difference  between  corneal  surface  and  the  indifference  electrode. 
The  a-wave  was  indicated  by  the  first  cornea  negative  deflection  of  the  trace,  while  the  b-wave 
was  indicated  by  the  first  cornea  positive  inflection  of  the  trace  following  the  a-wave.  Because  of 
uncertainty  in  the  value  of  the  c-wave  in  the  diagnosis  of  retinal  disease,  the  c-wave  was  not 
evaluated.  Both  a-wave  and  b-wave  amplitudes  (magnitude  of  deflection  or  inflection)  depended 
on  the  luminance  of  the  administered  light  flash.  The  a-wave  was  not  detectable  until  the 


B57Z,  DARK  ADAPTED.  O.D..  10/04/96 


Figure  19.  An  Example  of  Electroretinographic  Response- 
Luminance  Relationship  of  a  Dark-Adapted.  Eye  of  a  Monkey. 

luminance  reached  0.062  cd-s/m2  (-1.21  log  units)  or  higher.  The  b-wave  could  be  detected  at 
luminances  as  low  as  0.2  x  10‘3  cd-s/m2  (-3.70  log  units).  The  b-wave  implicit  time  (time 
required  to  reach  the  peak  inflection)  decreased  with  luminance  while  amplitude  (peak 
magnitude)  increased  with  the  increasing  luminance.  A  similar  response  (amplitude  and  implicit 
time)  intensity  relationship  was  also  noted  in  a-wave. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


The  ERG  response  to  a  dim  light  flash  in  the  dark  adapted  eye  is  accepted  clinically  as 
representative  of  the  rod  photoreceptor  response  because  of  the  high  sensitivity  of  rod 
photoreceptor  to  a  dim  light  while  the  cone  photoreceptor  is  insensitive  to  a  dim  light.  In  the 
present  experiment,  a  dim  light  flash  (3.47  x  10'  cd-s/m  or  -2.46  log  units)  was  used  for 
electrophysiological  evaluation  of  the  rod  photoreceptor.  It  is  marked  as  "rod"  in  Fig.  19. 

Intense  light  flash  can  be  painful  to  a  conscious  person  or  animal.  For  this  reason,  the 
maximum  luminance  used  clinically  is  actually  dimmer  than  the  luminance  that  can  elicit  a 
maximum  ERG  response.  A  painless  intense  flash  is  often  used  clinically  to  obtain  maximum 
ERG  response,  a  combined  response  of  rod  and  cone  photoreceptors.  The  luminance  used  in  the 
present  experiment  was  2.23  cd-s/m2  or  0.35  log  units,  which  was  marked  as  "max"  in  Fig.  19. 

Although  ERG  amplitude  and  implicit  time  (latency:  period  from  onset  of  light  flash  to 
peak  deflection  for  the  a-wave  and  to  peak  inflection  for  the  b-wave)  of  a  dark-adapted  eye 
varied  with  luminance,  their  relationships  to  the  luminance  was  by  no  means  simple.  Figure  20 
shows  the  complex  relationship  between  implicit  time  and  light  intensity.  Both  the  a-wave  and  b- 
wave  implicit  time  decreased  with  light  intensity.  The  implicit  time  of  the  scotopic  a-wave  and  b- 
wave  reached  a  minimum  at  different  luminance.  The  minimum  b-wave  implicit  time  appeared 
to  occur  around  0.83  cd-s/m2  (-0.08  log  units).  The  minimum  a-wave  implicit  time  did  not 
become  apparent  until  the  luminance  reached  361  cd-s/m2  (2.56  log  units). 


B57Z  10/04/96 


LOG  LUMINANCE  (cd-s/m  ) 


Figure  20.  Relationship  Between  Implicit  Time  and 
Flash  Luminance. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


The  a-wave  amplitude  increased  with  luminance  above  the  threshold  (Fig.  21).  On  the 
other  hand,  the  b-wave  intensity-amplitude  function  was  composed  of  at  least  two  limbs  with 
plateaus  or  dips  at  intermediate  and  intense  flash  intensities.  The  first  limb  of  the  intensity- 
amplitude  function  could  be  fitted  with  a  sigmoid  function  such  as  a  Naka-Rushton  function 
described  in  the  materials  and  methods  section.  Two  constants,  Rmax  and  k  can  provide  additional 
insight  into  the  mechanism  of  retinal  degenerative  diseases  involving  rod  photoreceptors.  Solid 
lines  in  Figure  21  were  the  Naka-Rushton  function  fitted  to  the  first  limb  of  the  intensity- 
amplitude  curve.  The  Rmax  and  k  of  the  Naka-Rushton  function  were  also  evaluated  routinely. 


B57Z  10/04/96 


LOG  LUMINANCE  (cd-s/m2) 


Figure  21.  ERG  Amplitudes  and  Flash  Luminance 


If  light  flashes  are  rapidly  repeated  (flicker),  the  slowly  changing  and  delayed 
components  of  the  ERG  response  tend  to  cancel  out  with  increasing  stimulus  frequency  while 
other  ERG  components  having  a  shorter  time  course  are  more  resistant  to  flicker  and,  thus,  stand 
out  clearly.  The  flicker  response  has  been  proven  to  be  one  of  the  most  useful  methods  for 
analysis  of  visual  function.  Clinically,  light  flashes  are  repeated  at  30  Hz  for  a  short  interval.  An 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


example  of  ERG  response  to  30  Hz  flicker  is  illustrated  in  Figure  22.  This  method  was  also 
included  in  the  present  experiment  for  identifying  the  visual  dysfunctions. 

In  comparison  to  ERGs  obtained  in  a  dark-adapted  eye,  both  a-wave  and  b-wave 
amplitudes  were  attenuated  in  a  light-adapted  eye  due  to  a  slow  recovery  of  rod  photoreceptor 
pigments  from  photo-bleaching.  Therefore,  ERG  response  in  a  light-adapted  eye  is  accepted  as  a 
test  of  cone  photoreceptor  function  because  the  response  to  light  stimuli  in  a  light-adapted  eye  is 
relatively  free  of  a  significant  contribution  by  rod  photoreceptors.  An  example  of  such  reduction 
in  response  to  a  clinical  "max"  photic  stimulus  (2.23  cd-s/m2  or  0.35  log  units)  is  shown  in  Fig. 
23.  The  background  illumination  for  light  adaptation  was  28.8  cd/m2.  The  ERG  response  in  a 
light-adapted  eye  was  used  as  an  electrophysiological  method  to  evaluate  cone  photoreceptor 
function.  The  method  was  used  routinely  in  the  present  experiment  as  part  of  the  test  battery. 


1-362  2-363 


Figure  22.  An  Example  of  30  Hz  Flicker 
Response.  To  obtain  the  flicker 
response,  2.23  cd-s/m2  light flashes  were 
repeated  at  30  Hz. 


1-212  2-273  3-234  4-235 


Figure  23.  ERG  Responses  to  a  2.23  cd- 
s/m2  Light  Flash  in  a  Dark-adapted 
(trace  1  and  2)  and  Light-adapted  (28.8 
cd/m2,  trace  3  and  4)  Eye.  R  denotes  the 
right  eye  and  L,  left  eye. 


Another  ERG  component  of  interest  is  so  called  "oscillatory  potentials."  Oscillatory 
potentials  are  high  frequency  ripples  at  the  ascending  portion  of  the  b-wave.  These  ripples  are 
very  sensitive  to  retinal  ischemic  changes,  and  a  reduction  in  their  amplitude  can  even  precede 
the  appearance  of  retinopathy  [Bresnick  1984],  Examples  of  oscillatory  potentials  can  be  found 
in  Fig.  19  and  23.  If  the  stimulus  luminance  is  intense  enough,  oscillatory  potentials  can  be 
obtained  by  using  a  75  Hz  high-pass  filter.  Alternatively,  oscillatory  potentials  can  be  extracted 
from  ERG  traces  obtained  with  a  low-cut  filter  by  subtracting  the  smoothed  trace  by  a  moving 
average  from  the  original  trace.  An  example  of  the  extracted  oscillatory  potentials  by  the  latter 
technique  is  shown  in  Fig.  24.  Five  wavelets  could  be  identified.  The  amplitude  indicated  was 
the  combined  amplitude  of  the  first  two  wavelets.  For  consistency,  oscillatory  potentials  were 


33 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


always  extracted  from  ERG  records  obtained  by  the  standard  maximum  response  protocol,  i.e., 
2.23  cd-s/m2  in  a  dark-adapted  eye. 

Because  of  these  luminance-response  relationships,  the  following  ERG  results  are 
presented  as  the  ratio  of  post-exposure  to  pre-exposure  responses  obtained  in  defined  test 
conditions.  Unless  a  significant  main  effect  was  observed  by  analysis  of  variance,  no  further 
statistical  evaluation  was  performed. 


Intensity  -  Response  ERG 


1-272  2-273 


Figure  24.  An  example  of  Extracted  Oscillatory  potentials 


3.6.1  Rod  Response 

The  rod  response  was  obtained  from  a  dark-adapted  eye  with  a  3.47  x  10'3  cd-s/m2  white 
flash.  Only  the  b-wave  could  be  ascertained.  The  rod  b-wave  amplitude  (Fig.  25,  Appendix  3) 
and  implicit  time  (Fig.  26,  Appendix  4)  were  not  affected  significantly  by  the  microwave 
exposures  at  4,  8  and  20  W/kg  R-SAR. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


3.6.2  Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response 

The  combined  rod  and  cone  response  was  obtained  in  a  dark-adapted  eye  with  a  2.23  cd- 
s/m2  white  flash.  The  appearance  of  a-wave  and  b-wave  could  be  ascertained.  The  post/pre 
combined  rod  and  cone  b-wave  amplitude  ratios  (Fig.  27,  Appendix  5)  were  not  different 
statistically  among  sham-,  4,  8  or  20  W/kg  R-SAR  exposed  monkeys.  On  the  other  hand,  a 
significant  main  effect  was  noted  in  the  post/pre  ratio  of  the  combined  rod  and  cone  b-wave 
implicit  time  (Fig.  28,  Appendix  6).  Student’s  t-test  indicated  that  post-exposure  appearance  of 
b-wave  was  accelerated  significantly  (a  shortened  implicit  time)  in  monkeys  exposed  at  8  W/kg 
R-SAR  only. 


Figure  27.  Combined  b-wave  Amplitude 


A  main  effect  was  not  statistically  significant  for  the  post/pre  ratio  of  the  combined  rod 
and  cone  a-wave  amplitude  (Fig.  29,  Appendix  7)  or  implicit  time  (Fig.  30,  Appendix  8). 

3.6.3  Oscillatory  Potentials 

The  oscillatory  potentials  were  the  combined  amplitude  of  the  first  2  oscillatory 
potentials  extracted  from  the  combined  rod  and  cone  response  in  the  dark-adapted  eye  elicited  by 
a  2.23  cd-s/m2  white  flash.  Facial  microwave  exposures  did  not  significantly  alter  the  post/pre 
amplitude  ratio  of  the  oscillatory  potentials  (Fig.  31,  Appendix  9). 


36 


37 


Figure  31.  Oscillatory  Potentials  of  the  Combined  Rod 
and  Cone  Response 


38 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


3.6.4  30  Hz  Flicker  Response 

The  30  Hz  flicker  response  was  obtained  in  the  dark-adapted  eye  elicited  by  2.23  cd-s/m2 
white  flashes  operated  at  30  Hz.  Facial  microwave  exposures  did  not  significantly  affect  the 
post/pre  amplitude  ratio  of  the  30  Hz  flicker  response  in  the  dark-adapted  eye  (Fig.  32,  Appendix 
10). 


o  4  8  12  16  20 


Retinal  SAR  (W/kg) 


Figure  32.  Amplitude  Ratio  of  the  30  Hz  Flicker  Response 


3.6.5  Cone  Response 

Cone  response  referred  to  the  ERG  response  in  a  light  adapted  eye  to  a  light  flash  (2.23 
cd-s/m2)  with  a  28.8  cd/m2  background  illumination.  A  significant  main  effect  was  noted  in  the 
post/pre  b-wave  amplitude  ratio  (Fig.  33,  Appendix  11).  In  comparison  to  the  sham  exposed 
group,  the  post/pre  b-wave  amplitude  ratio  increased  in  monkeys  exposed  at  8  and  20  W/kg  R- 
SAR.  An  example  of  the  post-exposure  enhancement  of  b-wave  amplitude  is  shown  (Fig.  34). 

Because  an  amplitude  ratio  was  used,  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  amplitudes  were 
examined  further  in  detail  (Fig.  35).  Results  of  statistical  analysis  by  paired  t-test  on  correlated 
data  from  each  individual  eye  indicated  that  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  consistently  higher 
than  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  in  monkeys  exposed  at  8  and  20  W/kg  R-SAR.  However,  the 
post-exposure  b-wave  amplitude  was  not  truly  "supra-normal"  in  monkeys  exposed  at  8  and  20 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


W/kg  R-SAR  because  these  microwave  exposures  did  not  enhance  the  photopic  b-wave  out  of 
the  normal  range  observed  in  the  untreated  controls  (Shams). 


Retinal  SAR  (W/kg) 


Figure  33.  Effect  of  Microwave  Exposure  on  Cone  b-wave  Response 


1-446  2-450  3-452  4-934  5-936  6-938 


Figure  34.  An  Example  of  Post-exposure  b-wave  Enhancement  of 
Cone  Response.  Trace  1,  2  and  3  are  pre-exposure  cone  responses. 
Trace  4,  5,  and  6  are  post-exposure  responses. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Although  the  main  (grouping)  effect  was  not  significant,  the  pre-exposure  cone  b-wave 
amplitude  in  8  and  20  W/kg  groups  was  slightly  lower  than  the  pre-exposure  baseline  in  shams 
and  4  W/kg  group.  In  8  and  20  W/kg  R-SAR  exposed  groups,  the  post-exposure  amplitude 
tended  to  shift  toward  a  higher  value  than  those  of  sham  and  4  W/kg  R-SAR  groups  (Fig.  36). 
Results  of  an  analysis  of  covariance  (a  regression  analysis)  indicated  that  the  post-exposure  b- 
wave  amplitude  was  strongly  influenced  by  the  pre-exposure  baseline  but  not  by  microwave 
treatments  (Fig.  36).  In  other  words,  the  microwave  treatment  effect  was  weak  in  comparison  to 
the  influence  of  pre-exposure  baseline  variation  on  the  outcome  of  the  experiment. 


8  12  16 
Retinal  SAR  (W/kg) 


Figure  35.  Photopic  b-wave  Amplitudes  Before  and  After  Expousres 


On  the  other  hand,  the  implicit  time  of  photopic  b-wave  was  not  affected  by  microwave 
exposures  (Fig.  37,  Appendix  12).  Neither  the  amplitude  (Fig.  38,  Appendix  13)  nor  the  implicit 
time  (Fig.  39,  Appendix  14)  of  cone  a- wave  (photopic  a- wave)  was  affected  by  microwave 
exposures. 


41 


plicit  Time  rotio  {%) 


110 

105 

100 

95 

90 

85 

80 


ure  39.  Cone  a-wave  Implicit  Time  and  Microwave  Exposure 


CONE  RESPONSE,  o-WAVE 


Retinol  SAR  (W/kq) 


3 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


3.6.6  Naka-Rushton  Constants 

The  Naka-Rushton  function  can  be  described  as: 

R(I)  =  Rmax  In/(In +  kn) 

The  Naka-Rushton  function  was  used  to  fit  data  in  the  first  limb  of  the  complex  sigmoid  scotopic 
b-wave  response-luminance  curve  as  shown  in  Fig.  21.  Results  of  data  fitting  with  Naka-Rushton 
function  are  shown  in  Fig.  40  and  Appendix  15.  Two  parameters  of  clinical  importance  are  Rmax 
and  k.  The  Rmax  represents  the  response  maximum,  k,  the  luminance  required  to  generate  a 
response  one  half  the  amplitude  of  Rmax  and  n,  a  dimensionless  slope  factor.  Alterations  in  Naka- 
Rushton  function  parameters  were  not  noted  in  monkeys  subjected  to  microwave  exposure. 
According  to  Peachey  et  al.  [1992],  decreased  Rn,ax  could  be  interpreted  as  a  decrease  in  number 
of  ERG  generators  and  decreased  k  as  a  decrease  in  light  sensitivity  of  photoreceptors. 
Therefore,  no  ERG  evidence  indicative  of  a  degenerative  change  was  found  with  this  powerful 
tool. 


RETINAL  SAR  (W/kg) 


Figure  40.  Naka-Rushton  Function  Parameters  of  the  ERG  Scotopic  b-waves 


3.7  Histopathology  and  Optical  Density  of  the  PAS  Reactions 

All  retinal  histopathology  was  within  normal  limits  (Appendix  16,  16A,  16B,  16C,  and 
16D).  Retinal  degenerative  changes  were  not  noted  in  any  of  17  monkeys.  A  non-degenerative 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


retinal  change  was  noted,  consisting  of  an  enhancement  in  uptake  of  the  Periodic  Acid  Schif 
(PAS)  stain.  Figure  41  shows  examples  of  PAS  negative  images  in  the  left-hand  column  an 
PAS  positive  images  in  the  right  hand  column.  In  comparison  with  images  in  the  left-hand 
column,  images  on  the  right  hand  column  showed  darker  cone  photoreceptors  (brilliant  red  under 
microscope  PAS  positive).  The  increased  uptake  of  PAS  stain  was  in  the  inner  segments  of  the 
cone  photoreceptors,  mainly  in  the  myoid  and  in  the  outer  area  surrounding  the  ellipsoid.  The 
PAS  uptake  enhancement  could  be  uniform  or  vary  between  photoreceptors.  Distortion  in  outer 
segments  was  noted  due  to  imperfect  tissue  fixation.  No  other  histopathologic  change  was  noted 
in  these  retinas. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  41.  PAS  Enhancement  (~>).  These  are  representative  photomicrographs  from  monkeys 
exposed  4  hours  daily,  3  days  per  week  for  3  weeks,  a  total  of  9  exposures.  Both  PAS  positive 
(right  column)  and  negative  (left  column)  are  included  Comments  on  morphology  of  outer 
segments  are  also  included 


46 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


B87Z,  OD,  sham,  PAS  (-)  B71Z,  OD,  sham,  PAS  (+) 

Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments  Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


B63Z,  OD,  20  W/kg,  PAS  (+)  B20Z,  OD,  20  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 

Normal  outer  segments  Mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


41 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


The  occurrence  rate  of  PAS  positive  cone  photoreceptors  is  shown  in  Table  2  and 
Appendix  16.  The  rates  of  PAS  positive  were  equal  between  retinas  of  shams  and  20.2  W/kg 
exposed  monkeys.  The  PAS  positive  was  not  found  in  any  of  4  monkeys  exposed  at  4.3  W/kg.  In 
contrast,  PAS  positive  was  found  in  every  retina  examined  in  3  monkeys  exposed  at  8.4  W/kg. 


Table  2.  Occurrence  Rate  of  the  PAS  Positive  Microscopically 


SAR 

(W/kg) 

Number  of  Eyes 
with  Enhanced  PAS 

Number  of  Eyes 
Examined 

0 

2 

5 

4.3 

0 

4 

8.4 

3 

3 

20.2 

2 

5 

To  ascertain  the  difference  in  PAS  reaction,  the  optical  density  of  the  photoreceptors' 
inner  segment  was  evaluated.  The  microwave  treatment,  PAS  reactivity,  optical  density  of  the 
inner  segment,  and  post-exposure  photopic  (cone)  b-wave  amplitude  are  tabulated  in  Appendix 
17.  It  was  clearly  evident  that  post-exposure  photopic  (cone)  b-wave  amplitude  did  not  correlate 
with  the  optical  density  of  PAS,  an  index  of  glycogen  storage  (Fig.  42). 


3 

LU 

a 


< 

_D 

o 

Ol 

o 

i— 

o 

I 

CL 

UJ 

CL 

z> 

(A 

o 

0- 


l/l 

o 

CL 


220 


200 


180 


160 


120 


80 


60 


'  I  1  1  1  1  I  1  1  1  1  I  1  1  1  '  I  1  1  1  ' T* 


o  SHAM,  PAS  - 

•  SHAM,  PAS  + 

A  4  W/kg,  PAS  - 
■  8  W/kg,  PAS  + 

O  20  W/kg,  PAS  - 

♦  20  W/KG.  PAS  4 


50 


60  70 


80  90  100  110  120  130  140  150  160 

PAS  OPTICAL  DENSITY 


Figure  42.  Microwave  Exposures,  Microdensitometry, 
PAS  Reactivity  and  Post-exposure  Photopic  b-wave 
Amplitude 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


A  demarcating  line  in  PAS  optical  density  («  80,  dotted  line)  could  be  used  as  a  criterion 
to  separate  the  PAS  reactivity  (positive  or  negative)  during  the  microscopic  evaluation. 
Quantitatively,  the  PAS  optical  density  was  not  different  among  treatment  groups  (F(3j]3)=  1 .28; 
N.S.). 


3.8  Special  Cases,  B06Z  and  748Z 

Alterations  in  ERG  and/or  retinal  degeneration  were  noted  in  these  two  monkeys. 
Because  of  unusual  case  histories  of  these  two  monkeys,  they  were  treated  as  special  cases.  In 
order  to  determine  the  ERG  abnormality,  the  normal  range  (mean  ±2  S.  D.)  was  determined 
from  all  the  pre-exposure  ERG  baselines  excluding  these  two  special  cases.  These  normal  ranges 
are  included  in  Appendix  18. 


3.8.1  Monkey  B06Z 

Monkey  B06Z  was  a  5-year  old,  5.6-kg  male  rhesus  monkey,  who  was  exposed  nine 
times  to  L-band,  microwaves  at  8.6  W/kg  average  R-SAR.  During  the  pre-exposure  ERG 
baseline  determination,  difficulty  was  encountered  in  anesthetizing  B06Z  with  ketamine- 
xylazine.  Four  additional  supplemental  doses  of  ketamine-xylazine  (28-mg  ketamine  and  5.6  mg 
xylazine  per  supplemental  dose,  5  mg/kg  ketamine  and  1  mg/kg  xylazine)  were  administered 
successively  to  achieve  a  stage  of  surgical  anesthesia  for  ERG  determination.  Subsequently, 
monkey  B06Z  developed  loose  bowel  movements  during  microwave  exposure.  The  symptom 
was  recurrent  in  nature  and  would  appear  during  the  later  part  of  each  weekly  exposure, 
returning  to  normal  after  the  animal  was  returned  to  vivarium.  Twenty-four  hours  after  the 
completion  of  3  weekly  exposures  (9  exposures  total),  significant  weight  loss  (1.2  kg)  was  noted. 
Because  of  this  unusual  occurrence,  necropsy  was  requested  after  the  completion  of  all  post¬ 
exposure  experimental  procedures.  Typhylocolitis  was  diagnosed  (Appendix  19). 

The  pre-exposure  baseline  was  all  within  normal  limits,  including  fundus  pictures, 
angiograms,  and  electroretinograms.  Post-exposure  fundus  pictures  and  angiograms  remained 
within  normal  limits.  However,  a  host  of  ERG  abnormalities  was  noted.  These  ERG 
abnormalities  were  bilateral  depression  of  rod  b-wave  amplitude  (Fig.  43,  Appendix  3),  bilateral 
depression  of  combined  rod  and  cone  b-wave  amplitude  (Fig.  44,  Appendix  5),  unilateral 
depression  (O.S.)  of  combined  rod  and  cone  a-wave  amplitude  (Fig.  44,  Appendix  7),  bilateral 
depression  of  30  Hz  flicker  amplitude  (Fig.  45  and  46,  Appendix  10),  bilateral  depression  of 
cone  b-wave  amplitude  (Fig.  47,  Appendix  11),  and  bilateral  depression  of  cone  a-wave 
amplitude  (Fig.  47,  Appendix  13).  Changes  in  implicit  time  were  variable.  They  were  normal  rod 
b-wave  implicit  time  (Fig.  43,  Appendix  4),  accelerated  appearance  of  combined  rod  and  cone  b- 
wave  (Fig.  44,  Appendix  6),  delayed  appearance  (O.S.  only)  of  combined  rod  and  cone  a-wave 
(Fig.  44,  Appendix  8),  normal  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  (Fig.  47,  Appendix  12),  and  delayed 
appearance  of  cone  a-wave  (Fig.  47,  Appendix  14).  The  post-exposure  oscillatory  potentials 
were  lower  than  the  pre-exposure  oscillatory  potentials  in  this  monkey  (Fig.  48,  Appendix  9). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


However,  both  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  oscillatory  potentials  of  B06Z  were  within 
normal  limits  due  to  a  greater  variation  of  the  oscillatory  potentia  . 


Intensity  -  Response  ERG 


l-ew  2-810  3'«1  4-482 


Figure  43.  Rod  Response  of  B06Z.  Trace  1 
and  2  are  pre-exposure  baseline.  Trace  3 
and  4  are  post-exposure  ERG.  R  denotes 
O.D.,  andL,  O.S.  Post-exposure  depression 
ofb-wave  amplitude  is  clearly  evident. 


Figure  44.  Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response 
of  B06Z.  For  legends,  see  Fig.  43.  Post¬ 
exposure  a-wave  and  b-wave  amplitudes  were 
depressed  The  b-wave  was  accelerated  or 
aborted,  while  a-wave  was  delayed  slightly. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


1-957  2-058  3-531  4-532 


Intensity  -  Response  ERG 


20 

uU/div 


20 

uV/aiv 


1:  0,0.  Anpli tude  =  117.6  uV  2:  O.P,  AwlituJe  =  38.5  uV 


5  hs  per  Division 
1-831  2-503 


Figure  47.  Cone  Response  of  B06Z.  For 
legends,  see  Fig.  43.  Post-exposure  b-wave 
amplitudes  were  depressed  and  a-wave 
amplitudes  were  not  Post-exposure  a-wave 
implicit  time  was  delayed  but  b-wave  implicit 
time  was  within  normal  limit 


Figure  48.  Oscillatory  Potentials  of  B06Z 
Right  Eye.  Trace  1  is  pre-exposure  baseline 
and  2,  post-exposure  data.  The  amplitude  of 
post-exposure  wavelets  was  greatly 
depressed.  Due  to  large  variation  in 
oscillatory  potentials  in  rhesus  monkeys,  the 
post-exposure  change  was  within  normal 
ranges. 


Histopathologically,  mild  scatter  karyolysis  (Fig.  49)  and  a  small  foveal/macular 
detachment  were  found.  The  retinal  detachment  was  a  very  well  circumscribed  area  circular  in 
shape  3.5  mm  in  diameter  and  a  maximum  separation  of  1  mm  under  the  fovea  (Fig.  50).  The 
separation  occurred  between  the  outer  segments  of  the  photoreceptor  layer  and  the  pigmented 
epithelium  layer.  The  karyolysis  was  indicated  by  lack  of  hematoxylin  staining  of  the  nuclei  sap 
of  cone  photoreceptors.  The  content  and  morphology  of  chromatin  was  more  variable. 
Karyolysis  of  cone  photoreceptors  was  associated  with  the  detachment;  it  was  more  abundant  in 
the  center  of  detachment  and  was  rarely  seen  outside  the  detachment. 


3.8.2  Monkey  748Z 

Monkey  748Z  was  a  9. 5 -year-old,  8.6-kg  male  rhesus  monkey  who  was  used  to  simulate 
the  repetitive  ketamine/xylazine  doses  used  in  monkey  B06Z.  Four  weeks  prior  to  microwave 
exposures,  ketamine  and  xylazine  were  administered  according  to  the  dose  schedule  of  B06Z, 
i.e.,  86  mg  (10  mg/kg)  ketamine  followed  by  4  supplemental  doses  of  44  mg  (5  mg/kg)  ketamine 
and  8.8  mg  (1  mg/kg)  xylazine  separated  by  a  5  minute  interval  between  doses.  The  monkey  was 
subsequently  exposed  to  the  L-band  microwaves  at  4.1  W/kg  average  R-SAR  4  hrs/day  and  3 
days/week  for  3  weeks  to  a  total  of  9  exposures. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Figure  49.  Karyolysis  of  the  Cone  Photoreceptors.  This 
photomicrograph  was  obtained from  B06Z.  Several  nuclei  in  the 
outer  nuclear  layer  showed  a  lacking  of  staining. 


Figure  50.  Retinal  Detachment  of  B06Z. 


52 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


The  pre-exposure  baseline  including  fundus  pictures,  angiograms  and  ERG  were  all 
within  normal  limits.  Post-exposure  fundus  pictures  and  angiograms  were  also  within  normal 
limits.  Post-exposure  ERG  showed  a  minor  depression  in  cone  photoreceptor  function  from  its 
pre-exposure  baseline.  The  post-exposure/pre-exposure  ratio  of  the  30  Hz  flicker  amplitude 
(Appendix  10,  O.D.=  48  %,  O.S.=  53  %)  and  cone  b-wave  amplitude  (Appendix  11,  O.D.=  61 
%,  O.S.=  68  %)  were  depressed.  However,  the  absolute  magnitude  of  the  post-exposure  30  Hz 
flicker  amplitude  and  cone  b-wave  amplitude  were  within  the  population  normal  limits 
(Appendix  18).  On  the  other  hand,  absolute  magnitude  of  the  combined  rod  and  cone  b-wave 
amplitudes  from  both  eyes  (Appendix  5)  was  below  the  lower  limit  of  the  population  (Appendix 
18)  but  not  the  post-exposure/pre-exposure  ratio.  A  low  but  within  normal  limits  pre-exposure 
combined  rod  and  cone  b-wave  amplitude  was  the  main  contributor  to  the  failure  of  revealing  a 
reduced  post-exposure/pre-exposure  ratio.  Other  than  a  positive  PAS  reaction,  no  other 
histopathologic  changes  were  noted  (Appendix  16). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


4.  DISCUSSION 


4.1  The  Present  Study 

Monkeys  were  exposed  for  a  total  of  36  hours  to  pulsed  microwaves  at  1.30  MW/kg 
spatially  averaged  temporal  peak  retinal  R-SAR,  and  spatially  and  temporally  averaged  R-SARs 
of  4.28,  8.44  and  20.16  W/kg.  No  evidence  of  retinal  injuries  was  found  in  clinical  morphology 
(abnormal  fundus  picture  or  angiogram),  histopathology  (degeneration),  or  electrophysiology 
(depressed  a-  or  b-wave  amplitudes,  and  delayed  a-  or  b-wave  implicit  times).  These  negative 
findings  are  in  contrast  to  previous  reports  of  "microwave-induced  retinitis"  characterized  by 
photoreceptor  degeneration  and  ERG  amplitude  depression  in  monkeys  subjected  to  similar 
microwave  exposure  at  a  local  ocular  SAR  of  4  W/kg  [Kues  et  a\.  1989a,  1989b,  1991,  1994, 
Kues  and  McLeod  1990,  Kues  and  Monahan  1992], 

Methods  used  to  determine  early  retinopathy  in  the  present  study  included 
ophthalmoscopy,  electroretinography,  and  histological  examinations.  These  procedures  are  well 
established  in  retinal  toxicity  testing  identifying  retinotoxins  such  as  organophosphate  pesticide 
(Fenthion)  and  anthelmintic  Amoscante  [Imai  et  al.  1983,  Maertins  et  al.  1993],  It  has  been 
concluded  that  ERG  inhibition  appeared  before  any  structural  damage  could  be  detected. 
Apparently,  the  absence  of  demonstrable  retinal  injuries  (degeneration)  caused  by  microwave 
exposure  in  the  present  study  was  not  a  result  of  technical  inadequacies  or  a  lack  of  sensitivity  in 
detecting  retinal  injury  caused  by  microwave  exposure. 

4.2  Effects  in  Current  Experiment 

In  contrast  to  Kues'  findings,  no  evidence  of  histological  and  electrophysiological 
changes  was  found  in  12  monkeys  exposed  at  4  to  20  W/kg  retinal  SAR  or  5  sham-exposed 
monkeys  (a  total  of  17  animals).  Instead,  histopathological  and  electrophysiological  changes 
such  as  enhanced  periodic  acid  Schiff  (PAS)  reactivity  of  cone  photoreceptors,  enhanced 
photopic  (cone)  b-wave  amplitude  and  shortened  combined  b-wave  implicit  time  were  found. 
None  of  these  changes  are  accepted  indications  of  degenerative  change  in  the  retina.  Therefore, 
Kues'  hypothesis  on  retinal  susceptibility  to  pulsed  microwave  induced  retinal  degeneration 
(injury)  was  not  supported  by  the  results  of  the  present  study. 

4.2.1  Enhanced  ERG  Amplitudes 

An  extensive  ERG  evaluation  was  performed  in  the  present  study  in  microwave-exposed 
and  sham-exposed  monkeys.  The  ERG  rod  (scotopic)  response  was  evaluated  under  a  standard 
protocol  recommended  by  the  International  Society  for  Clinical  Electrophysiology  of  Vision 
[Marmor  and  Zrenner  1995],  and  by  Naka-Rushton  intensity-response  functions  [Severns  and 
Johnson  1993,  Massof  et  al.  1984],  The  ERG  cone  (photopic)  response  was  also  evaluated  under 
a  standard  protocol  and  by  30-Hz  flickers.  In  addition,  standard  mixed  response  (maximum 
response)  and  oscillatory  potentials  were  evaluated.  Effects  of  microwave  exposures  were 
evaluated  against  values  obtained  in  sham-exposed  monkeys  as  a  post-exposure/pre-exposure 
ratio  and  as  absolute  magnitudes.  From  these  results,  it  was  concluded  that  cone  photoreceptors 
are  more  susceptible  than  rod  photoreceptors  to  enhancement  effects  of  microwave  exposure. 
However,  reduction  (inhibition)  in  ERG  cone  response  was  not  noted  unless  other  confounding 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


factors  were  present  (high  ketamine  dose,  colitis,  special  cases,  748Z  and  B06Z).  It  is  evident 
that  the  post-exposure/pre-exposure  ratio  with  pre-exposure  baseline  serving  as  control  within 
each  individual  was  more  sensitive  than  absolute  magnitude  in  which  individual  variation  was 
taken  into  consideration  (Appendix  21).  However,  the  post-exposure/pre-exposure  ratio  was 
prone  to  technical  error  when  ERG  amplitude  was  low.  This  was  the  case  in  rod  b-wave,  a  lower 
confidence  limit  could  not  be  established  due  to  individual  variation  (Appendix  4).  Correlation  to 
histopathologic  changes  (detachment  and  karyolysis)  was  only  apparent  when  reduction  in  ERG 
absolute  amplitude  (30  Hz  flicker  and  cone  b-wave  amplitudes)  was  below  the  normal  range 
(B06Z).  A  reduction  in  post-exposure/pre-exposure  ratio  without  the  pre-exposure  absolute  value 
exceeding  the  normal  range  did  not  result  in  discemable  histopathologic  change  (748Z) 
(Appendix  21).  In  addition,  the  monkey  with  retinal  detachment  also  had  reduced  amplitudes  in 
other  ERG  endpoints  such  as  rod  b-wave,  combined  b-wave  and,  possibly,  combined  a-wave. 

Enhanced  ERG  amplitudes  can  be  caused  by  low-dose  retinal  toxins  or  metabolic 
inhibitors  [Novell  1958]  and  can  occur  prior  to  the  appearance  of  retinal  degeneration  later 
observed  as  ophthalmoscopic  and  histopathological  changes,  depression  of  ERG  amplitudes,  and 
delayed  appearances  of  a-  and  b-waves.  Agents  known  to  cause  transient  enhancement  of  ERG 
amplitudes  are  sodium  azide,  trichloroethylene,  sodium  pentobarbital  [Novell  1958],  hyperbaric 
oxygen  [Ray  and  Hawgood  1977],  ischemia  [Brunette  et  al.  1986],  and  sodium  iodate  [Adachi- 
Usami  et  al.  1992,  Hosoda  et  al  1993,  Sugimoto  et  al.  1996],  Similar  progressive  alterations  in 
ERG,  from  enhancement  to  depression,  were  noted  in  siderosis  caused  by  intraocular  metal 
particles  [Knave  1969],  ERG  enhancement  could  occur  in  humans  with  or  without  clinical  signs 
of  optical  nerve  atrophy  [Feinsod  et  al.  1971a,  1971b],  Because  of  the  correlation  between 
enhanced  ERG  amplitude  and  the  presence  of  reduced  or  extinguished  visual  evoked  potentials, 
the  ERG  enhancement  was  hypothesized  to  result  from  abolition  of  a  physiologic  rivalry 
between  photoreceptor's  increasing  sensitivity  in  the  dark  and  inhibitory  cerebral  influence  upon 
retinal  activity  exerted  via  efferent  fibers  in  the  optic  nerve  [Feinsod  et  al.  1971a,  1971b], 
Pharmacologically-enhanced  ERG  amplitudes  in  isolated  retina  in  vitro  could  be  achieved  by 
dopaminergic  antagonists  (haloperidol  and  chlorpromazine),  anticholinergic  drug  (atropine)  and 
monoamine  uptake  inhibitor  (amitriptyline)  [Nakagawa  et  al.  1988]  or  in  vivo  in  rabbits  after 
dopamine  depletion  by  intravitreal  injection  of  6-hydroxydopamine  [Oliver  et  al.  1987], 
Dopamine  has  been  shown  in  rabbits  to  be  synthesized  and  degraded  in  a  subset  of  amacrine 
(interamacrine)  cells  located  at  the  junction  of  the  inner  plexiform  and  inner  nuclear  layers 
[Dowling  and  Ehinger  1978],  Most  likely,  enhanced  ERG  amplitude  is  a  physiological  event 
originating  in  inner  retina  or  optic  nerve,  not  in  photoreceptors.  Therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  to 
find  enhanced  ERG  amplitudes  in  the  absence  of  identifiable  histopathological  change  in 
photoreceptors.  Also,  retinal  histopathologic  changes  were  not  evident  until  ERG  amplitudes 
switched  from  enhancement  to  inhibition.  Lacking  conclusive  evidence  of  ERG  amplitude 
reduction  and  delayed  appearance  in  ERGs,  it  was  concluded  that  microwaves  could  alter 
physiological  functions  of  the  retina  but  the  effect  had  not  progressed  to  degeneration,  injury  or 
retinitis. 

4.2.2  Enhanced  PAS  Reactivity 

Variations  in  PAS  reactions  among  cone  photoreceptors  of  monkeys  subjected  to 
different  microwave  treatments  poses  an  interesting  question  regarding  the  participation  of 
glucose-glycogen  balance  in  retinal  pathogenesis.  The  PAS  stain  is  used  histologically  for 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


identifying  the  presence  of  glycogen,  mucin,  and  basement  membrane.  The  intracellular  PAS 
stain  in  retinal  cells  indicates  the  presence  of  a  significant  amount  of  glycogen.  Frequently, 
reduction  or  depletion  in  glycogen  stores  may  be  the  only  change  that  precede  the  appearance  of 
other  histopathological  alterations  during  retinal  degeneration  caused  by  ischemia.  In  human  and 
monkey  retina,  glycogen  is  found  in  the  inner  layers  of  retina  from  the  nerve  fiber  to  the  outer 
plexiform  layer,  Muller's  cells  and  cones  but  not  rod  photoreceptors  [Mizuno  and  Sato  1975],  It 
was  indicated  that  retinal  glycogen  existed  in  a  dynamic  state  between  glycogen  synthesis  and 
glucose  utilization  [Kuwabara  1964],  In  reaction  to  anoxic  or  ischemic  conditions,  the  retina 
manifests  injury  first  by  a  reduction  or  depletion  of  glycogen  storage,  followed  by  impaired 
function  (reduction  in  ERG  amplitudes),  and  finally  by  tissue  damage  (e.g.,  mitochondrial 
swelling,  vacuolization  histopathologically)  [Ames  and  Gurian  1963,  Ames  1965,  Wassilewa  et 
al.  1976,  Johnson  1977],  Photoreceptors  are  known  to  be  more  resistant  to  anoxia  and  ischemia 
than  brain  or  other  retinal  neuronal  cells  [Noel  1958]  possibly  owing  to  higher  glycogen  content, 
allowing  adaptation  to  anoxic  conditions  by  a  larger  reserve  of  anaerobic  glycolysis.  Possibly  for 
the  same  reason,  Brunett  et  al.  [1986]  demonstrated  that  cones  were  more  resistant  to  ischemia- 
induced  hyperactivity  than  rods  but  cones  do  not  recover  as  well  as  rods. 

A  recent  study  on  glucose  accessibility  of  primate  rod  and  cone  photoreceptors  indicated 
otherwise  [Nihira  et  al.  1995],  This  study  found  that  both  rod  and  cone  photoreceptors  had  the 
biochemical  capability  (glucose  transporter  protein  for  facilitated  glucose  entry  into 
photoreceptors)  to  transport  exogenous  glucose.  However,  glycogen  phosphorylase  (the  rate- 
limiting  enzyme  for  glycogenolysis)  was  found  in  cone  but  not  in  rod  photoreceptors.  From  these 
observations,  Nihira  et  al.  [1995]  concluded  that  cones  could  be  more  resistant  to  acute 
reductions  in  circulating  glucose  but  are  more  prone  to  acidosis  damage  in  hypoxic  conditions 
due  to  increased  lactic  acid  production  through  glycogenolysis  and  anaerobic  glycolysis. 

Based  on  an  in  vitro  study,  glucose  deprivation  was  more  damaging  to  retina  than 
hypoxia  as  measured  by  the  recovery  of  inhibited  light-evoked  responses  [Ames  and  Guiron 
1963],  A  synergistic  effect  of  glucose  deprivation  and  hypoxia  was  also  noted.  In  addition, 
higher  incubation  temperature  appeared  to  accelerate  the  occurrence  of  an  irreversible  damage  on 
light  evoked  responses  caused  by  combined  glucose  deprivation  and  hypoxia.  One  of  Kues' 
proposed  mechanisms  (pathogenesis)  of  microwave-induced  retinal  injury  was  disruption  of  the 
retinal  microcirculation.  If  this  is  the  case,  cone  photoreceptors  would  be  more  sensitive  to 
hypoxic  acidosis  and  would  be  the  primary  cells  which  showed  degenerative  changes  and 
reduction  in  function  (reduction  in  photopic  b-wave  amplitude).  ERG  b-wave  amplitudes  were 
known  to  be  rather  resistant  to  hypoxia  and  b-wave  alterations  were  not  noted  until  the  arterial 
oxygen  partial  pressure  decreased  from  100  mm  Hg  to  40  mm  Hg  [Lisenmeier  et  al.  1983, 
Linsenmier  1990],  All  retinal  tissue  is  known  to  be  susceptible  to  acute  ischemia  induced  by  an 
increase  in  intraocular  pressure  near  or  above  the  systemic  arterial  pressure  in  owl  monkeys 
[Anderson  and  Davis  1975],  Presumably,  both  nutrient  (glucose)  and  oxygen  supplies  were 
limited  in  the  pressure  induced  ischemia,  therefore,  a  synergistic  effect  between  glucose  and 
oxygen  availabilities  could  occur.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  only  retinal  injury  case 
observed  in  the  present  study  (karyolysis  and  extinction  of  photopic  b  waves)  was  in  a  monkey 
(B06Z,  Appendix  16)  exposed  to  microwave  at  8.6  W/kg  (a  thermogenic  SAR,  Fig.  17)  with 
colitis  which  could  have  a  reduced  carbohydrate  intake  or  disturbed  glucose  availability.  In  other 
words,  retinal  injury  occurred  in  the  present  study  only  in  a  condition  that  other  predisposing 
factors  co-existed  with  the  microwave  exposure. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


It  is  known  that  the  retinas  of  alloxan-diabetic  rats  show  increased  glycogen  synthesis  in 
vitro  and  accumulation  of  glycogen  in  vivo  [Kurimoto  et  al.  1965],  Compensatory  retinal 
accumulation  of  glycogen  was  noted  in  various  species  of  animals  in  response  to  hypoxia 
[Kuwabara  1965,  Antal  1979,  Schuschereba  et  al.  1983],  However,  compensatory  glycogen 
accumulation  occurred  primarily  in  Muller  cells,  not  in  cone  photoreceptors.  In  contrast  to  cone 
glycogen  depletion,  increased  glycogen  accumulation  in  cone  photoreceptors  has  not  been 
reported  as  a  marker  for  subsequent  events  leading  to  photoreceptor  degeneration.  In  the  absence 
of  ERG  depression,  histopathological  changes  or  a  correlation  between  enhancement  of  PAS 
reactivity  and  ERG  amplitude,  variation  in  PAS  reactivity  observed  in  the  present  study  could 
only  point  to  a  physiological  variation  instead  of  a  pathological  state. 

4.3  Rues'  Results 

Although  the  report  of  retinal  effects  of  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  first  appeared  in 
1989  in  an  abstract  form  [Kues  et  al.  1989],  Kues  et  al.  did  not  provide  a  detailed  description  of 
the  histopathological  and  electroretinogram  changes  until  1995  [Kues  et  al.  1995],  The 
description  of  "microwave-induced  retinal  injuries"  can  also  be  found  in  two  consecutive  final 
reports  submitted  by  Kues  [1992,  1993]  but  these  reports  were  not  widely  disseminated. 
According  to  these  abstracts  and  reports  [Kues  et  al.  1995,  Kues  1992,  1993],  the  purported 
microwave-induced  retinal  changes  were  from  11  monkeys  exposed  to  1.25  GHz  pulsed 
microwaves  with  the  generator  output  set  at  1  MW  peak  power.  Two  different  pulse  modulations 
were  used,  i.e.,  1  Hz  repetition  rate  and  10  ps  pulse  width,  or  at  16  Hz  and  0.5  ps  to  produce  4 
W/kg  local  ocular  SAR.  The  exposure  history  in  one  monkey  was  not  specified.  In  addition,  3 
sham-exposed  monkeys  were  used  (15  animals  total,  Appendix  20).  The  microwave  exposure 
was  4  hours  per  day,  3  days  per  week  for  3  weeks  for  a  total  of  9  exposures  or  36  hours.  Their 
description  of  retinal  changes  are  as  follows.  Light  and  TEM  (transmission  electron  microscopy) 
examinations  of  microwave-exposed  eyes  demonstrated  a  variety  of  retinal  changes  including 
effects  on  the  RPE  (retinal  pigmented  epithelium),  the  inner  and  outer  segments,  the  inner  and 
outer  nuclear  layers,  the  inner  and  outer  plexiform  layers,  ganglion  cells,  and  nerve  fiber  layer.  A 
transient  decrease  in  scotopic  (rod)  response  was  observed  right  after  microwave  exposure.  The 
decreased  scotopic  response  appeared  to  recover  shortly  following  termination  of  exposure.  A 
more  dramatic  decrease  (20  to  90%)  was  observed  in  photopic  (cone)  response  and  this  decrease 
had  not  recovered  8  months  post-exposure.  The  above  description  is  consistent  with  typical 
histopathological  and  electrophysiological  changes  defined  as  retinal  degenerative  changes. 

4.4  SAR  versus  Peak-Power  to  Pulse-Length  Ratio 

From  the  apparent  difference  in  ability  to  induce  retinal  injuries  by  2.85  GHz  (3.5  W/kg, 
negative  retinal  injury)  and  1.25  GHz  (3. 8-4.0  W/kg,  positive  retinal  injury),  Kues  et  al.  [1993] 
conceived  the  concept  that  differences  in  specific  pulse/frequency  parameters,  or  specific 
exposure  parameters  might  be  more  important  than  average  SAR.  In  the  following  year,  they 
further  suggested  that  the  ratio  of  peak-power  to  pulse-length  was  an  important  factor  in  the 
induction  of  retinal  changes  [Kues  et  al.  1994],  and  indirectly  indicated  the  importance  of  rise 
time.  However,  rise  time  in  a  pulsed  microwave  with  a  known  carrier  contributes  primarily  to  the 
spread  of  bandwidth  surrounding  the  carrier  frequency.  Bandwidth  dispersion  was  calculated  by 
one  of  the  authors  (SPM)  on  three  different  1.25  GHz  6.2  ps  pulses:  square  wave  (0  rise  time,  0 


57 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


fall  time),  Cober  pulse  (50  ns  rise  time,  1  ps  fall  time)  and  FPS-7  pulse  (1.3  ps  rise  time,  2.0  ps 
fall  time).  These  calculations  indicated  that  50-dB  bandwidth  was  ±15  MHz  for  a  square  wave, 
±7  MHz  for  the  Cober  pulse  and  ±1.5  MHz  for  the  FPS-7  pulse.  The  contribution  of  rise  time  to 
band  width  dispersion  was  well  within  the  range  of  inherent  pulse-to-pulse  variation  of  the 
transmitters  (Fig.  5,  -8  MHz  and  +15  MHz  from  center  frequency).  Therefore,  absorption  of 
pulse  energy  should  not  be  altered  by  differences  in  rise  times  unless  an  error  is  made  in  the 
integration  of  the  pulses.  Because  of  the  carrier,  photon  energy  is  the  same  regardless  of  the 
difference  in  pulse  modulation.  Apparently,  any  enhancement  due  to  a  large  peak-power  to 
pulse-length  ratio  is  not  due  to  changes  in  photon  energy  or  the  absorption  of  pulse  energy. 

If  the  peak-power  to  pulse-length  ratio  was  an  important  factor,  the  usual  experimental 
practice  is  to  design  the  experiment  by  assigning  experimental  subjects  as  evenly  as  possible  to 
evaluate  the  factor  under  study.  Apparently,  this  was  not  the  case  in  Rues'  experiment,  out  of  1 1 
monkeys  with  known  exposure  histories,  2  were  subjected  to  10  ps  pulses,  8  to  0.5  ps  pulses, 
while  one  monkey  was  exposed  to  both  pulses  (Appendix  20).  Excluding  two  monkeys  without 
exposure  histories  and  histopathology,  Kues'  1.25  GHz  experiments  appeared  to  support  his 
hypothesis  on  the  importance  of  peak-power  to  pulse-length  ratio  in  pulsed  microwave-induced 
cone  photoreceptor  injuries  because  4  of  8  monkeys  subjected  to  short  pulses  (1  MW,  0.5  ps,  16 
Hz)  exhibited  karyolysis  in  cone  photoreceptors  and  neither  of  2  monkeys  exposed  to  longer 
pulses  (1  MW,  10  ps,  1  Hz)  exhibited  any  histopathological  changes  in  retina.  However,  these 
results  may  be  confounded  by  the  use  of  a  fluorophotometry  procedure.  Fluorophotometry  as  a 
confounding  factor  will  be  analyzed  in  section  4.5.3.  It  is  sufficient  to  point  out  that  retinal 
histopathological  changes  did  appear  in  one  eye  of  the  two  sham-exposed  monkeys  subjected  to 
fluorophotometry  in  Kues'  experiments.  In  addition,  3  of  4  monkeys  exposed  to  0.5  ps  pulses 
without  retinal  injury  were  exposed  at  2  inches  from  the  open-end  waveguide  antenna  and 
received  a  higher  SAR  than  the  4  monkeys  exposed  to  0.5  ps  at  3  inches  who  did  exhibit  retinal 
injuries. 

At  the  same  peak  SAR,  specific  absorption  per  pulse  (SApUise  =  SARpeak  x  pulse  width)  is 
proportional  to  pulse  width  and  SApU|se  is  smaller  in  a  shorter  pulse.  To  maintain  a  constant 
temporal  average  SAR  between  various  pulses  with  the  same  SARpeak,  pulse  repetition  rate  must 
change  inversely  with  pulse  width  (SAR  =  SARpeak  x  pulse  width  x  pulse  repetition  rate).  To 
accept  the  concept  of  a  peak  power  to  pulse  length  ratio  as  a  modifier  or  enhancer  of  microwave- 
induced  bioeffects,  modulation  frequency  (pulse  repetition  rate)  has  to  be  considered.  Otherwise, 
a  "window"  effect  has  to  be  assumed  because  the  enhancement  process  will  be  defined  as  "the 
smaller  the  SA  per  pulse,  the  larger  the  effect"  which  is  contradictory  to  basic  toxicological 
principles.  Alternatively,  pulse  modulation  enhancement  effect,  i.e.,  "the  higher  the  pulse 
repetition  rate,  the  larger  the  effect",  is  plausible  and  within  the  content  of  toxicological 
principles  if  each  pulse  delivers  an  adequate  pulse  energy  to  elicit  an  effect. 

Enhancement  by  modulation  frequency  of  a  high-peak  power  microwave  appears  to  be  an 
attractive  mechanism  to  explain  a  pulse  enhancement  effect  if  the  modulation  frequency  is 
considered  in  conjunction  with  the  thermoelastic  effect.  A  widely  known  effect,  which  is  specific 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


to  pulsed  microwaves  with  high-peak  power,  is  the  auditory  sensation  elicited  by  microwave 
pulses.  The  auditory  sensation  is  perceived  as  clicking  or  buzzing  originating  in  or  from  the  back 
of  the  head  and  corresponds  to  pulse-repetition  rate.  The  auditory  effect  has  been  the  subject  of 
several  reviews  [Lin  1978,  Chou  et  al.  1982,  NCRP  1986],  It  is  generally  accepted  that  the  pulse 
microwave  induced  audible  sound  is  generated  from  a  thermoelastic  expansion  of  brain  tissue 
that  launches  an  acoustic  (mechanical)  wave  detected  by  hair  cells  in  the  cochlea.  Mechanical 
stress  and  fatigue  can  thus  be  correlated  to  modulation  frequency.  For  pulsed  microwaves  with 
pulse  width  shorter  than  30  p,s,  the  microwave-induced  auditory  threshold  is  independent  of 
temporal  peak  power  density  (or  temporal  peak  specific  absorption)  and  it  is  entirely  dependent 
on  the  energy  density  of  the  microwave  pulse  or  SApuise.  The  threshold  SApUiSe  has  been 
determined  in  human  volunteers  [Guy  et  al.  1975],  cats  [Guy  et  al.  1975]  and  rats  [Chou  et  al. 
1985]  at  16,  10-12  and  0.9-18  mJ/kg  respectively.  The  smaller  SApUise  used  by  Kues  et  al.  was 
250  mJ/kg  (4  W/kg  ^  16  Hz)  which  was  more  than  adequate  to  elicit  thermoelastic  acoustic 
waves  in  the  cranium.  The  hypothesis  of  mechanical  stress  or  fatigue  caused  by  modulation 
frequency  is  interesting  but  has  not  been  demonstrated  satisfactorily  in  the  retinal  tissue. 

4.5  Present  Methods  and  Kues’  Methods 

Different  results  obtained  by  Kues  and  us  are  difficult  to  reconcile  because  none  of  Kues' 
informal  publications,  including  final  reports  contained  a  complete  detail  of  their  experimental 
approach  regarding  the  pulsed  microwave  induced  retinal  injury.  This  lack  of  information  creates 
difficulties  in  reconstructing  the  exposure  parameters  used  in  their  experiments.  Careful 
examination  of  Kues'  meeting  abstracts  [Kues  et  al.  1998b,  Kues  and  McLeod  1990,  Kues  et  al. 
1991,  1993,  1994,  1995],  final  reports  [Kues  1992,  1993],  an  archival  laboratory  notebook  kept 
at  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  and  knowledge  from  personnel  involved  with  the 
Kues'  project  revealed  some  fundamental  differences  in  experimental  approaches  between  Kues' 
and  our  laboratories.  They  are: 

1)  Pulse  characteristics, 

2)  Procedure  for  SAR  determination, 

3)  Animals  and  their  handling, 

4)  Diagnostic  procedures. 

The  same  WR650  open-end  waveguide  antenna  and  nominal  peak  output  power  (1  MW) 
were  used  in  both  laboratories.  However,  two  different  transmitters  were  used,  i.e.,  Cober  by 
Kues  and  FPS-7  by  us.  As  indicated  in  the  Materials  and  Methods  (section  2.3  Exposure  Facility, 
figures  3,  4,  and  5),  the  FPS-7  produced  1.25  GHz  trapezoid  pulses  with  rise  time  in  the  1  pis 
range  and  an  equivalent  pulse  width  of  5.59  pis.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Cober  produced  1.25  GHz 
trapezoid  pulses  with  a  50-ns  rise  time.  Two  pulse  widths  (10  and  0.5  p,s)  were  employed  by 
Kues  et  al. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


4.5.1  Dosimetry 

Similar  equipment  (Luxtron  MAM-05  probe  and  Luxtron  3000)  was  used  for 
thermometric  dosimetry  between  Kues'  and  the  present  studies.  Details  of  Kues'  dosimetry 
procedure  can  found  in  his  final  report  [Kues  1993]  Attachments  A  and  B.  A  3.6-kg  monkey 
carcass  was  used.  The  MAM-05  probe  was  inserted  through  a  small  wound  into  the  eye.  Both 
upward  and  downward  insertions  were  used.  The  monkey  carcass  was  placed  2  inches  (5.1  cm) 
in  front  of  the  open-end  waveguide  antenna.  The  dosimetry  results  indicated  that  "intra-ocular" 
SAR  was  1.40  ±  0.49  (mean  ±  S.D.,  n=  12,  3  runs  of  4  sensors  each)  W/kg  per  W  forward  power. 
It  is  immediately  apparent  that  SAR  reported  by  Kues  was  not  a  reliable  retinal  SAR  because: 

1) .  Anatomical  integrity  of  the  eye  was  not  preserved. 

2) .  And  most  monkeys  were  exposed  at  3  inches  from  the  open-end  waveguide  not  at  2 

inches  as  performed  in  the  dosimetry  (Appendix  20). 

Due  to  a  near  field  exposure,  estimation  of  SAR  from  2  inches  to  3  inches  is  inappropriate. 
Extensive  retinal  dosimetry,  described  in  the  Material  and  Methods  and  Results  sections,  has 
been  performed  in  the  present  study.  Assuming  that  a  similar  absorption  occurred  in  Kues' 
monkey,  the  most  likely  R-SAR  for  the  majority  of  Kues'  monkeys  was  between  11.3  and  12.5 
W/kg  (9  and  10  W  forward  power  multiplied  by  the  mean  R-SAR  1.25  W/kg/W  in  Table  1)  and 
even  higher  in  three  monkeys  with  normal  retinal  histopathology  (1  IF,  82-105  and  82-101, 
Appendix  20)  exposed  at  2  inches  from  the  open-end  waveguide  antenna.  The  SAR  (4  W/kg) 
reported  by  Kues  appears  to  be  higher  by  at  least  by  a  factor  of  3  or  more. 

4.5.2  Ketamine 

One  confounding  factor  in  Kues'  study  was  the  use  of  ketamine  as  a  tranquilizer  for 
moving  the  monkeys  in  and  out  of  the  chair.  Upon  repetitive  administration,  animals  are  known 
to  quickly  build  up  resistance  to  ketamine  [Cumming  1976,  Livingston  and  Waterman  1978],  In 
Kues'  experiments,  it  was  highly  probable  that  the  ketamine  dose  would  have  been  increased  to 
achieve  the  same  effect  in  monkeys.  Reports  of  the  consequences  of  a  high  ketamine  dose  could 
be  retinal  ultrastructural  changes  within  one  hour  after  the  ketamine  administration  (30  mg/kg 
body  weight)  in  rabbits  [Antal  1979],  or  a  transient  loss  of  vision  for  25  to  30  minutes  in  humans 
after  regaining  full  consciousness  from  intra-muscular  and  intravenous  ketamine  monoanesthesia 
at  doses  from  1.5  to  2.6  mg/kg  [Fine  1974],  The  ketamine-induced  ultrastructural  changes  were 
similar  to  those  induced  by  hypoxia  [Antal  1979],  They  were  fragmentation  of  the  photoreceptor 
inner  segment,  vacuolization  of  the  photoreceptor  outer  segment,  pyknosis  and  appearance  of 
perinuclear  cisterns  in  the  outer  nuclear  layer,  vacuolization  and  chromatin  condensation  of  the 
inner  nuclear  layer,  vacuolization  of  ganglion  cells,  vacuolization  of  the  outer  and  inner 
plexiform  layers,  and  diminution  of  glycogen  content  of  Muller  glial  cells.  In  other  words,  none 
of  the  retinal  tissues  were  spared.  Three  days  after  high  doses  of  ketamine,  the  ultrastructural 
changes  regressed  and  only  occasional  vacuolization  was  noted.  Since  its  introduction  into 
clinical  anesthesia,  ketamine  has  been  given  intravenously  for  induction  and  maintenance  of 
general  anesthesia  without  respiratory  assistance  and  oxygen  administration,  in  the  belief  that  it 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


causes  neither  respiratory  depression  nor  airway  obstruction  from  jaw  relaxation.  However, 
severe  arterial  hypoxemia,  and  transient  and  prolonged  apnea  have  been  reported  [Zsigmond  et 
al.  1 976,  Van  Wijhe  et  al.  1986], 

Depending  on  the  method  of  induction  and  the  basis  for  comparison,  the  opinion  on 
hypoxia-  (ischemia-)  induced  retinopathy  appears  to  vary  among  investigators.  The  effect  of 
reduced  oxygen  tension  on  the  retina  has  been  discussed  previously  in  sections  dealing  with 
glucose/glycogen  availability.  Noell  [1958]  concluded  from  his  review  that  anoxia  or  ischemia  of 
human  eyes  could  not  produce  irreversible  retinal  damage  unless  the  ischemia  was  extended  for 
more  than  30  minutes.  Complete  recovery  of  the  rabbit's  visual  cells  (photoreceptors)  occurred 
even  when  ischemia  was  imposed  for  60-75  minutes.  Retinal  ganglion  cells  and  bipolar  cells  in 
the  rat  degenerated  after  20  minutes  of  ischemia  whereas  visual  cell  death  required  about  twice 
as  long.  On  the  other  hand,  Anderson  and  Davies  [1975]  reported  that  experimental  increase  of 
the  intraocular  pressure  first  caused  damage  to  photoreceptors,  pigment  cells,  and  nerve  fibers, 
then  all  nervous  elements  involved.  The  Muller's  cells  and  astroglia  remained  normal.  Johnson 
[1977]  investigated  the  time  relationship  of  the  retinal  damage  caused  by  artificial  elevation  in 
intraocular  pressure  in  rabbits.  A  pressure  elevation  of  30-minute  duration  caused  pathological 
changes  in  the  first  neuron  (photoreceptor),  whereas  the  other  nervous  elements  were  only 
damaged  by  pressure  elevations  for  60-90  minutes.  Following  pressure  increases  for  90-120 
minutes,  however,  the  pigment  epithelium  and  Muller's  cells  also  developed  pathologic 
alterations.  It  can  be  concluded  that  prolonged  hypoxia/ischemia  can  damage  all  layers  of  retina 
if  the  duration  of  the  ischemia  persists  long  enough.  However,  it  is  not  clear  whether  repetitive 
administration  of  low  doses  of  ketamine  can  induce  retinopathy. 

There  are  similarities  in  ultrastructure  changes  of  Kues'  monkeys  to  retinal  changes  in 
rabbits  receiving  high  dose  ketamine  [Antal  1979],  but  the  extent  of  nuclei  degeneration 
(karyolysis,  Appendix  20)  was  far  more  advanced  in  Kues'  monkeys.  In  the  present  study,  15- 
mg/kg  ketamine  was  administered  approximately  2  hours  before  enucleation  without  any  clinical 
morphological,  histopathological  and  electrophysiological  evidence  of  retinopathy.  On  the  other 
hand,  two  of  the  monkeys  (section  3.8  Special  dftses,  B06Z  and  748Z),  which  received  a  high 
dose  of  ketamine  (50  mg/kg,  a  dose  higher  than  the  threshold  for  inducing  ultrastructural  changes 
in  retina  in  rabbits)  3  weeks  before  enucleation,  showed  a  photopic  b-wave  depression  with  and 
without  corresponding  histopathological  changes  (karyolysis  and  focal  detachment).  It  is 
possible  that  repetitive  microwave  exposures  will  enhance  the  severity  of  a  high  dose  ketamine- 
induced  degeneration  or  interfere  with  the  repair  of  ultrastructure  (histopathologic)  changes.  The 
hypothesis  of  synergistic  effect  between  microwave  exposure  and  ketamine  has  never  been  tested 
experimentally. 

4.5.3  Fluorophotometery 

One  of  the  Kues'  diagnostic  procedures  [Kues  1992,  1993]  which  was  not  used  by  us  was 
fluorophotometry  for  evaluation  of  the  blood-aqueous  barrier.  For  fluorophotometry,  halothane 
anesthesia  (2.5  %  Halothane,  97.5  %  oxygen,  0.5  L/mim),  0.3  ml  of  10  %  sodium  fluorescein 
and  a  Coherent  Radiation  Fluorotron  Master  fluorophotometer  were  used.  However,  not  all  of 


61 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Rues'  monkeys  were  subjected  to  this  procedure  (Appendix  20).  The  rationale  for  not  evaluating 
all  monkeys  was  "Since  this  procedure  can  interfere  with  the  results  of  some  of  the  other 
diagnostic  evaluations  not  all  animals  were  given  this  test"  [Rues  1993,  page  8],  As  indicated 
previously,  histopathologic  changes  were  found  in  animals  subjected  to  fluorophotometry  with 
the  exception  of  monkey  6D;  who  had  an  incomplete  exposure  history.  Although  the  majority  of 
monkeys  (9  out  of  1 1)  showed  a  post-exposure  reduction  in  ERG  cone  responses  (Appendix  20), 
further  analysis  showed  a  poor  correlation  between  the  occurrences  of  histopathologic  changes 
and  reduction  in  ERG  cone  responses.  Out  of  9  monkeys  that  showed  a  reduction  in  ERG  cone 
response,  5  had  normal  histopathologic  findings.  If  histolopathologic  findings  are  used  as 
markers  for  the  presence  of  retinal  (or  cone)  degeneration,  the  poor  correlation  could  be 
interpreted  to  mean  that  reduction  in  ERG  cone  response  is  noisier  (prone  to  false  positive)  or  it 
is  more  sensitive  (physiological  changes  precede  pathological  changes)  than  the  histopathologic 
findings.  With  the  absence  of  ERG  data  from  sham  exposed  monkeys  in  Rues'  study,  neither  of 
the  alternative  interpretations  can  be  evaluated  with  confidence. 

Halothane  inhalation  anesthesia  is  known  to  inhibit  respiration  at  any  concentration  and 
to  reduce  systemic  arterial  pressure,  cardiac  contractile  force,  cardiac  output,  and  total  peripheral 
resistance.  The  inhibitory  action  of  halothane  on  circulation  is  increasingly  pronounced  as  the 
level  of  anesthetic  is  increased.  Hypoxia  can  occur.  When  human  or  primate  subjects  were  under 
halothane  anesthesia,  it  was  noted  that  cone  dark  adaptation  was  severely  retarded,  while  no 
effect  on  ERG  b-wave  amplitude  was  noted  [Norren  and  Padmos  1975],  Previous  discussion  has 
indicated  the  ERG  b-wave  amplitude  is  sensitive  to  hypoxic  inhibition.  Without  adequate  control 
on  retinal  oxygenation,  reduced  ERG  amplitude  can  occur.  Although  the  long-term  effect  and 
effect  of  repetitive  halothane  anesthesia  on  retina  are  not  known,  it  is  probably  wise  to  use 
ketamine  anesthesia  to  avoid  respiratory  and  circulatory  complications  caused  by  halothane. 

With  an  increased  oxygen  concentration  in  the  inhaled  gas  mixture,  hypoxia  could  be 
relieved.  However,  the  retina  is  prone  to  injury  caused  by  increased  oxygen  tension  under 
hyperbaric  conditions  or  by  increased  oxygen  concentration  under  normobaric  conditions.  Severe 
oxygen  toxicity  has  long  been  known.  Noell  [1958]  indicated  that  visual  cell  death  occurred 
during  exposure  to  oxygen  concentrations  as  low  as  60  %  at  ambient  pressure  for  5  days.  Ninety 
to  one  hundred  percent  oxygen  at  ambient  pressure  destroyed  the  majority  of  visual  cells  within 
40  to  48  hours.  Furthermore,  ERG  b-wave  is  affected  selectively  and  rapidly.  Oxygen  at  1 
atmosphere  reduced  the  amplitude  of  all  ERG  components  in  15  hours  and  recovery  was  limited 
to  the  fraction  of  ERG  that  had  been  reduced  for  less  than  8  hours  [Noell  1958],  Retinal 
detachment  was  also  found  in  animals  subjected  to  prolonged  oxygen  at  1  atmosphere  for  72 
hours  [Beehler  1964],  Similar  oxygen  sensitivity  was  also  noted  in  newborn  rats  serving  as  an 
animal  model  for  retinopathy  of  prematurity  [Penn  and  Thum  1989],  Oxygen  effects,  which 
included  decreases  in  the  retinal  vasculature  and  irreversible  reduction  in  b-wave  amplitudes, 
could  be  noted  in  neonatal  rats  reared  in  40%  oxygen.  It  has  been  hypothesized  that  oxygen 
induced  a  change  in  the  permeability  of  the  choroidal  blood  vessels,  possibly  through  its  toxic 
effects  on  endothelial  cells  [Nichols  and  Lambertsen  1969],  In  view  of  an  increased  leakage  of 
blood-aqueous  barrier  (between  blood  vessels  of  iris  and  ciliary  body  and  aqueous  humor)  in 


62 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


some  of  Rues'  monkeys,  oxygen  effects  on  the  choroidal  endothelium  cannot  be  discounted 
entirely. 

Another  potential  complication  from  fluorophotometry  in  Rues'  study  was  the 
administration  of  sodium  fluorescein  in  combination  with  intense  light.  Hochheimer  et  al  [1987] 
demonstrated  that  intravenous  administration  of  1  ml  of  25  %  sodium  fluorescein  (a  higher  dose 
than  that  used  by  Rues)  in  rabbits  could  reduce  the  amount  of  blue  light  needed  to  induce  a 
phototoxic  retinal  lesion  by  almost  a  log  unit  from  1.6  to  0.2  W/cm2.  Sperling  [1985] 
demonstrated  that  intermittent  exposure  to  intense  narrow-band  light  for  1.5  to  2  hours  on  six  or 
seven  successive  days  under  behavioral  control  in  awake,  performing  rhesus  monkeys  resulted  in 
irreversible  blue-sensitive  cone  activity  after  blue  light  (463  nm,  1  mW/cm2  or  less)  and  long- 
tern  loss  of  green-sensitive  cone  activity  after  the  green  exposure  (510  nm,  1  mW/cm2).  Under 
anesthesia,  a  2-hour  exposure  to  1  mW/cm2  of  463 -nm  radiation  produced  extensive  damage  to 
the  retinal  pigmented  epithelium.  In  comparison  to  rats  maintained  under  750  lux  (0.11 
mW/cm2),  14:10  light-dark  cycle,  a  significant  reduction  in  thickness  of  the  outer  nuclear  layer 
was  noted  in  rats  maintained  under  1080  lux  (0.16  mW/cm2)  constant  light  for  9  days  or  longer 
[Johnson  et  al.  1986],  It  has  also  been  demonstrated  that  long  term  light  history  of  animals 
determined  the  sensitivity  of  the  photoreceptors  to  light  damage  [Birch  and  Jacobs  1980,  Noell 
and  Albrecht  1971],  Therefore,  factors  associated  with  fluorophotometry,  if  not  controlled 
adequately,  may  very  well  be  the  cause  of  retinal  damage. 

4.5.4  Transportation 

An  additional  confounding  factor  in  Rues'  study  could  be  the  weekly  transportation 
between  Silver  Spring  and  Baltimore  in  daylight.  If  care  was  not  exercised,  light  damage  of  the 
retina  could  result.  Noell  [1965]  noted  the  most  important  variable  in  determining  the 
effectiveness  of  excessive  light  on  retinal  damage  was  body  (and  eye)  temperature,  i.e.,  the 
higher  body  temperature,  the  greater  the  light  induced  damage.  The  synergistic  effect  of  ocular 
temperature  on  light  induced  damage  would  become  even  more  important  if  the  monkey  was 
transported  immediately  after  microwave  exposure  because  the  ocular  temperature  would  still  be 
elevated. 

4.6  Conclusion 

The  consistency  between  ERG  and  histopathology  in  the  present  study  points  to  an 
absence  of  a  microwave  retinal  effect.  A  review  of  previous  work  reporting  retinal  effects 
revealed  a  number  of  confounding  factors.  These  include:  (1)  Methods  used  to  calculate  retinal 
SAR  underestimated  actual  SAR.  (2)  Repeated  use  of  ketamine  anesthesia  would  have  resulted 
in  the  development  of  tolerance  and  higher  ketamine  doses  that  could  have  induced  ischemia  and 
retinal  damage.  (3)  Fluorophotometry  procedures  could  cause  retinal  damage.  (4)  Exposure  of 
animals  to  uncontrolled  ambient  conditions  prior  to  or  following  microwave  or  sham  exposure 
could  confound  experimental  results.  Therefore,  it  is  premature  to  conclude  that  microwave 
radiation  can  cause  retinopathy  at  4  W/kg  average  ocular  SAR. 


63 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


5.  REFERENCES 

Adachi-Usami  E,  Mizota  A,  Ikeda  H,  Hanawa  T,  and  Kimura  T  [1992]:  Transient  increase  of  b- 
wave  in  the  mouse  retina  after  Sodium  iodate  injection.  Invest.  Ophthalmol.  Visual  Sci.  33: 
31093113. 

Allis  JW,  Blackman  CF,  Fromme  ML,  and  Benane  SG  [1977]:  Measurement  of  microwave 
radiation  absorbed  by  biological  system.  1.  Analysis  of  heating  and  cooling  data.  Radio  Sci.  12 
(Suppl.):  1S-8S. 

Ames  A  III  [1965]:  Studies  of  morphology,  chemistry  and  function  in  isolated  retina.  In: 
Biochemistry  of  the  Retina.  Ed.:  Graymore  CN,  New  York,  NY:  Academic  Press,  pp  22-30. 

Ames  A  III  and  Gurian  [1963]:  Effects  of  glucose  and  oxygen  deprivation  on  function  of  isolated 
mammalian  retina.  J.  Neurophysiol.  26:  617-634. 

Anderson  DR,  and  Davis  EB  [1975]:  Sensitivities  of  ocular  tissues  to  acute  pressure-induced 
ischemia.  Arch.  Ophthalmol.  93:  367-274. 

ANSI  (American  National  Standards  Institute)  [1982]:  American  National  Standard  Safety 
Levels  with  Respect  to  Human  Exposure  to  Radioffequency  Electromagnetic  Fields,  300  kHz  to 
100  GHz.  ANSI  C95. 1-1982.  New  York,  NY:  American  National  Standards  Institute. 

Antal  M  [1979]:  Ketamine-induced  ultrastructural  changes  in  the  retina.  Albrecht  v.  Graefes 
Arch.  Klin.  Exp.  Ophthal.  210:  43-53. 

Beehler  CC,  Newton  NL,  Culver  JF,  and  Tredici  T  [1964]:  Retinal  detachment  in  adult  dogs 
resulting  from  oxygen  toxicity.  Arch.  Ophthalmol.  71:  665-670. 

Birch  DG,  and  Jacobs  [1980]:  Light  induced  damage  to  photopic  and  scotopic  mechanisms  in  rat 
depends  on  rearing  conditions.  Exp.  Neurol.  68:  269-283. 

Brunette  JR,  Olivier  P,  Zaharia  M,  Blondeau  P  and  Lafond  G  [1986]:  Rod-cone  differences  in 
response  to  retinal  ischemia  in  rabbit.  Doc.  Ophthal.  63:  359-365. 

Bresnick  GH,  Korth  K,  Groo  A,  and  Palta  M  [1984]:  Electroretinographic  oscillatory  potentials 
predict  progression  of  diabetic  retinopathy.  Preliminary  report.  Acta  Ophthalmol.  102:  1307- 
1311. 

Carpenter  R  [1979]:  Ocular  effects  of  microwave  radiation.  Bull.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  55:  1048-1057. 

Chou  CK,  Guy  AW  and  Galambos  R  [1982]:  Auditory  perception  of  radio-frequency 
electromagnetic  fields.  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  71:  1321-1334. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Chou  C-K,  Yee  K-C,  and  Guy  AW  [1985]:  Auditory  response  in  rats  exposed  to  2,450  MHz 
electromagnetic  fields.  Bioelectromagnetics  6:  323-326. 

Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Jacobi  JH,  Sanwal  M,  Baskerville  JC,  Bassen 
HE,  Brown  DO,  and  Trevithick  JR  [1987]:  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract,  n. 
Comparison  of  damage  observed  for  continuous  wave  and  pulsed  microwaves.  Exp.  Eye  Res.  45: 
233-246. 

Cumming  JF  [1976]:  The  development  of  an  acute  tolerance  to  ketamine.  Anesth.  Analg.  55: 
788-791. 

D' Andrea  JA,  Gandhi  OP,  and  Lords  JL  [1977]:  Behavioral  and  thermal  effects  of  microwave 
radiation  at  resonant  and  nonresonant  wavelengths.  Radio  Sci.  12  (suppl):  251S-256S. 

D' Andrea  JA,  Thomas  A,  Hatcher  DJ,  and  DeViette  TL  [1992]:  Rhesus  monkey  contrast 
sensitivity  during  exposure  to  high  peak  power  5.6-GHz  microwave  pulses.  In:  Abstracts  of  the 
First  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine. 

D'Andrea  JA,  Thomas  A,  Hatcher  DJ,  and  DeViette  TL  [1993]:  Rhesus  monkey  contrast 
sensitivity  during  extended  exposure  to  high  peak  power  1.3-GHz  microwave  pulses.  In: 
Abstracts  of  the  15th  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

deLorge  JO  [1976]:  Behavior  and  temperature  in  rhesus  monkeys  exposed  to  low  level 
microwave  irradiation.  Report  NAMRL-1222.  Pensacola, FL:  Naval  Aerospace  Medical 
Research  Laboratory  (AD  A021769). 

deLorge  JO  [1979]:  Operant  behavior  and  colonic  temperature  of  squirrel  monkeys  during 
microwave  irradiation.  Radio  Scil  14  (suppl.):  217S-225S. 

deLorge  JO,  and  Ezell  CS  [1980]:  Observing-response  of  rats  exposed  to  1.28  and  5.62  GHz 
microwaves.  Bioelectromagnetics  1:  183-198. 

Dowling  JE,  and  Ehinger  B  [1978]:  Synaptic  organization  of  the  dopaminergic  neurons  in  the 
rabbit  retina.  J.  Comp.  Neurol.  180:  203-220. 

Feinsod  M,  Rowe  H,  and  Auerbach  E  [1971a]:  Changes  in  the  electroretinogram  in  patients  with 
optic  nerve  lesions.  Doc.  Ophthal.  29:  169-200. 

Feinsod  M,  Rowe  H,  Auerbach  E  [1971b]:  Enhanced  retinal  responses  without  signs  of  optic 
nerve  involvement.  Doc.  Ophthal.  29:  201-21 1. 

Fine  J,  Weissman  J,  and  Finestone  SC  [1974]:  Side  effects  after  ketamine  anesthesia:  transient 
blindness.  Anesth.  Analg.  53:  72-74. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Gambrill  CS,  DeAngelis  ML,  and  Lu  S-T  [1993]:  Error  analysis  of  a  thermometric  microwave- 
dosimetry  procedure.  In:  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine.  Ed.:  Blank  M,  San 
Francisco,  CA:  San  Francisco  Press,  pp  593-595. 

Guy  AW,  Chou  CK,  and  Lin  JC  [1975]:  Microwave-induced  acoustic  effects  in  mammalian 
auditory  systems  and  physical  materials.  Ann.  N.Y.  Acad.  Sci.  247:  194-218. 

Guy  AW,  Lin  JC,  Kramar  PO,  and  Emery  AF  [1975]:  Effect  of  2450  MHz  radiaiton  on  the  rabbit 
eye.  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  23:  492-498. 

Hochheimer  BF,  Lutty  GA,  and  D’Anna  SA  [1987]:  Ocular  fluorescein  phototoxicity.  Appl. 
Optics  26:  1473-1479. 

Hosoda  L,  Adachi-Usami  E,  Mizota  A,  Hanawa  T,  and  Kimura  T  [1993]:  Early  effects  of  sodium 
iodate  injection  on  ERG  in  mice.  Acta  Ophthalmol.  71:  616-622. 

Imai  H,  Miyata  M,  Uga  S,  and  Ishikawa  S  [1983]:  Retinal  degeneration  in  rats  exposed  to  an 
organophosphate  pesticide  (Fenthion).  Environ.  Res.  30:  453-465. 

IEEE  (Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers,  Inc.)  [1999]:  IEEE  Standard  for  Safety 
Levels  with  Respect  to  Human  Exposure  to  Radio  Frequency  Electromagnetic  Fields,  3  kHz  to 
300  GHz.  New  York,  NY:  The  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineers,  Inc. 

International  Standardization  Committee  [1989]:  Standard  for  clinical  electroretinography.  Arch. 
Ophthalmol.  107:  816-819. 

Johnson  CC,  and  Guy  AW  [1972]:  Nonionizing  electromagnetic  wave  effects  in  biological 
materials  and  systems.  Proc.  IEEE  60:  692-718. 

Johnson  DD,  O'Steen  WK,  and  Duncan  TE  [1986]:  Photically-induced  retinal  damage  in  diabetic 
rats.  Current  Eye  Res.  5:  1-7. 

Johnson  NF  [1977]:  Retinal  glycogen  content  during  ischaemia.  Albrecht  v.  Graefes  Arch.  Klin. 
Exp.  Ophthal.  203:  271-282. 

Knave  B  [1969]:  Electroretinography  in  eyes  with  retained  intraocular  metallic  foreign  bodies. 
Acta  Ophthalmol.  Supplement  100:  1-63. 

Kues  H  [1992]:  Effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  humans.  Monkeys  exposed  to  1.25  GHz 
pulsed  microwaves.  Defense  Technical  Information  Center,  ADA249997. 

Kues  HA  [1993]:  High  peak  power  microwaves:  A  health  hazard.  Defense  Technical 
Information  Center,  ADA277168. 


66 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Kues  HA,  Hirst  LW,  Lutty  GA,  D'Anna  SA,  Dunkelberger  GR  [1985]:  Effects  of  2.45-GHz 
microwaves  on  primate  corneal  endothelium.  Bioelectromagnetics  6:  177-188. 

Kues  HA,  McLeod  DS,  D'Anna  SA,  Lutty  GA,  and  Monahan  JC  [1989a]:  Pulsed  microwave- 
induced  ocular  pathology  in  non-human  primates.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  1 1th  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kues  HA,  McLeod  DS,  D'Anna  SA,  Lutty  GA,  Gambrill  C,  and  Elson  EC  [1989b]:  Ocular 
changes  following  exposure  to  high  peak  pulsed  1 .25  GHz  microwaves.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  1 1th 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kues  HA,  and  McLeod  DS  [1990]:  Retinal  changes  in  the  primate  following  pulsed  2.45  GHz 
exposure.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  12th  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kues  HA,  McLeod  DS,  D'Anna  SA,  Johnson  MA,  Perry  CR,  and  Monahan  JC  [1991]: 
Microwave-induced  electroretinographic  changes  in  primates.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  13  th 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kues  HA,  and  Monahan  JC  [1992]:  Microwave-induced  changes  to  the  primate  eye.  Johns 
Hopkins  APL  Tech.  Dig.  13:  244-255. 

Kues  HA,  and  Monahan  JC  [1992a]:  Pulsed  microwave-induced  ocular  changes  in  the  restrained 
non-human  primate.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in 
Biology  and  Medicine. 

Kues  HA,  Monhan  JC,  D'Anna  SA,  McLeod,  Lutty,  and  Koslow  S  [1992]:  Increased  sensitivity 
of  the  non-human  primate  eye  to  microwave  radiation  following  ophthalmic  drug  pretreatment. 
Bioelectromagnetics  13:  379-394. 

Kues  HA,  D'Anna  SA,  Johnson  MA,  Lutty  GA,  and  Monahan  JC  [1993]:  Absence  of 
comparable  ocular  effects  in  animals  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation  from  two  separate 
systems.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  15th  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kues  HA,  D'Anna  SA,  Johnson  MA,  Green  WR,  Brooks  LJ,  and  Monahan  JC  [1994]:  The 
importance  of  specific  microwave  parameters  for  the  induction  of  ocular  effects  in  the  non¬ 
human  primate.  In:  Abstracts  of  the  16th  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kues  HA,  D'Anna  SA,  Johnson  MA,  Green  WR,  and  Monahan  JC  [1995]:  Retinal  damage 
following  repeated  exposure  to  pulsed  1.25  GHz  at  an  average  local  SAR  of  4  mW/g.  In: 
Abstracts  of  17th  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  Annual  Meeting. 

Kurimoto  S,  Newell  FW,  and  Farkas  TG  [1965]:  Glycogen  synthesis  by  the  rat  retina.  In: 
Biochemistry  of  the  Retina.  Ed.:  Graymore  CN,  New  York,  NY:  Academic  Press,  pp  31-35. 


67 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Kuwabara  T  [1965]:  Some  aspects  of  retinal  metabolism  revealed  by  histochemistry  in  Muller 
cells  in  the  pathological  condition.  In:  Biochemistry  of  the  Retina.  Ed.:  Graymore  CN,  New 
York,  NY:  Academic  Press,  pp  93-98. 

Lin  JC  [1978]:  Microwave  Auditory  Effects  and  Applications.  Springfield:  Charles  C.  Thomas. 

Linsenmeier  RA  [1990]:  Electrophysiological  consequences  of  retinal  hypoxia.  Graefe's  Arch. 
Clin.  Exp.  Ophthalmol.  228:  143-150. 

Linsenmeier  RA,  Mines  AH,  and  Steinberg  RH  [1983]:  Effects  of  hypoxia  and  hypercapnia  on 
the  light  peak  and  electroretinogram  of  the  cat.  Invest.  Ophthalmol.  24:  37-46. 

Livingston  A,  and  Waterman  AE  [1978]:  The  development  of  tolerance  to  ketamine  in  rats  and 
the  significance  of  hepatic  metabolism.  Br.  J.  Pharmacol.  64:  63-69. 

Lu  S-T,  DeAngelis  ML,  and  Gambrill  [1993]:  Ocular  microwave  thermometric  dosimetry  and 
thermometry  in  the  rabbit.  In:  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine.  Ed.:  Blank 
M,  San  Francisco,  CA:  San  Francisco  Press,  Inc.,  pp  675-678. 

Maertins  T,  Kroetlinger  F,  Sander  E,  Pauluhn  J,  and  Machemer  L  [1993]:  Electroretinographic 
assessment  of  early  retinopathy  in  rats.  Arch.  Toxicol  67:  120-125. 

Marmor  MF,  and  Zrenner  E  [1995]:  Standard  for  clinical  electroretinography  (1994  update). 
Doc.  Ophthalmol.  89:  199-210. 

Massof  R,  Wu  L,  Finkelstein  D,  Perry  C,  Starr  SJ,  Johnson  MA  [1984]:  Properties  of 
electroretinographic  intensity-response  functions  in  retinitis  pigmentosa.  Doc.  Ophthalmol.  57: 
279-296. 

Michaelson  SM,  and  Lin  JC  [1987]:  Cataract  and  other  ocular  effects.  In:  Biological  effects  and 
Health  Implications  of  Radiofrequency  Radiation.  New  York,  NY:  Plenum  Press,  pp  183-197. 

Mizuno  K,  and  Sato  K  [1975]:  Reassessment  of  histochemistry  of  retinal  glycogen.  Exp.  Eye 
Res.  21:  489-497. 

Naka,  KI,  and  Rushton  WAH  [1966]:  S-potentials  from  colour  units  in  the  retinal  of  fish 
(Cyprindae).  J.  Physiol.  185:  536-555. 

Nakagawa  T,  Kurasaki  S,  Masuda  T,  Ukai  K,  Kubo  S,  and  Kadono  H  [1988]:  Effects  of  some 
psychotropic  drugs  on  the  b-wave  of  the  electroretinogram  in  isolated  rabbit  retina.  Japan.  J. 
Pharmacol  46:  97-100. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


NCRP  [1986]:  Perception  of  PFEM  fields.  In  Biological  Effects  and  Exposure  Criteria  for 
Radiofrequency  Fields.  Bethesda:  National  Research  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and 
Measurements,  pp.  175-180. 

Nichols  CW,  and  Lambertsen  CJ  [1969]:  Effects  of  high  oxygen  pressures  on  the  eye.  N.  Engl.  J. 
Med.  281:  25-30. 

Nihira  M,  Anderson  K,  Gorin  FA,  and  Burns  MS  [1995]:  Primate  rod  and  cone  photoreceptors 
may  differ  in  glucose  accessibility.  Invest.  Ophthalmol.  36:  1259-1270. 

Noell  WK  [1958]:  Differentiation,  metabolic  organization,  and  viability  of  the  visual  cell. 

A.M.A.  Arch.  Ophthalmol.  60:  702-733. 

Noell  WK  [1965]:  Aspects  of  experimental  and  hereditary  retinal  degeneration.  In:  Biochemistry 
of  the  Retina.  Ed.:  Graymore  CN,  New  York,  NY:  Academic  Press,  pp.  51-72. 

Noell  WK,  and  Albrecht  R  [1971]:  Irreversible  effects  of  visible  light  on  the  retina:  role  of 
vitamine  A.  Science  172:  76-80. 

Norren  DV,  and  Padmos  P  [1975]:  Cone  dark  adaptation:  the  influence  of  halothane  anesthesia. 
Invet.  Ophthalmol.  14:212-227. 

Olivier  P,  Jolicoeur  FB,  Lafond  G,  Drumheller  A,  and  Brunette  JR  [1987]:  Effects  of  retinal 
dopamine  depletion  on  the  rabbit  electroretinogram.  Doc.  Ophthalomol.  66:  359-371. 

Paulsson  LE,  Hamneius  Y,  Hasson  HA,  and  Sjostrand  J  [1979]:  Retinal  damage  experimentally 
induced  by  microwave  radiation  at  55  mW/cm2.  Acta  Ophthalmol.  57:  183-197. 

Peachey  NS,  Alexander  KR,  Derlacki  DJ,  and  Fishman  GA  [1992]:  Light  adaptation  and  the 
luminance-response  function  of  the  cone  electroretinogram.  Doc.  Ophthalmol.  79:  363-369. 

Penn  JS,  and  Thum  LA  [1989]:  The  rat  as  an  animal  model  for  retinopathy  of  prematurity.  Prog. 
Clin.  Biol.  Res.  314:  623-642. 

Ray  DE,  and  Hawgood  J  [1977]:  Influence  of  systemic  factors  on  hyperbaric  oxygen  toxicity  in 
the  rat  visual  system.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  48:  1046-1050. 

Rosenthal  SW,  Birenbaum  L,  Kaplan  IT,  Metlay  W,  Snyder  WZ,  and  Zaret  MM  [1976]:  Effects 
of  35  and  107  GHz  microwaves  on  the  rabbit  eye.  In:  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic 
Waves,  Vol.  1.  Ed.:  Johnson  CC,  and  Shore  ML,  Rockville,  MD:  Food  and  Drug  Administration, 
HEW  Publ.  (FDA)-77-8010,  pp  110-128. 


69 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Schuschereba  ST,  Friedman  HI,  DeVenuto  F,  and  Beatrice  ES  [1983]:  Morphologic  effects  on 
the  retina  of  massive  exchange  transfusion  with  stroma-free  hemoglobin  solution.  Lab. 
Investigation  48:  339-352. 

Sperling  HG  [1985]:  Intense  spectral  light  induced  cone-specific  lesions  of  the  primate  retina  and 
the  effects  of  anaesthesia.  Doc.  Ophthalmol.  55:  153-167. 

Sugimoto  S,  Imawaka  M,  Kurata  K,  Kanamaru  K,  Ito  T,  Sasaki  S,  Ando  T,  Saijo  T,  and  Sato  S 
[1996]:  A  procedure  for  recording  electroretinogram  (ERG)  and  effect  of  Sodium  iodate  on  ERG 
in  mice.  Japan.  J.  Toxicol.  Sci.  21  (Suppl.):  15-32. 

Stewart-Dehaan  PJ,  Creighton  MO,  Jacobi  JH,  Ross  Sanwal  M,  Guo  TC,  Guo  WW,  and 
Trevithick  JR  [1983]:  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract:  Separation  of  field  and 
heating  effects.  Exp.  Eye  Res.  36:  75-90. 

Stewart-DeHaan  PJ,  Creighton  MO,  Larsen  LE,  Jacobi  JH,  Sanwal  M,  Baskerville  JC,  and 
Trevithick  Jr  [1985]:  In  vitro  studies  of  microwave-induced  cataract:  Reciprocity  between 
exposure  duration  and  dose  rate  for  pulsed  microwaves.  Exp.  Eye  Res.  40:  1-13. 

Severns  ML,  and  Johnson  MA  [1993]:  The  variability  of  the  b-wave  of  the  electroretinogram 
with  stimulus  luminance.  Doc.  Ophthalmol.  84:  291-299. 

Tengroth  B,  and  Aurell  E  [1974]:  Retinal  changes  in  microwave  workers.  In:  Biologic  Effects 
and  Health  Hazards  of  Microwave  Radiaiton.  Ed.:  Czerski  P,  Silverman  C,  Ostrowski  K,  Suess 
ML,  and  Waldeskog  B,  Warsaw,  Poland:  Polish  Medical  Publishers,  pp  302-305. 

Trevithick  JR,  Creighton  MP,  Sanwal  M,  Brown  DO,  and  Bassen  HI  [1987]:  Histopathological 
studies  of  rabbit  cornea  exposed  to  millimeter  waves.  Proc.  EEEE  EMBS  Conf.  9:  695-697. 

Van  Wijhe  M,  Strieker  BHC,  and  Rejger  VS  [1986]:  Prolonged  apnea  with  ketamine.  Br.  J. 
Anaesth.  58:  573-574. 

Wassilewa  P,  Hockwin  O.,  and  Korte  I  [1976]:  Glycogen  concentration  changes  in  retina, 
vitreous  body  and  other  eye  tissues  caused  by  disturbances  of  blood  circulation.  Albrecht,  v. 
Graefes  Arch.  Klin.  Exp.  Ophthal.  199:  115-120. 

Yee  KC  [1983]:  Interaction  of  RF  and  MW  with  the  living  systems:  Research  and  experience  in 
China.  In:  Biological  Effects  and  Dosimetry  of  Non-ionizing  Radiation,  Radiofrequency  and 
Microwave  Energies,  Ed.:  Grandolfo  M,  Michaelson  SM,  and  Rindi  A,  New  York,  NY:  Plenum 
Press,  pp.  501-530. 

Zsigmond  EK,  Matsuki  A,  Kothary  SP,  and  Jallad  M  [1976]:  Arterial  hypoxemia  caused  by 
intravenous  ketamine.  Anesth.  Analg.  55:  311-314. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


6.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT  AND  APPENDICES 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT:  The  authors  wished  to  acknowledge  the  technical  assistance  provided 
by  Michael  Belt,  Don  Hatcher,  David  D.  Cox  (U.S.  Navy),  Frank  Weathersby,  Kevin  Kosub 
(Veridian),  Cary  Richardson  (Geocenter),  Andre  Akers,  SSgt.  Sally  Ruiz,  SSgt.  Janis  Loveday 
(U.S.  Army),  TSgt.  Leland  Johnson,  TSgt.  Maurice  Tate,  SSgt.  Vincenet  Zavala,  SSgt.  David 
Hernandez,  SrA.  Jason  Cochetti  and  SrA.  Mike  Lilly  (U.S.  Air  Force). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  1.  Results  of  Ocular  Dosimetry  in  A35Z* 


Right  Eye 


Depth 

(cm) 

Nasal 

Temporal 

Superior 

Oral 

0.0 

2.75  ±0.09 

1.60  ±  0.17 

0.49  ±  0.08 

2.31  ±0.08 

0.5 

2.06  ±0.13 

0.89  ±0.06 

0.53  ±0.03 

1.44  ±0.10 

1.0 

1.45  ±  0.11 

0.62  ±0.05 

0.84  ±0.10 

1.15  ±  0.13 

1.5 

1.31  ±0.12 

1.01  ±0.28 

1.41  ±0.06 

0.99  ±0.14 

Left  Eye 

Depth 

(cm) 

Nasal 

Temporal 

Superior 

Oral 

0.0 

2.09  ±0.15 

1.17  ±0.07 

0.99  ±  0.34 

1.11  ±0.18 

0.5 

1.51  ±0.18 

1.48  ±0.23 

0.58  ±0.10 

1.71  ±0.24 

1.0 

1.16  ±  0.14 

0.75  ±  0.08 

0.78  ±0.15 

1.01  ±0.25 

1.5 

1.25  ±0.07 

0.63  ±  0.08 

0.58  ±0.06 

0.94  ±0.12 

*  A35Z  was  a  4.45  kg  6  years  old  female  monkey.  SAR  data  shown  is  Mean  ±  S.D.  from  4 
replicates,  which  is  normalized  to  W/kg  per  W  transmitted  power.  Specific  absorption 
rate  was  determined  from  pulsed  exposures  at  1.25  GHz  carrier,  1.18  MW  peak  power, 
5.56  p.s  pulse  width  and  17.44  Hz  for  40  seconds. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  2.  Results  of  Ocular  Dosimetry  in  A47Z* 


Right  Eye 


Depth 

(cm) 

Nasal 

Temporal 

Superior 

Oral 

0.0 

1.62  ±0.06 

1.95  ±0.04 

2.00  ±  0.07 

1.51  ±0.01 

0.5 

1.17  ±0.05 

1.68  ±0.12 

0.87  ±  0.03 

1.03  ±0.02 

1.0 

1.06  ±0.07 

1.09  ±0.05 

1.51  ±0.07 

1.19  ±  0.01 

1.5 

1.11  ±0.15 

0.92  ±  0.05 

1.32  ±0.06 

1.38  ±0.02 

Left  Eye 

Depth 

(cm) 

Nasal 

Temporal 

Superior 

Oral 

0.0 

1.38  ±0.03 

1.22  ±0.12 

1.02  ±0.11 

2.62  ±  0.09 

0.5 

0.81  ±0.04 

1.37  ±  0.17 

0.77  ±  0.06 

3.14  ±  0.10 

1.0 

0.74  ±  0.06 

0.68  ±  0.06 

1.22  ±0.06 

1.22  ±0.03 

1.5 

0.63  ±0.12 

0.78  ±  0.07 

1.47  ±0.07 

1.03  ±0.04 

*  A47Z  was  a  4.90  kg  8  years  old  female  monkey.  SAR  data  shown  is  Mean  ±  S.D.  from  4 
replicates  which  is  normalized  to  W/kg  per  W  transmitted  power.  Specific  absorption  rate 
was  determined  from  pulsed  exposures  at  1.25  GHz  carrier,  1.08  MW  peak  power,  6.04 
tis  pulse  width  and  17.46  Hz  for  40  seconds. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  3  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Rod  Response,  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (3.47  x  10'3  cd-s/m2) 

A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post  Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

250.49 

241.95  96.59 

265.61 

264.03 

99.41 

B57Z 

0 

279.76 

339.51  121.36 

278.05 

309.02 

111.14 

B87Z 

0 

259.76 

224.39  86.38 

270.73 

184.63 

68.20 

B71Z 

0 

191.71 

218.79  114.13 

177.56 

221.83 

124.93 

892Z 

0 

91.10 

247.93  272.15 

74.76 

206.10 

275.68 

The  mean  ratio  was  137.00  ±  23.43  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  213.95  ±  24.51  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  245.82  ±  14.99  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post  Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

178.05 

185.85  104.38 

107.32 

197.80 

184.31 

B93Z 

4.19 

234.64 

237.20  101.09 

219.27 

237.44 

108.29 

B59Z 

4.29 

240.00 

330.66  137.78 

251.95 

303.66 

120.52 

B14Z 

4.42 

202.68 

167.56  82.67 

178.54 

182.68 

102.32 

748Z* 

4.05 

185.61* 

135.37*  72.93* 

153.66 

137.56* 

89.52* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

The  mean  ratio  was  1 17.67  ±  1 1.06  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Exluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  201.56  ±  16.58  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 
Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  230.36  ±  21.04  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  3  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Rod  Response,  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (3.47  x  10'3  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

179.15 

166.10 

92.72 

191.22 

170.98 

89.42 

B51Z 

8.78 

235.13 

173.66 

73.86 

230.98 

192.68 

83.42 

929Z 

8.14 

188.54 

163.66 

86.80 

179.76 

164.63 

91.58 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

208.66* 

65.24* 

31.27* 

159.15* 

62.07* 

39.00* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  86.30  ±  2.84  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  200.80  ±  10.40  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  171.95  ±  4.44  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

189.27 

163.22 

86.24 

188.42 

200.49 

106.41 

B20Z 

20.71 

150.25 

140.86 

93.75 

140.37 

93.42 

66.55 

B43Z 

19.58 

119.51 

254.63 

213.06 

106.10 

246.10 

231.95 

B48Z 

20.41 

198.05 

133.66 

67.49 

174.15 

121.22 

69.61 

A72Z 

20.00 

185.49 

143.66 

77.45- 

166.22 

186.83 

112.40 

The  mean  ratio  was  1 12.49  ±  19.05  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  161.78  ±  10.00  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  168.41  ±  16.76  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  4  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Rod  Response,  b-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (3.47  x  10'3  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

88.75 

88.25 

99.44 

89.25 

89.25 

100.00 

B57Z 

0 

110.50 

98.00 

88.69 

102.00 

99.00 

97.06 

B87Z 

0 

79.00 

89.50 

113.29 

82.00 

92.50 

112.80 

B71Z 

0 

98.50 

106.25 

107.87 

96.00 

110.25 

114.84 

892Z 

0 

108.50 

86.25 

79.49 

113.00 

86.75 

76.77 

The  mean  ratio  was  99.03  ±  4.36  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  96.75  ±  3.76  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  94.60  ±  2.67  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


B.  4  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

109.50 

82.50 

75.34 

112.50 

82.50 

73.33 

B93Z 

4.19 

93.38 

109.50 

117.26 

95.50 

101.25 

106.02 

B59Z 

4.29 

96.50 

81.00 

83.94 

98.00 

81.00 

82.65 

B14Z 

4.42 

93.00 

92.50 

99.46 

101.00 

89.00 

88.12 

748Z* 

4.05 

92.50* 

86.50* 

93.51* 

93.00* 

93.00* 

100.00* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

The  mean  ratio  was  90.75  ±  5.47  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  99.92  ±  2.59  ms  (S.E., 
n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  89.91  ±  3.75  ms  (S.E., 
n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  4  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Rod  Response,  b-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (3.47  x  10 3  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

101.00 

84.50 

83.66 

100.00 

85.00 

85.00 

B51Z 

8.78 

105.00 

80.25 

76.43 

106.50 

80.75 

75.82 

929Z 

8.14 

88.00 

83.00 

94.32 

87.50 

83.00 

94.86 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

105.75* 

101.25* 

95.74* 

105.00* 

102.75* 

97.86* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  85.02  ±  3.38  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  98.00  ±  3.39  ms  (S.E., 
n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  82.75  ±  0.79  ms  (S.E., 
n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

123.50 

106.83 

86.50 

121.50 

105.50 

86.83 

B20Z 

20.71 

106.25 

86.50 

81.41 

107.00 

86.00 

80.37 

B43Z 

19.58 

111.50 

95.50 

85.65 

110.75 

94.50 

85.33 

B48Z 

20.41 

84.50 

79.00 

93.49 

85.00 

75.50 

88.82 

A72Z 

20.00 

105.00 

103.00 

98.10 

106.00 

107.00 

100.94 

The  mean  ratio  was  88.74  ±  2.14  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  106.10  ±  4.09  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  rod  b-wave  implicit  time  was  93.93  ±  3.71  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

77 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  5  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/nr) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

746.22 

512.20 

68.64 

485.06 

523.21 

107.87 

B57Z 

0 

618.30 

635.37 

102.76 

587.50 

618.90 

105.34 

B87Z 

0 

473.78 

469.27 

99.05 

476.83 

400.49 

83.99 

B71Z 

0 

457.62 

488.54 

106.76 

434.15 

467.32 

107.64 

892Z 

0 

390.86 

514.63 

131.67 

345.13 

444.52 

128.80 

The  mean  ratio  was  104.25  ±  5.86  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  501.55  ±  37.38  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  507.45  ±  23.08  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

468.60 

536.89 

114.57 

365.85 

545.43 

149.09 

B93Z 

4.19 

420.37 

438.05 

104.21 

408.54 

425.85 

104.24 

B59Z 

4.29 

558.54 

509.15 

91.16 

559.15 

499.39 

89.31 

B14Z 

4.42 

428.97 

398.29 

92.85 

436.89 

386.59 

88.49 

748Z* 

4.05 

276.10* 

235.61* 

85.34* 

254.64* 

228.54* 

89.75* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

Excluding  748Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  104.24  ±  7. 18  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  455.86  ±  24.66  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 
Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  467.46  ±  22.19  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  5  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m  ) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

382.57 

264.39 

69.11 

396.95 

326.10 

82.15 

B51Z 

8.78 

403.05 

383.78 

95.22 

401.95 

383.17 

95.33 

929Z 

8.14 

398.90 

333.84 

83.69 

408.54 

319.21 

78.13 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z 

8.64 

399.39* 

90.70* 

22.71* 

364.40* 

68.10* 

18.69* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  83.94  ±  4. 14  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  398.66  ±  3.60  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  335.08  ±  18.27  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

396.59 

358.29 

90.34 

387.56 

372.32 

96.07 

B20Z 

20.71 

385.73 

375.24 

97.28 

391.95 

354.15 

90.36 

B43Z 

19.58 

299.39 

404.63 

135.15 

281.71 

407.07 

144.50 

B48Z 

20.41 

387.93 

404.27 

104.21 

360.73 

351.52 

97.45 

A72Z 

20.00 

367.07 

303.30 

82.63 

335.49 

228.66 

68.16 

The  mean  ratio  was  100.62  ±  7.27  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  359.42  ±  12.92  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  355.95  ±  17.31  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  6  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

47.00 

47.25 

100.53 

47.00 

47.75 

101.60 

B57Z 

0 

45.25 

47.00 

103.87 

46.25 

47.50 

102.70 

B87Z 

0 

46.60 

44.50 

95.49 

45.75 

44.50 

97.27 

B71Z 

0 

47.50 

46.50 

97.89 

46.25 

45.50 

98.38 

892Z 

0 

49.25 

47.25 

95.94 

49.00 

46.25 

94.39 

The  mean  ratio  was  98.81  ±  1.02  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  46.99  ±  0.41  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  46.40  ±  0.38  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

46.50 

43.75 

94.09 

47.50 

44.50 

93.68 

B93Z 

4.19 

47.25 

51.00 

107.94 

46.75 

51.50 

110.16 

B59Z 

4.29 

48.25 

46.25 

95.85 

50.25 

45.00 

89.55 

B14Z 

4.42 

43.75 

47.50 

108.57 

43.75 

46.00 

105.14 

748Z* 

4.05 

46.75 

45.50 

97.33 

46.75 

44.75 

95.72 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

Excluding  748Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  100.62  ±  2.88  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  46.75  ±  0.77  ms  (S.E.,  n=  8). 
Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  46.94  ±  1.03  ms  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  6  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

46.50 

38.50 

82.80 

46.25 

38.50 

83.24 

B51Z 

8.78 

48.25 

43.75 

90.67 

47.75 

43.25 

90.58 

929Z 

8.14 

46.50 

44.00 

94.62 

46.25 

46.25 

100.00 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z 

8.64 

50.50 

34.75 

68.81 

50.25 

34.25 

68.16 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  90.32  ±  2.70  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  46.92  ±  0.35  ms  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  42.38  ±  1.30  ms,  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

48.50 

45.75 

94.33 

48.50 

46.50 

95.88 

B20Z 

20.71 

47.50 

49.25 

103.68 

47.50 

47.75 

100.53 

B43Z 

19.58 

49.50 

46.25 

93.43 

50.75 

45.25 

89.16 

B48Z 

20.41 

43.25 

40.00 

92.49 

42.25 

40.75 

96.45 

A72Z 

20.00 

48.50 

47.50 

97.94 

50.75 

46.50 

91.63 

The  mean  ratio  was  95.55  ±  1.37  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  46.40  ±  0.85  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  45.55  ±  0.93  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  7  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0  -283.54 

-300.72 

106.06 

-292.69 

-319.82 

109.27 

B57Z 

0  -236.28 

-226.22 

95.74 

-228.66 

-225.61 

98.67 

B87Z 

0  -232.93 

-269.51 

115.70 

-240.85 

-203.66 

84.56 

B71Z 

0  -255.80 

-238.42 

93.21 

-250.92 

-229.64 

91.52 

892Z 

0  -206.06 

-300.31 

145.74 

-225.61 

-268.29 

118.92 

The  mean  ratio  was  105.94  ±  5.62  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -245.33  ±  8.37  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -258.22  ±  12.42  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23  -267.69 

-302.44 

112.98 

-195.73 

-303.36 

154.99 

B93Z 

4.19  -233.05 

-260.00 

111.56 

-220.49 

-254.15 

115.27 

B59Z 

4.29  -267.68 

-266.16 

99.43 

-267.38 

-283.54 

106.04 

B14Z 

4.42  -264.63 

-231.22 

87.37 

-279.58 

-239.76 

85.76 

748Z* 

4.05  -242.32* 

-285.12* 

117.66* 

-215.86* 

-257.56* 

119.32* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

Excluding  748Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  109.18  ±  7.66  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -249.53  ±  10.45  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 
Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -267.58  ±  9.53  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  7  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ‘ 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

-216.59 

-139.76 

64.53 

-233.42 

-187.56 

80.35 

B51Z 

8.78 

-213.66 

-200.61 

93.89 

-212.32 

-190.92 

89.92 

929Z 

8.14 

-227.20 

-196.95 

86.69 

-216.95 

-203.97 

94.02 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z 

8.64 

-231.22* 

-164.52* 

71.15* 

-190.25* 

-145.98* 

76.73* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  84.90  ±  4.58  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -220.02  ±  3.43  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -186.63  ±  9.69  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

-186.83 

-218.07 

116.72 

-197.56 

-216.22 

109.45 

B20Z 

20.71 

-277.20 

-237.44 

85.66 

-296.34 

-213.17 

71.93 

B43Z 

19.58 

-197.08 

-213.29 

108.23 

-176.35 

-210.25 

119.22 

B48Z 

20.41 

-175.61 

-194.52 

110.77 

-158.66 

-174.70 

110.11 

A72Z 

20.00 

-213.17 

-205.98 

96.63 

-185.86 

-178.42 

96.00 

The  mean  ratio  was  102.47  ±  4.70  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -206.47  ±  14.24  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -206.21  ±  5.99  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  8  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 

A.  Sham 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

16.00 

15.25 

95.31 

15.50 

14.75 

95.16 

B57Z 

0 

14.75 

15.00 

101.69 

14.75 

15.50 

105.08 

B87Z 

0 

14.50 

14.50 

100.00 

15.00 

14.50 

96.67 

B71Z 

0 

15.25 

14.50 

95.08 

15.50 

14.75 

95.16 

892Z 

0 

16.25 

15.00 

92.31 

16.50 

15.25 

92.42 

The  mean  ratio  was  96.89  ±  1.30  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  15.40  ±  0.21  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  14.90  ±  0.1 1  ms 

(S.E.,  n=  10) 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

15.50 

14.50 

93.55 

16.50 

14.00 

84.85 

B93Z 

4.19 

15.00 

16.00 

106.67 

14.75 

15.00 

101.69 

B59Z 

4.29 

15.00 

14.50 

96.67 

15.75 

14.50 

92.06 

B14Z 

4.42 

14.50 

14.50 

100.00 

14.75 

14.50 

98.31 

748Z* 

4.05 

16.25* 

16.00* 

98.46* 

17.25* 

16.25* 

94.20* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

Excluding  748Z,  the  mean  ration  was  96.73  ±  2.35  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  15.22  ±  0.23  ms  (S.E.,  n=  8). 
Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  14.69  ±  0.21  ms  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  8  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Combined  Rod  and  Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
S cotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

15.25 

13.50 

88.52 

15.25 

13.50 

88.52 

B51Z 

8.78 

16.25 

14.25 

87.69 

16.25 

14.00 

86.15 

929Z 

8.14 

15.50 

14.75 

95.16 

15.50 

15.25 

98.39 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

15.25* 

16.25* 

106.56* 

15.50* 

17.75* 

114.52* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  90.74  ±  1.99  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  15.67  ±  0.19  ms  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  14.21  ±  0.28  ms  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

16.00 

15.00 

93.75 

16.50 

14.50 

87.88 

B20Z 

20.71 

15.25 

15.50 

101.64 

15.50 

16.00 

103.23 

B43Z 

19.58 

17.25 

14.50 

84.06 

16.75 

14.25 

85.07 

B48Z 

20.41 

13.50 

13.50 

100.00 

14.00 

14.00 

100.00 

A72Z 

20.00 

16.50 

15.50 

93.94 

17.00 

15.50 

91.18 

The  mean  ration  was  94.08  ±  2.21  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  implicit  time  was  15.83  ±  0.40  ms  (S.E.,  n-  10). 
The  post-exposure  implicit  time  was  14.83  ±  0.25  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  9  (part  1  of  2) 
ERG-Oscillatory  Potentials  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 

A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

232.9 

238.4 

102.36 

256.1 

240.2 

93.79 

B57Z 

0 

201.2 

181.1 

90.01 

197.6 

139.0 

70.34 

B87Z 

0 

211.0 

204.1 

96.73 

215.2 

202.4 

94.05 

B71Z 

0 

246.3 

136.8 

55.54 

209.1 

141.0 

67.43 

892Z 

0 

124.0 

114.5 

92.34 

103.4 

99.1 

95.84 

The  mean  ratio  was  85.84  ±  4.92  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  199.68  ±  15.61  pV  (S.E.,  n= 

10). 

The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  169.66  ±  15.97  pV  (S.E.,  n= 

10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

272.6 

225.0 

82.54 

214.0 

237.2 

110.84 

B93Z 

4.19 

97.3 

87.1 

89.52 

96.0 

86.3 

89.90 

B59Z 

4.29 

92.1 

112.2 

121.82 

72.0 

99.4 

138.06 

B14Z 

4.42 

204.7 

213.4 

104.25 

188.3 

220.9 

117.31 

748Z* 

4.05 

79.6* 

62.4* 

78.39* 

69.5* 

68.4* 

98.42* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

Excluding  748Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  106.78  ±  6.69  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  154.63  ±  26.24  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 
Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  160.19  ±  24.44  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


86 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  9  (part  2  of  2) 
ERG-Oscillatory  Potentials  (pV) 
Scotopic  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

193.9 

130.5 

67.30 

195.7 

133.4 

68.17 

B51Z 

8.78 

92.7 

110.2 

118.88 

82.7 

129.3 

156.35 

929Z 

8.14 

143.5 

68.6 

47.80 

160.4 

73.6 

45.89 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64* 

123.9* 

41.2* 

33.25* 

104.4* 

38.8* 

37.16* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  84.02  ±  18.03  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  144.82  ±19.85  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  107.60  ±  12.03  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

144.6 

167.1 

115.56 

126.1 

178.0 

141.16 

B20Z 

20.71 

179.9 

139.1 

77.32 

200.1 

116.7 

58.32 

B43Z 

19.58 

40.2 

186.0 

462.69 

56.6 

198.1 

350.00 

B48Z 

20.41 

97.6 

136.6 

139.96 

81.7 

132.0 

161.57 

A72Z 

20.00 

109.8 

126.2 

114.94 

100.7 

103.6 

102.88 

The  mean  ratio  was  172.44  ±  41.01  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  113.70  ±  16.02  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  148.34  ±  10.06  pV  (S.E.,  n  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  10  (part  1  of  2) 
ERG-30  Hz  Flicker  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  White  Flashes  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post  Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

116.10 

104.60  90.09 

115.35 

112.30 

97.36 

B57Z 

0 

104.00 

118.00  113.46 

107.56 

113.20 

105.24 

B87Z 

0 

80.85 

110.00  136.05 

77.80 

93.30 

119.92 

B71Z 

0 

83.55 

98.05  117.35 

91.80 

80.20 

87.36 

892Z 

0 

79.00 

130.50  165.19 

77.10 

109.15 

141.57 

The  mean  ratio  was  1 17.36  ±  7.77  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  93.31  ±  5.04  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  106.93  ±  4.40  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post  Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

91.00 

84.25  92.58 

74.25 

92.30 

124.31 

B93Z 

4.19 

67.35 

62.10  92.20 

62.80 

56.10 

89.33 

B59Z 

4.29 

122.80 

107.35  87.42 

124.10 

107.70 

86.78 

B14Z 

4.42 

92.40 

84.75  91.72 

91.60 

85.70 

93.56 

748Z* 

4.05 

104.25* 

48.45*  46.47* 

85.00* 

44.65* 

52.53* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

Excluding  748Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  94.74  ±  4.3 1  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  90.79  ±  8.18  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  85.03  ±  6.59  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  10  (part  2  of  2) 
ERG-30  Hz  Flicker  Amplitude  (pV) 
Scotopic  White  Flashes  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

75.25 

129.75 

172.43 

75.00 

126.70 

168.93 

B51Z 

8.78 

77.35 

100.25 

129.61 

78.75 

97.20 

123.43 

929Z 

8.14 

109.70 

64.25 

58.57 

119.27 

109.80 

92.06 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

80.40* 

31.23* 

38.84* 

84.15* 

27.63* 

32.83* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  124.17  ±  17.98  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  89.22  ±  8. 10  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  104.66  ±  9.75  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

75.53 

91.20 

120.75 

77.30 

88.65 

114.68 

B20Z 

20.71 

73.00 

63.30 

86.71 

59.05 

73.70 

124.81 

B43Z 

19.58 

44.40 

123.05 

277.14 

43.15 

131.80 

305.45 

B48Z 

20.41 

105.65 

121.80 

115.29 

97.20 

114.20 

117.49 

A72Z 

20.00 

70.10 

99.35 

141.73 

66.95 

77.95 

116.43 

The  mean  ratio  was  152.05  ±  23.68  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  71.24  ±  6.32  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  98.50  ±  7.40  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  11  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/m2)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

138.42 

119.92 

86.63 

141.28 

129.66 

91.78 

B57Z 

0 

162.28 

151.95 

93.63 

154.79 

155.12 

100.21 

B87Z 

0 

98.89 

115.20 

116.49 

101.38 

105.20 

103.77 

B71Z 

0 

84.63 

95.31 

112.62 

88.15 

89.15 

101.13 

892Z 

0 

105.25 

142.39 

135.29 

96.71 

123.17 

127.36 

The  mean  ratio  was  106.89  ±  5.00  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  1 19.18  ±  8.53  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  Post-exposure  amplitude  was  122.71  ±  7.14  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  difference  between  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  amplitudes  was  not  significant 
by  paired  t-test  (t=  2.3 1,  p=  0.08). 


B.  4  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

119.94 

146.50 

122.14 

91.22 

145.45 

159.45 

B93Z 

4.19 

84.15 

84.02 

99.85 

92.56 

82.80 

89.46 

B59Z 

4.29 

160.43 

178.78 

111.44 

181.89 

178.46 

98.11 

B14Z 

4.42 

107.28 

107.49 

100.20 

113.75 

104.70 

92.04 

748Z* 

4.05 

119.76* 

73.11* 

61.05* 

109.51* 

74.24* 

67.79* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case.  The  mean  ratio  was  109.09  ±  8.10  % 
(S.E.,  n=  8).  The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  118.90  ±  12.34  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8).  The  post¬ 
exposure  amplitude  was  128.53  ±  13.83  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

The  difference  between  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  amplitudes  was  not  significant 
by  paired  t-test  (t=  1.23,  p=  0.26). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  11  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/m2)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

65.51 

125.12 

190.99 

70.85 

117.32 

165.59 

B51Z 

8.78 

91.46 

122.20 

133.61 

95.96 

114.02 

118.82 

929Z 

8.14 

113.76 

136.79 

120.24 

125.32 

141.41 

112.84 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

96.10* 

7.56* 

7.87* 

106.34* 

6.54* 

6.15* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation.  Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  140.35  ±  12.74  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  93.81  ±  9.54  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  126.14  ±  4.43  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6).  The 
difference  between  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  amplitudes  was  significant  by  paired 
t-test  (t=  4.57,  p=  0.006). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

78.38 

95.25 

121.52 

84.19 

93.61 

111.19 

B20Z 

20.71 

87.78 

103.71 

118.15 

92.66 

100.95 

108.95 

B43Z 

19.58 

91.22 

150.78 

165.29 

94.54 

152.68 

161.50 

B48Z 

20.41 

116.19 

129.03 

111.05 

109.35 

126.34 

115.54 

A72Z 

20.00 

99.17 

112.68 

113.62 

97.27 

130.12 

133.77 

The  mean  ratio  was  126.06  ±  6.62  %  (S.E.,  n=  10).  The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was 
95.08  ±  3.56  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10).  The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  119.52  ±  6.85  pV  (S.E., 
n=  10).  The  difference  between  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  amplitudes  was 
significant  by  paired  t-test  (t=  4.00,  p=  0.003). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  12  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/nr)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 

A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg)  - 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

37.38 

36.17 

96.76 

36.88 

36.17 

98.07 

B57Z 

0 

35.33 

35.00 

99.07 

35.67 

35.00 

98.12 

B87Z 

0 

35.00 

34.83 

99.51 

34.83 

33.50 

96.18 

B71Z 

0 

35.00 

33.13 

94.66 

34.80 

33.63 

96.64 

892Z 

0 

35.13 

32.10 

91.37 

36.00 

31.90 

88.61 

The  mean  ratio  was  95.90  ±  1.10%  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  35.60  ±  0.28  ms  (S.E.,  n= 
The  Post-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  34. 14  ±  0.48  ms  (S.E.,  n= 

10). 

10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

36.00 

32.00 

88.89 

35.88 

31.5 

87.79 

B93Z 

4.19 

34.88 

33.13 

94.98 

34.25 

33.88 

98.92 

B59Z 

4.29 

36.25 

33.00 

91.03 

35.38 

33.67 

95.17 

B14Z 

4.42 

33.00 

33.88 

102.67 

32.75 

33.88 

103.45 

748Z* 

4.05 

33.63* 

35.50* 

105.56* 

32.88* 

35.25* 

107.21* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

The  mean  ratio  was  95.36  ±2.11%  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  34.80  ±  0.48  ms  (S.E., 
n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  33.12  ±  0.33  ms  (S.E., 
n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  12  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  b-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/nr)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ‘ 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

34.38 

30.33 

88.22 

33.88 

30.00 

88.55 

B51Z 

8.78 

40.17 

34.75 

86.51 

39.17 

35.00 

89.35 

929Z 

8.14 

35.86 

34.50 

96.21 

35.71 

34.50 

96.61 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

33.75* 

36.75* 

108.89* 

33.92* 

37.75* 

111.29* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  90.91  ±  1.78  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  36.53  ±  1.05  ms  (S.E., 
n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  33.58  ±  0.96  ms  (S.E., 
n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

35.75 

32.60 

91.19 

35.67 

33.30 

93.36 

B20Z 

20.71 

34.00 

37.75 

111.03 

34.00 

36.13 

106.26 

B43Z 

19.58 

39.10 

36.30 

92.84 

35.20 

35.80 

101.70 

B48Z 

20.41 

32.70 

31.40 

96.02 

32.83 

30.90 

94.12 

A72Z 

20.00 

35.60 

34.50 

96.91 

36.20 

33.75 

93.23 

The  mean  ratio  was  97.67  ±  2.08  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  35.1 1  ±  0.59  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  cone  b-wave  implicit  time  was  34.24  ±  0.71  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  13  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/m2)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post  Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

-60.61 

-49.84  82.23 

-54.88 

-47.15 

85.91 

B57Z 

0 

-30.16 

-49.39  163.76 

-35.93 

-51.50 

143.33 

B87Z 

0 

-40.57 

-46.34  114.22 

-43.09 

-42.52 

98.68 

B71Z 

0 

-34.51 

-34.23  99.19 

-30.69 

-26.73 

87.10 

892Z 

0 

-62.08 

-91.95  148.12 

-52.87 

-81.95 

155.00 

The  mean  ratio  was  1 17.75  ±  10.01  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -44.54  ±  3.85  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -52.16  ±  6.33  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

B.  4  W/kg 

Animal 

SAR 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Number 

(W/kg) 

Pre 

Post  Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

-60.61 

-39.68  65.47 

-46.95 

-46.08 

98.15 

B93Z 

4.19 

-35.55 

-34.09  95.89 

-25.00 

-41.28 

165.12 

B59Z 

4.29 

-68.78 

-78.29  113.83 

-63.01 

-78.05 

123.87 

B14Z 

4.42 

-64.02 

-41.22  64.39 

-60.94 

-45.18 

74.14 

748Z* 

4.05 

-64.09* 

-62.62*  97.71* 

-57.68* 

-55.30* 

95.87* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

The  mean  value  was  100.10  ±  12.06  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -53.11  ±  6.18  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -50.48  ±6.18  pV  (S.E.,  n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  13  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/m2)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

-37.72 

-29.63 

78.55 

-40.49 

-36.53 

90.22 

B51Z 

8.78 

-15.37 

-44.73 

291.02 

-37.15 

-39.03 

105.06 

929Z 

8.14 

-41.39 

-38.14 

92.15 

-43.07 

-41.01 

95.22 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

-30.16* 

-20.08* 

66.58* 

-26.83* 

-19.67* 

73.31* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  125.37  ±  33.31  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -35.87  ±  4.20  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 
Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -38.18  ±  2.06  pV  (S.E.,  n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

-23.34 

-45.17 

193.53 

-24.27 

-49.51 

204.00 

B20Z 

20.71 

-42.08 

-35.13 

83.48 

-41.35 

-44.22 

106.94 

B43Z 

19.58 

-36.25 

-42.70 

117.79 

-38.95 

-44.47 

114.17 

B48Z 

20.41 

-30.23 

-33.00 

109.16 

-31.24 

-33.59 

107.52 

A72Z 

20.00 

-64.09 

-62.62 

97.71 

-57.68 

-55.30 

95.87 

The  mean  ratio  was  122.99  ±  13.03  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  amplitude  was  -38.96  ±  4.21  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  amplitude  was  -43.72  ±  3.70  pV  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  14  (part  1  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/m  )  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


A.  Sham 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B89Z 

0 

14.88 

14.17 

95.23 

14.25 

14.17 

99.44 

B57Z 

0 

13.50 

14.25 

105.56 

13.67 

14.50 

106.07 

B87Z 

0 

13.17 

13.67 

103.80 

13.83 

13.67 

98.84 

B71Z 

0 

13.90 

12.63 

90.86 

14.20 

13.00 

91.55 

892Z 

0 

14.63 

13.80 

94.33 

14.88 

13.90 

93.41 

The  mean  ratio  was  95.75  ±  1.49  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  14.04  ±  0.1 1  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  Post-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  13.43  ±  0.14  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


B.  4  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B45Z 

4.23 

14.50 

12.83 

88.48 

14.38 

13.17 

91.59 

B93Z 

4.19 

13.88 

13.63 

98.20 

14.13 

13.50 

95.54 

B59Z 

4.29 

13.63 

13.67 

100.29 

13.88 

14.00 

100.86 

B14Z 

4.42 

13.75 

13.00 

94.55 

14.13 

13.63 

96.46 

748Z* 

4.05 

13.75* 

15.25* 

110.91* 

13.88* 

14.88* 

107.20* 

*  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  excluded  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 

The  mean  ratio  was  97.91  ±  1.81  %  (S.E.,  n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  pre-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  14.04  ±0.11  ms  (S.E., 
n=  8). 

Excluding  748Z,  the  post-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  13.43  ±  0.14  ms  (S.E., 
n=  8). 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  14  (part  2  of  2) 

ERG-Cone  Response,  a-Wave  Implicit  Time  (ms) 
Photopic  (28.8  cd/m2)  Adapted,  White  Flash  (2.23  cd-s/m2) 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ' 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B61Z 

8.39 

12.88 

11.83 

91.85 

13.50 

12.00 

88.89 

B51Z 

8.78 

15.00 

13.13 

87.53 

14.67 

13.75 

93.73 

929Z 

8.14 

13.14 

12.67 

96.42 

13.64 

13.83 

101.39 

B31Z 

rejected 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

— 

B06Z* 

8.64 

14.25* 

17.50* 

122.81* 

14.17* 

19.00* 

134.09* 

*  Monkey  B06Z  developed  diarrhea  and  dehydration  during  exposure.  Data  was  excluded 
and  treated  as  a  special  case.  Monkey  B31Z  was  rejected  during  the  stage  of  chair 
acclimation. 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  mean  ratio  was  93.30  ±  2.08  %  (S.E.,  n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  pre-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  13.81±  0.35  ms  (S.E., 
n=  6). 

Excluding  B06Z,  the  post-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  12.81  ±  0.35  ms  (S.E., 
n=  6). 


D.  20  W/kg 


Animal 

Number 

SAR 
(W/kg)  ■ 

Right  Eye 

Left  Eye 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

Pre 

Post 

Ratio  (%) 

B63Z 

20.09 

13.50 

13.40 

99.26 

14.17 

13.70 

96.68 

B20Z 

20.71 

13.70 

15.00 

109.49 

13.70 

14.38 

104.96 

B43Z 

19.58 

14.30 

13.00 

90.91 

14.90 

13.10 

87.92 

B48Z 

20.41 

12.10 

12.30 

101.65 

12.00 

12.20 

101.67 

A72Z 

20.00 

15.20 

14.50 

95.39 

15.30 

13.50 

88.24 

The  mean  ratio  was  97.62  ±  2.27  %  (S.E.,  n=  10). 

The  pre-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  13.89  ±  0.36  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 
The  post-exposure  cone  a-wave  implicit  time  was  13.51  ±  0.29  ms  (S.E.,  n=  10). 


97 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  1 5  (part  1  of  4) 

Naka-Rushton  Function  Parameters  of  the  ERG  Scotopic  b-waves 

A.  Sham 


Animal  No.  Pre-exposure  Baseline  Post-exposure  Response 


And  Eye 

Rmax 

log  k 

n 

Rmax 

log  k 

N 

B89Z,  OD 

346.19 

-2.8515 

1.0069 

404.08 

-2.4727 

0.6541 

B89Z,  OS 

358.06 

-2.7210 

0.9497 

416.88 

-2.5560 

0.5312 

B57Z,  OD 

489.74 

-2.5888 

0.9697 

485.65 

-2.7284 

0.9967 

B57Z,  OS 

439.19 

-2.7074 

1.0054 

450.53 

-2.6980 

0.9846 

B87Z,  OD 

346.37 

-2.6561 

0.8183 

286.44 

-2.7879 

1.2555 

B87Z,  OS 

350.05 

-2.7125 

0.8336 

252.59 

-2.7829 

1.0713 

B71Z,  OD 

327.00 

-2.3399 

0.5966 

312.21 

-2.7500 

0.9856 

B71Z,  OS 

328.15 

-2.2221 

0.4970 

317.53 

-2.7658 

0.8038 

892Z,  OD 

247.98 

-2.6445 

0.6042 

359.31 

-2.6230 

1.1793 

892Z,  OS 

178.86 

-2.9380 

1.1059 

383.07 

-2.4082 

0.7278 

MEAN 

341.16 

-2.6445 

366.83 

-2.6573 

S.E. 

±27.39 

±0.0685 

±23.63 

±0.0431 

N 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

*  Naka-Rushton  Function:  R  =  Rn,ax  I"  /  (In  +  kn).  The  first  limb  of  b-wave  intensity- 
response  curve  was  used.  Consult  text  and  figure  21  for  details. 

NA=  not  available 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  1 5  (part  2  of  4) 

Naka-Rushton  Function  Parameters  of  the  ERG  Scotopic  b-waves 

B.  4  W/kg 


Animal  No. 
and  Eye 

Pre-exposure  Baseline 

Post-exposure  Response 

Rmax 

log  k 

n 

Rmax 

log  k 

n 

B45Z,  OD 

278.34 

-2.7671 

1.2197 

396.93 

-2.8073 

0.7323 

B45Z,  OS 

249.48 

-2.6156 

0.8269 

412.48 

-2.6471 

0.7678 

B93Z,  OD 

274.16 

-2.8249 

0.9237 

267.96 

-2.9342 

1.0359 

B93Z,  OS 

278.75 

-2.7499 

0.8474 

265.08 

-2.9408 

0.9671 

B59Z,  OD 

418.16 

-2.5570 

0.7720 

381.16 

-2.8152 

1.2627 

B59Z,  OS 

426.32 

-2.5604 

0.8469 

325.33 

-2.8701 

1.3284 

B14Z,  OD 

295.57 

-2.6585 

0.8546 

278.49 

-2.7497 

0.7513 

B14Z,  OS 

346.42 

-2.4530 

0.7947 

290.73 

-2.5847 

0.5454 

748Z,  OD* ** 

232.05 

-2.6346 

1.3108 

257.83 

-2.6874 

1.7797 

748Z,  OS** 

212.13 

-2.7196 

0.8245 

226.16 

-2.6809 

1.5567 

MEAN 

320.90 

-2.6483 

327.27 

-2.7936 

S.E. 

±24.18 

±0.0445 

±21.60 

±0.0453 

N 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

8 

*  Naka-Rushton  Function:  R  =  Rn,ax  In  /  (In  +  k”).  The  first  limb  of  b-wave  intensity- 
response  curve  was  used.  Consult  text  and  figure  21  for  details. 

**  Monkey  748Z  received  high  dose  of  ketamine  and  xylazine  4  weeks  before  exposure. 
Data  was  listed  and  treated  as  a  special  case. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  1 5  (part  3  of  4) 

Naka-Rushton  Function  Parameters  of  the  ERG  Scotopic  b-waves 


C.  8  W/kg 


Animal  No. 

Pre-exposure  Baseline 

Post-exposure  Response 

and  Eye 

Rmax 

log  k 

n 

Rmax 

log  k 

n 

B61Z,  OD 

363.68 

-2.5811 

0.7590 

237.20 

-2.3653 

0.9450 

B61Z,  OS 

311.83 

-2.4954 

0.7776 

263.33 

-2.4213 

0.8682 

B51Z,  OD 

326.95 

-2.3872 

0.8480 

323.57 

-2.4189 

0.5188 

B51Z,  OS 

305.96 

-2.4357 

0.8448 

316.42 

-2.6303 

0.5731 

929Z,  OD 

255.58 

-2.7353 

0.8664 

235.57 

-2.7458 

1.0428 

929Z,  OS 

244.91 

-2.8087 

0.9081 

228.01 

-2.7168 

0.9811 

B06Z,  OD 

285.68 

-2.6102 

0.7688 

267.35 

NA 

NA 

B06Z,  OS 

264.85 

-2.5161 

0.8653 

228.01 

NA 

NA 

MEAN 

301.49 

-2.5739 

267.35 

-2.5497 

S.E. 

±18.21 

±0.0686 

±17.33 

±0.0684 

N 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

6 

*  Naka-Rushton  Function:  R  =  R^x  I"  /  (In  +  kn).  The  first  limb  of  b-wave  intensity- 
response  curve  was  used.  Consult  text  and  figure  21  for  details.  Monkey  B06Z  was 
treated  as  a  special  case  because  of  colitis.  Post-exposure  b-waves  were  absent  in  B06Z, 
therefore,  no  Naka-Rushton  function  parameters  were  obtained.  The  pre-exposure  values 
were  shown  but  not  included  in  statistics. 

NA=  not  available,  because  b  waves  were  extinguished  after  exposure. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  1 5  (part  4  of  4) 

Naka-Rushton  Function  Parameters  of  the  ERG  Scotopic  b-waves 

D.  20  W/kg 


Animal  No.  Pre-exposure  Baseline  Post-exposure  Response 


and  Eye 

Rmax 

log  k 

n 

Rmax 

Log  k 

n 

B63Z,  OD 

242.34 

-2.5895 

2.1409 

247.92 

-2.3400 

0.7240 

B63Z,  OS 

231.88 

-2.7910 

1.4497 

324.94 

-2.0486 

0.5962 

B20Z,  OD 

217.14 

-2.3400 

0.8086 

301.16 

-1.9900 

0.4494 

B20Z,  OS 

222.73 

-2.4104 

0.7591 

242.63 

-2.2164 

0.5087 

B43Z,  OD 

198.52 

-2.4823 

0.5701 

299.24 

-2.5993 

0.8215 

B43Z,  OS 

175.78 

-2.4727 

0.5669 

328.38 

-2.5267 

0.7432 

B48Z,  OD 

267.64 

-2.5790 

0.7766 

302.70 

-2.1359 

0.7555 

B48Z,  OS 

269.60 

-2.4976 

0.7107 

249.53 

-2.3646 

0.8496 

A72Z,  OD 

201.87 

-2.8408 

1.1059 

187.01 

-2.6413 

0.8676 

A72Z,  OS 

191.84 

-2.0890 

1.0450 

166.57 

-2.7675 

1.3212 

MEAN 

221.87 

-2.5812 

265.01 

-2.3630 

S.E. 

±9.95 

±0.0557 

±17.74 

±0.0840 

N 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

10 

*  Naka-Rushton  Function:  R  =  Rmax  In  /  (In  +  kn).  The  first  limb  of  b-wave  intensity- 
response  curve  was  used.  Consult  text  and  figure  21  for  details. 

NA=  not  available 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16  (part  1  of  2) 
Summary  of  Histopathologic  Changes 


Animal  # 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

RPE 

Outer 

Segments 

Inner 

Segments 

Nuclei 

Other 

B89Z 

0 

NC 

Moderate 

NC 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion* 

B57Z 

0 

NC 

Moderate 

NC 

NC 

NC 

OS 

Distortion 

B87Z 

0 

NC 

Mild 

NC 

NC 

Mild  Disc  Cupping 

OD 

Distortion 

B71Z 

0 

NC 

Mild 

PAS+ 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion 

892Z 

0 

NC 

Mild 

PAS+ 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion 

B45Z 

4.23 

NC 

Moderate 

NC 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion* 

B93Z 

4.19 

NC 

Moderate 

NC 

NC 

NC 

OS 

Distortion* 

B59Z 

4.29 

NC 

Mild 

NC 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion 

B14Z 

4.42 

NC 

Mild 

NC 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion 

B61Z 

8.39 

NC 

NC 

PAS+ 

NC 

NC 

OD 

B51Z 

8.78 

NC 

Mild 

PAS+ 

NC 

NC 

OD 

Distortion 

929Z 

8.14 

NC 

Mild 

PAS+ 

NC 

Artifactual  Macular 

OD 

Distortion 

Retinal  Detachment 

Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16  (part  2  of  2) 
Summary  of  Histopathologic  Changes 


Animal  # 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

RPE 

Outer 

Segments 

Inner 

Segments 

Nuclei 

Other 

B63Z 

20.09 

NC 

NC 

PAS+ 

NC 

Slight  Disc  Cupping 

OD 

B20Z 

OD 

20.71 

NC 

Mild 

Distortion 

NC 

NC 

NC 

B43Z 

OD 

19.58 

NC 

Mild 

Distortion 

NC 

NC 

NC 

B48Z 

OD 

20.41 

NC 

Moderate 

Distortion 

NC 

NC 

Moderate  Disc 
Cupping 

A72Z 

20.00 

NC 

NC 

PAS+ 

NC 

Slight  Disc  Cupping 

OD 

B06Z 

OD 

8.64 

NC 

Moderate 

Distortion 

NC 

Mild  Cone 
Karyolysis 

Possible  Serous 
Macular 
Detachment* ** 

748Z 

OS 

4.05 

NC 

Mild 

Distortion 

PAS+ 

NC 

NC 

NC  =  No  Change 


*  Probably  artifactual  because  of  less  than  optimum  preservation  in  other  retinal  elements. 

**  May  be  artifactual,  see  fundus  photos  and/or  SLO  for  confirmation. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16 A.  Histopathology  (sham) 


B89Z,  OD,  1 1/15/96,  sham,  PAS  (-)  B57Z,  OS,  12/12/96,  sham,  PAS  (-) 

moderate  distortion  in  outer  segments  moderate  distortion  in  outer  segments  • 


B87Z,  OD,  02/21/97,  sham,  PAS  (-)  B71Z,  OD,  05/02/97,  sham,  PAS  (+) 

mild  distortion  in  outer  segments  mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


892Z,  OD,  08/21/97,  sham,  PAS  (+) 
mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


104 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16B.  Histopathology  (4  W/kg) 


B45Z,  OD,  1 1/15/96,  4.23  W/kg,  PAS  (-)  B93Z,  OS,  12/12/96,  4. 19  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 

•  moderate  distortion  in  outer  segments  moderate  distortion  in  outer  segments 


B59Z,  OD,  03/27/97,  4.29  W/kg,  PAS  (-)  B14Z,  05/30/97,  4.42  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 

mild  distortion  in  outer  segments  mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


748Z,  OS,  11/06/97,  4.05  W/kg,  PAS  (+) 
mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 
•  high  ketamine  dose 


105 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16C.  Histopathology  (8  W/kg) 


B6 1Z,  OD,  02/21/97,  8.93  W/kg,  PAS  (+)  B5 1Z,  OD,  03/27/97,  8.78  W/kg,  PAS  (+) 

normal  outer  segments  mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


929Z,  OD,  07/24/97,  8.14  W/kg,  PAS  (+) 
mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


B06Z,  OD,  06/26/97,  8.64  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 
moderate  distortion  in  outer  segments 

•  high  ketamine  dose 

•  enterothyphlocolitis 


106 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  16D.  Histopathology  (20  W/kg) 


B63Z,  OD,  05/02/97,  20.09  W/kg,  PAS  (+)  B20Z,  OD,  05/30/97,  20.71  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 

normal  outer  segments  mild  distortion  in  outer  segments 


B43Z,  OD,  06/26/97,  19.58  W/kg,  PAS  (-)  B48Z,  OD,  07/24/97,  20.41  W/kg,  PAS  (-) 

mild  distortion  in  outer  segments  moderate  distortion  in  outer  segments 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  17 

PAS  Microdensitometry  and  Post-exposure  ERG  Photopic  White  b-Wave  Amplitude  (pV) 


Monkey 

Number 

SAR 

(W/kg) 

Eye 

(PAS  enhanced) 

PAS  Optical  Density 

Photopic  b 
Amplitude 

Nasal 

Temporal 

B89Z 

sham 

O  D.  (-) 

64.68  ±  2.82 

69.70  ±6.46 

119.92 

B57Z 

sham 

O  S.  (-) 

71.66  ±6.57 

69.77  ±5.04 

155.12 

B87Z 

sham 

O  D.  (-) 

60.11  ±  1.82 

64.68  ±2.83 

115.20 

B71Z 

sham 

O  D.  (+) 

103.50  ±  5. 18 

114.77  ±3.67 

95.31 

892Z 

sham 

O  D.  (+) 

140.26  ±  10.05 

147.72  ±  12.37 

142.39 

B45Z 

4.23  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

74.37  ±4.53 

59.61  ±  1.33 

146.50 

B93Z 

4  .19  W/kg 

os.  (-) 

68.63  ±  5.55 

68.34  ±2.58 

82.80 

B59Z 

4.29  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

69.16  ±2.90 

68.66  ±8.91 

178.78 

B14Z 

4.42  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

72.79  ±1.34 

66.55  ±7.91 

107.49 

B61Z 

8.39  W/kg 

O.D.  (+) 

101.72  ±9.57 

108.57  ±  10.75 

125.12 

B51Z 

8.78  W/kg 

O.D.  (+) 

119.17  ±  14.23 

138.72  ±6.66 

122.20 

929Z 

8. 14  W/kg 

O.D.  (+) 

79.84  ±4.72 

108.98  ±9.05 

136.79 

B63Z 

20.09  W/kg 

O.D.  (+) 

101.23  ±9.99 

113.64  ±  2.16 

95.25 

B20Z 

20.71  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

67.06  ±4.50 

60.05  ±  7.42 

103.71 

B43Z 

19.58  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

71.74  ±  1.06 

73.89  ±2.30 

150.78 

B48Z 

20.41  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

73.76  ±6.34 

76.41  ±  5.44 

129.03 

A72Z 

20.00  W/kg 

O.D.  (+) 

148.60  ±  12.37 

145.49  ±8.29 

112.68 

B06Z* 

8.64  W/kg 

O.D.  (-) 

69.61  ±  7.03 

68.96  ±0.54 

7.56 

748Z* 

4.05  W/kg 

O.S.  (+) 

97.47  ±  2.07 

102.20  ±  10.51 

74.24 

*  Special  cases. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  18 

Normal  Ranges  for  Standard  Flash  Electroretinogram  in  Rhesus  Monkeys* 


Parameter 

Average 

Lower  Limit 

Upper  Limit 

Rod  b-wave  Amplitude 

193.37  pV 

85.07  pV 

301.67  pV 

Rod  b-wave  Implicit  Time 

98.65  ms 

76.75  ms 

120.55  ms 

Combined  b-wave  Amplitude 

430.84  pV 

244.18  pV 

617.50  pV 

Combined  b-wave  Implicit  Time 

47.13  ms 

43.15  ms 

51.11  ms 

Combined  a-wave  Amplitude 

-230.42  pV 

-158.60  pV 

-302.24  pV 

Combined  a-wave  Implicit  Time 

15.53  ms 

13.81  ms 

17.25  ms 

Oscillatory  Potentials  Amplitude 

154.12  pV 

27.16  pV 

281.08  pV 

30  Hz  Flickers  Amplitude 

85.50  pV 

43.52  pV 

127.48  pV 

Cone  b-wave  Amplitude 

106.96  pV 

52.40  pV 

161.52  pV 

Cone  b-wave  Implicit  Time 

35.43  ms 

32.01  ms 

38.85  ms 

Cone  a-wave  Amplitude 

-43.38  pV 

-15.34  pV 

-71.42  pV 

Come  a-wave  Implicit  Time 

13.97  ms 

12.43  ms 

15.51  ms 

*  Data  were  obtained  from  17  adult  5-9  year  old  Rhesus  monkeys  of  both  genders  adapted 
to  darkness  for  more  than  30  minutes.  Values  from  both  eyes  were  included  (n=  34). 
Upper  and  lower  limits  were  ±  2  S.D.  of  the  mean.  The  sequence  of  testing  was  Rod 
response,  combined  cone  and  rod  response,  30  Hz  flickers  response  and  cone  response. 
Rod  response  was  evaluated  with  a  3.47  x  10'3  cd-s/m2  white  flash  in  a  dark-adapted  eye. 
Combined  rod  and  cone  response  was  evaluated  with  a  2.23  cd-s/m2  white  flash  in  a  dark- 
adapted  eye.  Oscillatory  potentials  were  the  combined  amplitude  of  the  first  two  wavelets 
of  the  combined  rod  and  cone  response.  The  30  Hz  flickers  amplitude  was  evaluated  with 
2.23  cd-s/m  white  flashes  flickering  at  30  Hz  in  a  dark-adapted  eye.  The  cone  response 
was  evaluated  with  a  2.23  cd-s/m2  white  flash  with  a  28.8  cd/m2  background  illumination. 
Because  the  complex  nature  of  response-luminance  relationship,  these  values  applied 
only  to  the  evaluation  conditions  used  as  indicated. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Appendix  19 
Necropsy  Report  (B06Z) 

INTERUM  REPORT 


Species:  Rhesus  ( Maccaca  mulatta) 

Animal  number:  B06Z 

Accession  number:  N97-0151 

Date  of  death:  26  June  1997 

Date  of  Preliminary  report:  26  June  1997 

Date  of  Final  report: 


HISTORY:  This  animal  has  a  history  of  having  diarrhea.  This  monkey  was  anesthetized  and 
euthanized  as  per  protocol,  and  the  eyes  were  harvested  by  the  investigator. 


GROSS  FINDINGS: 

General:  The  carcass  of  this  juvenile  male  Rhesus  monkey  (chest  tattoo  number 
B06Z)  is  thin,  but  adequately  muscled  with  scant  discernible  subcutaneous  or 
cavitary  adipose  tissue.  The  dorsal  processes  of  the  entire  vertebral  column  are 
prominent  (possibly  muscle  atrophy,  or  secondary  to  diarrhea  and  weight  loss). 
Respiratory  system:  The  lungs  are  diffusely  mottled  red  (congestion).  On  the 
diaphragmatic  aspect  of  the  right  caudal  lung  lobe,  there  is  a  round  dome  shaped 
emphysematous  nodule  that  is  6  mm  diameter  and  extends  above  the  pleural  surface 
approximately  3-4  mm  (possibly  due  to  lung  mites).  Between  the  caudal  margin  of  the  left 
inferior  lung  lobe  and  the  pleural  surface  of  the  thorax,  there  is  a  single  fine  fibrous 
adhesion.  On  the  center  of  the  anterior  surface  of  the  left  apical  lung  lobe,  there  is  an 
irregularly  shaped  hard  white  mass  that  is  2  mm  at  greatest  dimension  (probably 
mineralization). 

Cardiovascular  system:  No  gross  lesions  detected  (NGLD). 

Spleen:  (NGLD) 

Liver/gallbladder:  (NGLD) 

Endocrine  glands:  The  head  of  the  pancreas  is  covered  by  a  thin  shiny  gelatinous  film,  and 
there  is  a  segmental  loss  of  lobular  definition  (interstitial  edema). 

Gastrointestinal  tract:  The  cecum  and  colon  are  diffusely  and  uniformly  distended  by  gas 
and  fluid  greenish-gray  intestinal  contents,  and  the  serosal  blood  vessels  are  distended  and 
more  prominent  than  normal  (congestion).  All  of  the  mesenteric  lymph  nodes  are  mildly 
enlarged. 

Urinary  system:  (NGLD) 

Testes,  ovaries,  uterus,  accessory  sex  glands:  (NGLD) 

Ears  and  eyes:  The  eyes  have  been  harvested  by  the  investigator.  No  gross  lesions  are 
detected  in  the  ears. 

Brain:  (NGLD) 

Spinal  cord:  (NGLD) 

Bone  marrow,  bones,  and  joints:  (NGLD) 

Musculature:  (NGLD) 

GROSS  DIAGNOSES: 

Cecum;  colon:  Typhylocolitis,  with  diarrhea  with  gaseous  distention 
Lungs:  Congestion 
Pancreas:  Edema 
Carcass:  Thin 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


LABORATORY  FINDINGS:  Swabs  were  taken  of  the  jejunum,  cecum  and  colon  and 
submitted  to  the  laboratory  for  culture.  No  Salmonella,  Shigella,  Campylobacter, 
Vibrio,  or  Yersinia  were  isolated  from  any  of  the  submitted  samples. 

MICROSCOPIC  FINDINGS: 

Slide  1: 

Lung:  In  the  sections  of  lungs  examined  histologically  there  is  a  mild  infiltration  of  plasma 
cells  neutrophils  and  occasional  lymphocytes  in  the  bronchiolar  epithelial  lining.  There  is  a 
similar  inflammatory  infiltrate  around  the  terminal  airways  and  there  is  a  focal  area  where 
there  is  marked  type  II  pneumocyte  hyperplasia.  The  alveoli  contain  large  numbers  of 
distended  pulmonary  alveolar  macrophages  (PAM).  In  this  area  there  is  also  marked 
congestion  and  multifocal  hemorrhage.  The  BALT  adjacent  to  the  bronchial  multifocally 
exhibits  lymphoid  depletion. 

Slide  2: 

Trachea:  Tracheitis,  subacute,  diffuse,  minimal 

Thyroid  Gland:  Follicular  cysts,  focal 

Adipose  Tissue:  Atrophy,  diffuse,  moderate 

Parathyroid  gland;  esophagus;  tongue:  Within  normal  limits  (WNL) 

Slide  3: 

Heart:  Diffusely  affecting  the  papillary  muscles  in  the  endocardial  surface  of  the  left 
ventricle.  Myocardiocytes  are  diffusely  shrunken  and  separated  by  increased  or  expanded 
interstitium. 

The  interstitium  is  expanded  by  clear  space  interpreted  to  be  edema. 

Within  in  the  remainder  of  the  myocardium  there  are  numerous  large  finely  stippled  nuclei. 
The  myocardiocytes  are  diffusely  shrunken  and  exhibits  one  or  more  of  the  following 
changes: 

cytoplasmic,  hyalinization,  vacuolization 
Slide  4: 

Spleen:  The  red  pulp  is  diffusely  congested  with  small  to  moderate  populations  of 
neutrophils  and  tingible  body  macrophages.  Multifocally  the  white  pulp  exhibits  lymphoid 
depletion  (hialosis). 

Mesenteric,  splenic:  Serosa  atrophy  of  fat,  diffuse,  severe 

Lymph  node,  axillary,  sinuses:  Reticuloendothelial  hyperplasia  ,  diffused,  marked  with  mild 
histiocytosis. 

Lymph  node,  axillary,  cortex:  Lymphoid  depletion,  multifocal,  mild 
Adipose  tissue,  axillary:  Atrophy,  diffuse,  moderate 

Slide5: 

Liver:  Congestion,  diffuse,  moderate 
Gall  Bladder:  WNL 

Slide  6: 

Kidney,  right:  Glomeruli,  Bowman's  space,  eosinophilic  (proteinaceous)  material  diffuse, 
mild  to  moderate.  Collecting  ducts  syncytial  cell  formation,  multifocal,  moderate  with 
intraepithelial  vacuolization. 

Kidney,  right:  Proximal  confluent  tubules:  Degeneration  and  vacuolization,  diffuse, 
moderate 

Kidney,  right:  Nephritis,  interstitial,  subacute,  multifocal,  minimal 

Kidney,  right,  distal  tubules:  Degeneration  necrosis  with  condensation,  multifocal,  moderate 
Adrenal  Gland,  right:  Congestion,  multifocal,  mild 
Adipose  tissue,  Perirenal:  Atrophy,  diffuse,  moderate 

111 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Ureter,  right:  Increased  numbers  of  binucleated  cell,  multifocal,  moderate 
Slide  7: 

Kidney,  left:  Changes  similar  to  those  seen  in  the  right  kidney  but  also  with  lobulation  of  the 
glomerular  tufts  and  multifocal  mineralization  within  the  medulla. 

Adrenal  gland,  left:  WIML 

Adipose  tissue,  perirenal:  Atrophy,  diffuse,  moderate 

Ureter,  epithelium:  Increased  numbers  of  binucleated  cells,  multifocal,  moderate 
Slide  8: 

Diaphragm;  duodenum;  pancreas:  WNL 

Stomach,  cardia  colon:  Edema,  diffuse,  moderate  with  multifocal  lymphoplasmacytic 
gastritis 

Slide  9: 

Jejunum:  Diffusely  effecting  the  mucosal  surface  villi  are  separated  by  clear  space 
interpreted  to  be  edema  and  increased  numbers  of  lymphocytes  and  plasma  cells  and 
multifocal  within  the  submucosal  lamina  propria  there  are  low  numbers  of  lymphocytes  and 
plasma  cells. 

Jejunum:  Enteritis,  lymphoplasmacytic,  diffuse  ,  moderate  with  submucosal  hemorrhage 
Colon:  Colitis,  subacute,  lymphoplasmacytic  and  histiocytic,  diffuse,  moderate 
Urinary  Bladder:  Essential  normal  but  with  increased  binuculate  and  trinuculate  transitional 
epithelial  cells. 

Stomach,  fundus:  Gastritis,  subacute,  multifocal,  minimal 
Slide  10: 

Lymph  node,  mesenteric:  Sinus  histiocytosis,  diffuse  moderate  with  mild 
eyrthrophagocytosis 

Lymph  node,  mesenteric,  cortex:  Lymphoid  depletion,  multifocal,  moderate  (possibly 
amyloid) 

Stomach,  pylorus:  Gastritis,  lymphoplasmacytic,  diffuse,  mild 

Ileum:  Enteritis,  plasmacytic,  diffuse,  moderate  with  numerous  Mott  cells  and  multifocal 
accumulation  of  homogenous  hyalinized  eosinophilic  material 

Slide  11: 

Cecum:  Typhlitis,  plasmacytic  and  histiocytic,  subacute,  diffuse,  mild  with  multifocal  crypt 
ectasia,  crypt  abscesses,  and  interstitial  edema. 

Prostate;  seminal  vesicles:  WNL 

Slide  12: 

Rectum:  Proctatitis,  plasmacytic  and  histiocytic,  subacute,  diffuse,  mild 
Testis,  right;  Epididymis,  right:  WNL 

Slide  13: 

Testis,  left;  Epididymis,  left:  WNL 
Spinal  Cord,  cervical:  WNL 

Slide  14:  Spinal  Cord,  thorax:  WNL 

Slide  15:  Spinal  Cord,  lumbar:  WNL 

Slide  16:  Spinal  Cord,  sacrum:  WNL 

Slide  17:  Cerebrum,  occipital  lobe:  Gliosis,  subacute,  diffuse,  moderate. 

Pituitary  gland:  WNL. 


Technical  Report 


Microwave  Induced  Retinal  Effects 


Slide  18:  Cerebrum,  parietal  lobe;  cerebellum:  Gliosis,  subacute,  diffuse,  moderate. 

Slide  19:  Cerebrum;  pons:  Gliosis,  subacute,  diffuse,  moderate. 

Slide  20:  Cerebrum,  at  the  level  of  the  mammillary  bodies:  Gliosis,  subacute,  diffuse, 
moderate. 

Slide  21:  Cerebrum,  at  the  level  of  the  optic  chiasma:  Gliosis,  subacute,  diffuse,  moderate. 
Slide  22:  Cerebrum,  olfactory  lobe:  Gliosis,  subacute,  diffuse,  moderate. 

Slide  23:  Sternum:  In  decal 

SIGNIFICANT  FINDINGS: 

Intestine:  Enterothyphlocolitis,  lymphoplasmacytic,  diffuse,  moderate. 

Heart,  endocardium  and  papillary  muscles:  Necrosis,  acute,  moderate. 

Cerebrum;  cerebellum:  Gliosis,  diffuse,  moderate. 

Spleen;  lymph  nodes;  BALT;  GALT:  Lymphoid  depletion,  multifocal,  mild  to 
moderate. 

Lung:  Type  II  pneumocyte  hyperplasia,  focal,  mild,  with  lipid  pneumonia. 

Adipose  tissue:  Atrophy 


COMMENT: 

Other  than  the  typhylocolitis,  there  are  no  significant  gross  lesions  detected  in  the 
carcass  of  this  Rhesus  monkey.  (I  am  attributing  the  diffuse  yellow  discoloration  to 
protocol  procedures.)  This  is  a  preliminary  report.  As  soon  as  the  microscopic 
examination  of  the  harvested  tissues  has  been  completed,  a  final  report  will  be 
submitted. 


113 


o 

*8 

w 

13 

d 

I 

T5 

<U 

O 

d 

HH 

1 

1 


t 

o 

ex 

Pi 

13 

o 

*3 

•s 

<u 

H 


ti 

o 

I1 

13 

.3 

E 

1/5 

a> 

5 

4h 

O 

3 

3 

3 

d 

O) 

© 

<N 


T3 

d 

<D, 

I 


C/5 

rxo 

B  Q 

5s 

0s 

w  p 
8  § 
gu 

O  CD 

.3  O 

•4-»  r. 

g  Q 

JJ  o 

w  pi 


t>0 

O 

o 

*3  w 

cd  60 
&  d 
O 

tt  H 

a  I 


2 

e  I 

|! 

Uh  Cu 


P  H 
1/3  £3 

3  £ 

Oh  Oh 


<D 

si 


d 

•§ 

o 

I 


t- 

rs 


CX 

$ 

p 


a 

p 

d 

o 

o 


'o 

I 


-> 

t 

o 


-» 

I 

On 

*n 


vO 

O 


-> 

VO 

— >. 

*A 

t- 

cf\ 

»n 

15 

<N 

i 

t-H 

oo 

(N 

00 

CO 

-f 

O 

m 

i 

-> 

I 

< 

c 

“t 

“> 

£ 

cd 

PQ 

On 

m 

o 

nl 

(N 

o 

r- 

CN 

*T3 

00 

o 

Z 

z 

On 

-> 

1 

On 

00 

t- 

00 

00 

15 

i 

-> 

■ 

-> 

i 

5 

ON 

-> 

i 

< 

r- 

5 

< 

< 

On 

Z 

ON 

VO 

-> 

i 

S3 

m 

00 

in 

00 

<N 

in 

in 

00 

25 

CN 

r- 

O 

Z 

1' 


Td 

O 


* 

O 

Q 

o 


£h 

O 

a. 

p 

o 

P 


t 

1 

O 

o 

.55 

*5? 

o 

1“ 


w 


P 

bO 


•8 

§ 


I 


T3 

p 

tr> 

cd 

B 

8 

TJ 

£ 

I 

p 


P 

ex 


T3 

p 

S3 

B 

O 

.s 

I* 

1 

p 


XJ 

CD 

c/i 

cd 

B 

.3 

& 

a 

I 

P 


&  & 


TJ 

(D 

c/> 

cd 

a 

y 

nd 


P  3 
bO^D 

Jed 
p 

o  E 
o  & 
d 

*>  Q 
O  O 


s 

-8 

o 

d 


Td 

p 

to 

cd 

B 

P 

Td 

& 

3 

*§ 

p 


p 

ex 


£ 

£ 

£ 

1 

££ 

£ 

NO 

f“H < 

NO 

pH 

vO 

VO 

VO  NO 

r^H 

NO  X 

T  1  r-H 

^co 

co' 

n 

iA 

zl 

£  £ 

£  ^ 

o5 

ZL 

in 

in 

in 

«n 

•n  in 

‘P  o 

c^- 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o  o 

O  — 1 

X3 

P 

to 

cd 

a 

£ 

I 

P 


P 

ex 


£ 

NO 

f-H 

£ 


T3 

P 


£ 

<D 

ex 


Td 

P 


g 

*8 

& 


O-  *“H  >— • 


Q  § 

VO  «-H 


«d 

to 


W 

W 

w 

n 

<0 

P-( 

Uh 

o 

<n 

1 

w 

w 

CN 

i 

-d’ 

o 

i— i 

i 

TT 

in 

o 

■ 

TT 

r-H 

o 

t 

m 

<N 

T— H 

1 

<n 

r- 

i-^ 

fN 

^H 

CN 

CN 

<N 

CM 

<N 

fS 

CN 

tFH 

rsi 

<N 

<N 

00 

OO 

00 

00 

00 

£  I 


W 

& 

1 

CO 

d 

i 


d 

o 

s 

<U 


P 

X) 


I 

cd 


|  |  |  | 
z  z  z  z 


£  £ 


< 

z 


< 

z 


d 

<D 

P 

B 

p 

X> 

d 

i 

s 

T3 


IS 

to  ^ 

II 

8  S3 

B  2 

o  ex 

P  o 
-d  p 

ex 

|1 

’co  ex 


i 


X3 

co 


w  53 

T3  Oh 


On  ^ 
cm  ^ 
°  00 
13  .5 

O  * 


<u  w 
O  /—> 
^5  c/5 

-i  £ 


Js. 

0>  ctf 

*5  4) 


|  II  O  i 

->  & 

«  h_t  CD 


115 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

Form  Approval 

OMB  No.  07040183 

flAKc  rafortiflQ  hvrdm  for  tfcb  cpjbctbn  1 1  iirfannHbn  b  intatwl  u  inrafi*  1  hMr  par  respite,  btJudfcj  Mt  tim  far  mrbwju  kpfnjctjphs;  wi/rhiac  iiitfiu  datt  sums,  laffwnri  inf  mifttirina  tin  ifeta  mM  ini  aMkiiwr 
njfNWira  ft*  caljcttai  al  iarorm»loi.  rniMiti  wring  tkj*  bkfn  itfmili  *  w  alter  atpict  «1  this  obHmCmis  af  infamitia  toeMing  MUiit'aft  hr  nhciiq  (hit  burfm  to  WitMan  Hutfocirte*  »rnc*t  DfUrtiiu  for 

InfaMlu  QpiTatimnd  flapdiU  1215  lilfaron  OamH^wiy,  auto  T2W,  Aringtit  M  22202002.  and  u  tk  Offict  of  N*«|«iait  kiW  Burfiat  fetenwrk  ftahutiin  Pnjict  I07W-D1MJ.  WArfriagfarii.  DC  2D503. 

1.  AGENCY  USE  ONLV  ILuvatiank}  i.  H(Mf  DfttE  3.  REPORT  TYPE  AND  DATES  . . . 

28/02/2000  Final 

H.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

RETINAL  EFFECTS  OF  HIGH  PEAK  POWER  MICROWAVES  IN  RHESUS 
MONKEYS 

“FUNDING  kUMBEItt - 

Contract  Numbers: 

AF  #41624-96-C-9009 

ARMY  §  DAMD17-94-C-4069 

B.  AUTHORS  "  - - 

Shin-Tsu  Lu;  Ph.D.;  McKesson  BioServices 

Satnam  P.  Mathur;  Ph.D.;  McKesson  BioServices 

John  A,  D’Andrea;  Ph.D.;  Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment  (Continue) 

Program  Element  Number: 

Navy  6,3/  Army  622782 

AF  62202F  (Continue) 

T.  PBIFOflMING  qrganeatiqnnam£(S)  AND  A66ft£&(ESi - 

U. S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

*.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 

REPORT  NUMBER 

USAMRD  WRAIR  9907  006  TX 
NHRC  DET  99-01 
AFRL-HE-BR-TR- 1 999-023 1 

9.  SPONSORINGJMONIT OfflNG  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESSES! - 

Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  (AFSC)  U.  S.  Army  Medical  Research 

Human  Effectiveness  Directorate  and  Materiel  Command 

8315  Hawks  Road  504  Scott  Street 

Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas  78235-5324  Ft.  Detrick,  MD  21072-5012 

laross  Merrill  (210)536-4709 _ Bruce  Stuck  (2 101536-4621 

mSPONSOfllHdfMOIlllTURINfc  ” 

AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 

NHRC  DET,  AFRL/HEDR, 
USAMCMR 

11.  SUPPLEMENT ARY  NOTES  - - — - 

a.  Approved  for  public  release:  distribution  unlimited 

1Z».  DISTRIBUTION  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 

Will  be  published  in  Bioelectromagnetics  in  2000 

f».  CH&f  AlfiUTIori  fcboE - 

13.  ABSTRACT  (Auximm  200  words)  - - - - 

This  report  summarized  current  progress  in  Tri-Service  research  efforts  on  the  retinal  effects  of  1.25  GHz  high  peak  power 
microwaves  in  Rhesus  monkeys.  Pre-exposure  fundus  photographs,  retinal  angiograms,  and  electroretinograms  (ERG)  were 
obtained  to  screen  for  normal  ocular  structure  and  function  and,  after  exposure,  as  endpoints  of  the  study.  Histopathology 
of  the  retina  was  used  as  an  additional  endpoint.  Seventeen  monkeys  were  randomly  assigned  to  receive  sham  exposure  or 
pulsed  microwave  exposures.  Microwaves  were  delivered  anteriorly  to  the  face  at  0,  4.4,  8.1  or  20.2  W/kg  spatialty  and 
temporally  averaged  retinal  specific  absorption  rates  (R-SAR).  The  pulse  characteristics  were  1 .04  MW  (~  1.30  MW/kg 
temporal  peak  R-SAR),  5.59  us  pulse  length  at  0,  0.59,  1.18  and  2.79  Hz  pulse  repetition  rates.  Exposure  was  4  hr  per  day 
and  3  days  per  week  for  3  weeks,  for  a  total  of  9  exposures.  The  pre-exposure  and  post-exposure  fundus  pictures  and 
angiograms  were  all  within  normal  limits.  The  response  of  cone  photoreceptors  to  light  flash  was  enhanced  in  monkeys 
exposed  at  8  or  20  W/kg  R-SAR  but  not  in  monkeys  exposed  at  4  W/kg  R-SAR.  Scotopic  (rod)  response,  maximum 
(combined  cone  and  rod)  response  and  Naka-Rushton  Rmax  and  log  k  of  scotopic  b-waves  were  all  within  normal.  Retinal 
histopathology  revealed  the  presence  of  an  enhanced  glycogen  storage  in  photoreceptors  distributed  evenly  among  sham 
(2/5),  8  W/kg  (3/3)  and  20  W/kg  (2/5)  exposed  monkeys,  while  enhanced  glycogen  storage  was  not  observed  in  the  4  W/kg 
(0/4)  exposed  group.  Supranormal  cone  photoreceptor  b-wave  was  R-SAR  dependent,  and  may  be  an  early  indicator  of  mile 
inury.  However,  no  evidence  of  degenerative  changes  and  ERG  depression  was  seen.  (see  continuation  on  back! 

1*1.  SUBJECT  TEAMS 

Microwaves,  Rhesus  Monkey,  High  Peak  Power,  Electroretinogram,  Retinal  Angiogram, 
Fundus  Photograph,  Retinal  Histopathology- 

IslM&bfPAdlS - 

122 

Iff  PRICE  code 

1>.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  IB.  SECUArrV  CLASSIFICATION  l£.  SECURITY  d.A$i)flt ATl6AI  "1 

OF  REPORT  OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified  Unclassified  Unclassified 

E 


Continue  from  front  page: 

5,  Project  #  Navy  706  Army  878  AF  7757B330 

Work  Unit  #  NMRDC  #63706.  M00096,  DN241243  AF  775B330 

6.  Author (s) 

John  M.  Ziriax;  Ph.D.;  Naval  Health  Research  Center  Detachment 
James  H.  Merritt;  U.S.  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory 
Gerard  Lutty;  Ph.D.;  Johns  Hopkins  University 
D.  Scott  McLeod;  Johns  Hopkins  University 
Mary  Johnson;  Ph.D.;  University  of  Maryland 

9.  Performing  Organization  Name(s)  and  Address (es) 

Naval  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command 

National  Naval  Medical  Center 

Bldg.  1,  Tower  12 

8901  Wisconsin  Avenue 

Bethesda,  MD  20889-5044 

14 .  Abstract 

We  concluded  that  retinal  injury  is  very  unlikely  at  4  W/kg. 
Functional  changes  that  occur  at  higher  R-SAR  are  probably  reversible 
since  we  saw  no  evidence  of  histopathologic  correlation  with  ERG 
changes . 


AFEL4iB-SR“TR*1990-0219 


y  mm mmm  mr mmm 


ft  MAMMA? ICAL.  MP0SL 


ELECTROMAGNETIC  CELL,  I 


Sherwood  Samn 


AIR  FORCE  RESEARCH  LABORATORY 

mmm  iF^gCTOiREssiiRiCTORATi^ 

DIRECTED  ENERGY  BIOEFFECTS  DIVISION 
2503  Gillingham  Drive,  Building  ITS 
Brooks  AF8,  Texas  78235*5102 


Satnam  Mithur 


USA-VfCSSR 

SScKessotr  HBOC  BieSemces 
8308  Hawks  Road,  Big  1168 
Brooks  AF8 IX  78235*5460 


NOTICES 


This  report  is  published  in  the  interest  of  sdefi^Rc  aod  ^chrikat  lnfomtation 
exchangeand  does  notomstitute  approval  or  disapproval  gf  its  Ideas  or  findings. 

Using  Government  drawings,  specifications,  or  other  data  included  in  this 
document  for  any  purpose  other  than  Govemment-reiatod  procurement  does  mi  In 
any  way  obligate  the  US  Government,  The  fact  that  the  Government  formulated  or 
supplied  the  drawings,  specifications,  or  other  data,  does  not  license  the  holder  or 
any  other  person  or  corporation,  or  convey  any  rights  or  permission  to  manufacture, 
use,  or  sell  any  patented  invention  that  may  relate  to  them, 

The  Offtce  ot  Puhic  Affairs  has  reviewed  this  report,  and  it  is  releasable  to  the 
National  Technical  Information  Service,  where  it  will  he  available  to  the  general 
public,  including  foreign  nationals- 


RICHARD  L-  MILLER,  Ph.D. 

Chief,  Directed  Energy  bloeffects  Division 


DESTRUCTION  NOTICE  '"  Destroy  by  any  method  tbatwii!  prevent  disclosure  of 
cantentsorreconstructloo  ol  the  document. 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


Form  Approved 
OMB  No.  0704-0188 


Public  reporting  burden  for  this  collection  of  Information  la  estimated  to  avarage  1  hour  per  response,  including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  date  sources,  gathering  and 
maintaining  the  data  needed,  and  completing  completing  and  reviewing  the  colection  of  information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  espeet  of  this  eolection  of 
information,  including  suggestions  for  reducing  this  burden,  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson  Davis  Highway,  Suite 
1204,  Arlington,  VA  22202*4302,  and  to  the  Office  of  Management  end  Budget,  Paperwork  Reduction  Project  (0704-01881,  Waehington.  DC  20503. _ 


1.  AGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Leave  blank)  2.  REPORT  DATE  3. 

May  1999  Interim  Report-  February  1998  -January  1999 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

A  Mathematical  Model  of  a  Gigahertz  Transverse  Electromagnetic  Cell,  I 


6.  AUTHOR(S) 
Sherwood  Samn 
Satnam  Mathur 


5.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 

PE  -  62202F 

PR  -  7757 

TA  -  B4 

WU  -  02 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(5)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

USA-MCMR 

McKesson  HBOC  Bio-Services 
8308  Hawks  Road,  Bldg  1168 
Brooks  AFB  TX  78235-5460 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 


9.  SPONSORING/MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 
Air  Force  Research  Laboratory 
Human  Effectiveness  Directorate 
Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division 
2509  Gillingham  Drive  Bldg  175 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base  TX  78235-5118 


11.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 

Air  Force  Research  Laboratory  Technical  Monitor:  Dr.  Sherwood  Samn,  210-536-5708 


10.  SPONSORING/MONITORING  AGENCY 
REPORT  NUMBER 

AFRL-HE-BR-TR  1999-0219 


12a.  DISTRIBUTION/AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 


12b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODE 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


13.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  words) 


A  mathematical  model  for  transverse  electromagnetic  (TEM)  cell  has  been  constructed.  The  model  estimates  the  electric  field 
inside  rectangular  or  flared  TEM  cells  driven  by  a  wideband  electromagnetic  current  pulse.  The  finite  difference  time  domain 
(FDTD)  approach  is  used. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS 

Transverse  electromagnetic  cell,  wideband  electromagnetic  pulse,  finite  difference  time  domain, 
mathematical  model 


OF  REPORT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


15.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

24 

16.  PRICE  CODE 


18.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 

19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 

20.  LIMITATION  OF  ABSTRACT 

OF  THIS  PAGE 

UNCLASSIFIED 

OF  ABSTRACT 

UNCLASSIFIED 

UL 

NSN  7540-01-280-5500 


Standard  Form  290  (Rev.2-89) 
Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std.  Z39-18 
298-102 


(Include  Report  Document  Page  Here) 


1 


Contents 


INTRODUCTION 
THE  GTEM  CELL 
A  MATHEMATICAL  MODEL 
COMPUTATIONAL  RESULTS 
CONCLUSION 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 


List  of  Figures 

1  An  UltraWide-Band  (UWB)  Exposure  Facility  and  Data  Acquisition  System.  2 

2  Dimensions  of  the  GTEM  Cell .  3 

3  Excitation  Plane  SI.  (Not  to  scale)  .  4 

4  NBC  Cell .  7 

5  Potential  (V)  in  Excitation  Plane .  8 

6  Calculated  and  Measured  Relative  E  Field  for  100  MHz  Sinusoidal  Input.  .  .  8 

7  Calculated  and  Measured  Relative  E  Field  for  500  MHz  Sinusoidal  Input.  .  .  9 

8  Calculated  and  Measured  Relative  E  Field  for  1  GHz  Sinusoidal  Input.  ...  9 

9  Calculated  E  Field  in  Excitation  Plane  for  V=42.75  kV .  10 

10  Selected  Cross  Sections  of  the  GTEM  cell .  11 

11  Simulated  Input  Voltage  Source .  13 

12  Calculated  Ey  at  4  points  in  CS  BB  vs  Measured  Ey .  13 

13  Contour  Plot  of  Measured  Peak  E .  14 

14  Contour  Plot  of  Calculated  Peak  E .  14 


iii 


A  Mathematical  Model  of  a 
Gigahertz  Transverse 
Electromagnetic  Cell,  I. 

INTRODUCTION 

The  Gigahertz  Transverse  Electromagnetic  Cell  (GTEM)  has  become  a  popular  tool  in  the 
electromagnetic  compatibility  community  for  testing  radiated  emission  and  immunity  (sus¬ 
ceptibility)  work  [5,  6,  13,  19].  Recently  it  has  found  use  in  the  electromagnetic  dosimetry 
community  [8].  Whatever  the  application,  it  is  important  to  know  exactly  what  the  held 
characteristics  are  inside  the  cell,  both  before  and  after  a  test  object  is  placed  in  it.  The  field 
characteristics  in  an  empty  cell  can  be  obtained  by  direct  measurement.  However,  once  an 
object  is  placed  in  the  cell,  the  field  is  disturbed  and  it  is  no  longer  easy  to  know  or  even  mea¬ 
sure  the  field  experienced  by  the  object  [14,  15,  16].  Mathematical  modeling  hence  becomes 
indispensable.  Using  measurements  from  an  empty  cell,  one  can  validate  a  mathematical 
model  of  the  cell.  Knowing  the  electrical  properties  of  the  object  being  tested,  one  can  then 
estimate  the  field  experienced  by  the  test  object  using  the  model.  Moreover,  the  scattered 
field  from  the  object,  if  measured,  can  also  be  used  to  further  validate  the  mathematical 
model. 

Mathematical  analysis  of  various  aspects  of  GTEM  cells  can  either  be  theoretical  [11, 
17,  18,  21,  22,  23,  28,  29,  31,  32]  or  computational  (modeling)  [9,  12,  16,  25].  Here  we 
describe  our  initial  efforts  to  model  a  1.92m-long  GTEM  cell  (Sandia  National  Laboratories, 
Albuqueque,  New  Mexico)  using  a  finite  difference  time  domain  method.  The  GTEM  ceil 
modeled  is  part  of  an  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  exposure  system  currently  in  use  at  U.S. 
Army-Medical  Research  and  Material  Command  (USA-MCMR)  to  study  the  bioeffects  of 
RF  radiation  in  experimental  animals.  A  precise  knowledge  of  the  electric  field  inside  the 
test  subject  is  required  to  calculate  the  energy  absorption  rate  in  the  animal. 


1 


High  Frequency  Absorber 


2 


Figure  1:  An  Ultrawide-Band  (UWB)  Exposure  Facility  and  Acquisition  System 


(/) 

0) 

o> 


< . . . 878.7 - > 


3 


Figure  2  :  GTEM  Cell  Cross  Section  (Vertical  Plane) 


THE  GTEM  CELL 


A  detail  description  of  the  GTEM  cell  and  related  electronics  and  issues  can  be  found  in 
the  references  [1,  24].  A  schematic  of  the  UWB  exposure  facility  and  acquisition  system  is 
shown  in  Figure  1  and  the  dimensions  of  the  GTEM  Cell  (in  a  vertical  cross  section)  are 
shown  in  Figure  2. 


A  MATHEMATICAL  MODEL 

To  calculate  the  electromagnetic  field  inside  the  GTEM  cell,  we  use  a  finite  difference  time 
domain  (FDTD)  code  modified  from  Kunz  and  Luebbers  [20].  This  is  basically  the  Yee’s 
algorithm  [30]  enhanced  with  more  recent  treatment  of  absorbing  boundary  conditions  [3,  4], 


A.  Source 

Instead  of  modeling  the  complete  GTEM  cell  starting  from  the  source  (a  spark-gap  pulse 
generator)  outside  the  main  chamber,  we  assumed  that  the  field  inside  the  cell  is  driven  by  an 
equivalent  source  that  is  spread  over  an  excitation  plane  (more  precisely,  a  square  annulus) 
located  near  the  entrance  to  the  cell.  In  particular,  if  the  base  plane  (cross  section  AA’  in 
Figure  2)  of  the  cell  is  located  at  z  =  0,  then  the  excitation  plane  is  assumed  to  be  located 
at  z  =  z.  where  z,  has  a  magnitude  equivalent  to  the  thickness  of  a  few  Yee’s  cells.  The 
excitation  plane,  a  region  II  in  the  cross  section  of  the  GTEM  cell  at  z  =  z„  is  depicted  in 
Figure  3. 


Figure  3:  Excitation  Plane  H.  (Not  to  scale) 


4 


Assume,  at  a  given  time  t}  the  inner  rectangle,  which  corresponds  to  the  septum  of  the 
GTEM  cell,  has  a  uniform  voltage  and  the  outer  rectangle,  which  corresponds  to  the 

ex 

conductive  walls  of  the  cell,  is  grounded,  then  the  electric  field  E  (®jy,2r,f)  in  induced 
by  can  be  calculated  by 

ex 

E  (*,  y,  *.,<)  =  -V^as.y,*) 

where  the  potential  <f>  is  the  unique  solution  of  the  2-dimensional  Laplace’s  Equation 

W  =  0  in  fl  (1) 


subject  to  the  boundary  condition 


4>{x,y, 


^spt (0 

0 


for  (a;,y)  £  inner  rectangle 
for  (sc,y)  £  outer  rectangle 


It  can  easily  be  verified  that  if 

where  Vm  is  a  constant  and  $(£)  is  an  arbitrary  function  of  t  and  if  </>m(z,y)  is  the  unique 
solution  to  Equation  (1)  subject  to  the  boundary  condition 


then 


for  (»,y)  £  inner  rectangle 
for  (x,y)  £  outer  rectangle 


<K*>  y»0  =  <L(*>v)-*(*) 

ex 

E  (x,y,Z',t)  =  —V<f>(x,ytt) 

=  -9(t)Vfm(x,y) 

=  ®(t)  *£*(*,  v) 

where 


This  implies  that  we  only  have  to  solve  Equation  (1)  once  for  (f>m(x ,  y)  to  determine  the  exci¬ 
tation  field  E  (»,!/,  z.,  t)  for  all  time  t.  Some  additional  discussion  on  the  implementation 
of  excitation  sources  in  FDTD  can  be  found  in  [2,  7]. 


5 


B.  Boundary  Conditions 

The  GTEM  cell  is  terminated  by  an  anechoic  wall  consisting  of  a  series  of  resistive  low 
frequency  terminators  and  pyramidal  microwave  absorbers  for  the  high  frequency  end  of 
the  frequency  spectrum.  These  are  constructed  to  minimize  reflections  at  the  terminal  end 
that  could  compromise  the  field  at  a  test  site  within  the  cell.  We  model  this  by  placing 
a  Berenger’s  perfectly  matched  layer  (PML)  [3,  4]  at  this  terminal  end  to  simulate  non¬ 
reflection  of  electromagnetic  waves.  We  aho  place  a  PML  at  the  base  plane  (cross  section 
AA’  in  Figure  2)  to  absorb  fictitious  backward  waves  generated  by  the  assumed  excitation 
plane.  The  four  other  walls  of  the  GTEM  cell  are  modeled  faithfully  as  perfectly  electrically 
conducting  (PEC)  boundary. 

C.  Staircase  Errors 

The  GTEM  cell  is  flared.  The  side  walls  cannot  all  be  aligned  with  the  rectangular  grid  axes 
in  FDTD.  It  is  well  known  that  this  leads  to  so-called  staircase  errors  in  the  computations. 
For  the  work  reported  here,  we  took  the  simple,  albeit  inefficient,  approach  of  using  smaller 
mesh  sizes  to  minimize  these  errors.  More  sophisticated  methods  such  as  locally  conforming 
FDTD  schemes  [26]  will  be  used  in  the  future. 


6 


RESULTS 


We  have  tested  our  computational  method  on  several  different  TEM  cells  using  a  variety 
of  input  sources.  The  results  have  been  excellent  on  simple  cases  and  reasonable  on  more 
complex  ones.  We  will  report  on  two  cases  below. 


I.  A  Non-flared  Square  cell 

In  this  computational  experiment,  we  use  the  square  TEM  cell  (the  “  NBS  cell  ”)  studied 
first  experimentally  by  Crawford  [10]  and  latter  theoretically  (quasi-statically)  by  Spiegel 
[27].  This  square  cell  has  dimensions  shown  in  Figure  4. 


Figure  4:  NBC  Cell. 

Unlike  Spiegel’s  theoretical  cell,  the  cell  we  studied  has  a  finite  non-zero  thickness  that 
is  one  FDTD  cell  thick.  The  FDTD  cell  we  used  is  5  mm  thick.  The  input  for  this  compu¬ 
tational  experiment  is  sinusoidal.  Three  frequencies  were  chosen:  100  MHz,  500  MHz,  and  1 
GHz.  The  cutoff  frequency  for  the  first  order  TE  mode  (TEi0)  for  this  cell  is  slightly  above 
500  MHz  [10]. 

We  picked  a  the  TEM  cell  that  is  100  cm  long  (in  the  z-direction)  and  monitored  the 
electric  field  at  approximately  the  same  locations  where  measurements  were  made  by  Craw¬ 
ford  [10]  and  also  by  Spiegel,  et  al  [27].  The  cross  section  in  which  these  points  are  taken 
is  halfway  (z  =  50  cm)  along  the  TEM  cell.  The  results  are  shown  in  Figures  4  through 
7.  Figure  5  shows  the  potential  field  in  the  cross  section  at  z  =  2.5  cm.  Figures  6  through 
8  are  the  relative  time-averaged  magnitude  of  the  electric  field  when  using  the  frequencies 
100  MHz,  500  MIIz,  and  1  GIIz  respectively.  Also  shown  Eire  the  measured  values.  There 
is  general  agreement  between  the  measured  and  the  calculated.  As  expected,  the  first  two 
calculated  fields  are  practically  identical,  as  they  are  both  below  cutoff. 


7 


:?< 


%  ito:  K  ‘tt  $:  .(ft.  ,■  # 


%i  Calculated  Md  Measured  Relative  B  Fidd  for  lf)0  MBs?  Btmssdd&l  Input 


*  *  1*  IS  M  <£  m  •»;.  »  .**/ 

D&ars#  to* 


Figure  &  Calculated  aad  Measured  Eektive  B  Field  for  1  Ofi?  iin»so|d&i  Iapil. 


XL  A  by  a  wide-baud  pulse 

Tfae  tjTEM  cell  shewn  in  Figure  1  Fas  dimeR8io.tis  sij.owa  in  Figure  2  and  Figure  1.0.  The 
UWB  pulm  applied  fee*  Pie  GTBM  eett  can  be  apprommated  by 


where 


vm  ■«  lid  m 

4$Q  **  «rwt-< 


u  »  1  J9iiiE  4'Q  ft 
0  «  UO&TSB  4- 10  f 


a  rise  time  of  ISO  ps  aad  a  pels*;  width  <M  t  Us.  This  is  depicted  in  Figure  il, 
-  L*  and  solving  the  Laplaec’s  egastk>a  in  Equation  (1.)  yield*  the 
solution  $*,!*> f)  similar  m  shape  to  that  shewn  in  Figure  §.,  The  mrr espeadlag  veefcer  field 


m 


'  ■'■  «  •:  X  k.  *  i  i:  i  ; 

*'  '■  '  *  *' .  *'  <  i  i  i  i 

v  c-  \  ■•■'  *  Y  <  >  if  i  i 
'*  \  v  i-  '<  t  <  *  V  6  < 

,v  ■'  *  >  \  S  t  i;  i-  i  k  j 

>.;<*  v  V  V  i  X  k  i 

:^>;VVH  i  V  i;  i  i 

•>X  ->X  --N*.  >VS*. 

.w; 

■  o  _  ■>*'•  «*> 


j  >  >  *  ■'■ 

<  ;  L  *  L  *■  *■  -  - 

5  Li  >'  *'  :■!■■  y-  r  ~ 

i.  i  i 

*  i  i  /  ~ 

v'  i  f  * 

■4**'V.-v..  .y.. 


..»e» 

.:>;  r  *  f  f-  ?  1 

,y  .^  >  ?  ?  >  f  f  ?  i 

.vs  .y  *  ,/r  X  f  f  .<  :|  i  j  1 


?  5  s  *Avt:iZ 

>.  *  i 

■:.  *  i  \  V  \  x-,  .y.  .<v 


.^..:>!  :y  y  .<  ?.  f  .?  .!■  *.  <:  i 

v  y  .0  y  ?  /  ?  ;■  t  ?  < 

v  >  < ■  <  ■>  i  f  f  £  t  i  ■< 

c  <  y  ;•  ■  >  <  V  ::  :■  > 


%  \  <.  S  4s  -‘w 

'<  >.  */  -<  :v  -:■ 

\  X  <:  >.  >.  v.  .-. 

V  V  *■  ••  *•'  >.  V 


% 


% 


W 


Mgtire  S:  E  Mdd  m  fer  VW42,il5  k¥  , 


Using  this  pulse,  we  calculated  the  field  inside  the  cell  using  FDTD.  The  main  parameters 
used  are: 


space  discretization:  Ax  = 
space  discretization:  Ay  = 
space  discretization:  Az  = 
time  step:  At  = 


0.005  m 
0.005  m 
0.005  m 

9.629  x  10-12sec 


These  values  are  dictated  by  the  high  frequency  content  of  the  pulse  and  the  stability 
requirement  of  the  method  [20]. 

In  our  simulation,  we  calculated  the  E  field  at  several  points  in  the  proximity  of  the 
location  where  the  actual  measurements  had  previously  been  taken.  These  selected  points 
are  in  the  center  of  cross  section  BB7  (Figure  2)  near  the  bottom  of  the  cell.  Figure  12 
compares  the  calculated  Ey  at  the  selected  points  to  the  measured  Ey.  The  amplitude  Vm 
of  the  voltage  source  at  the  excitation  plane  was  picked  (trial  and  error)  to  be  42.75  kV  in 
this  particular  calculation. 

We  have  also  measured  and  calculated  several  indices  related  to  the  E  field  at  each  point 
in  a  grid  (not  shown  here)  on  the  bottom  wall  (“parallel”  to  the  septum).  Among  these 
indices  is  the  peak  intensity  of  the  E  field.  From  this  a  contour  plot  is  made.  This  is  shown 
in  Figure  13.  We  used  the  model  to  calculate  the  peak  E  field  intensity  at  approximately 
the  same  points  and  constructed  the  corresponding  contour  plot.  This  is  shown  in  Figure 
14.  The  two  contour  plots,  Figure  13  and  Figure  14  are  qualitatively  similar.  (At  this  time, 
we  have  not  fine  tuned  the  choice  of  the  amplitude  Vm  of  the  voltage  source  at  the  excitation 
plane  to  make  the  comparison  better.) 


12 


3$> 


I 


r 


s# 

I  J 
1  * 


*■. 

¥'«^vsaf;: 


i%«re  11;  iaptffc  Voltage  Source. 


Figure  13;  Contour  Plot  of  Measured  Peak  E. 


Pigtite  14:  Contour  Plot  of  Oalcalated  Peak  B> 


14 


CONCLUSION 


In  this  report  we  have  described  a  general  mathematical  model  that  can  be  used  to  estimate 
the  electric  field  in  a  large  class  of  TEM  cells.  An  excitation  plane  was  used  to  simulate 
the  input  to  the  GTEM  cell  and  the  popular  PDTD  method  was  then  used  to  calculate  the 
field  anywhere  and  anytime  inside  the  cell.  To  our  knowledge  this  is  the  first  documented 
use  of  FDTD  to  model  an  ultrawide-band  exposure  system.  We  tested  our  model  on  the 
simple  (square)  NBC  cell  and  on  a  flared  GTEM  cell.  The  results  have  been  reasonable  in 
all  cases.  We  believe  this  effort  has  laid  the  foundation  for  further  fruitful  research.  Future 
improvements  to  the  model  include  implementing  methods  to  reduce  staircase  errors  and  to 
multiple  grids.  These  improvements  Eire  necessary  for  the  efficient  and  accurate 
of  relatively  small  objects  placed  in  the  cell.  When  accomplished,  they  will  have 
the  scope  and  capability  of  electromagnetic  compatibility  and  dosimetry  research. 


allow  for 
modeling 
increased 


15 


Bibliography 


[1]  J.  Z.  Bao,  J.C.  Lee,  M.  E.  Belt,  D.  D.  Cox,  S.  P.  Mathur,  and  S.  T.  Lu,  Error  Correc¬ 
tion  in  Transient  Electromagnetic  Field  Measurements  Using  Deconvolution  Techniques, 
Ultra-Wideband,  Short-Pulse  Electromagnetics,  vol.  3,  pp.  373-380,  1997. 

[2]  G.  Bellanca,  High-Accuracy  Assigned  Power  Excitation  for  the  FDTD  Technique ,  IEEE 
Microwave  and  Guided  Wave  Letters,  vol.  7,  pp.  411-413,  1997. 

[3]  J.  P.  Berenger,  A  Perfectly  Matched  Layer  for  the  Absorption  of  Electromagnetic  Waves , 
J.  Comput.  Physics,  vol  114,  pp.  185-200,  1994. 

[4]  J.  P.  Berenger,  Three-Dimensional  Perfectly  Matched  Layer  for  the  Absorption  of  Elec¬ 
tromagnetic  Waves ,  J.  Comput.  Physics,  vol  127,  pp.  363-379,  1996. 

[5]  E.  L.  Bronaugh,  Simplifying  EMI  immunity  (susceptibility)  tests  in  TEM  cells ,  Symp. 
Record  IEEE  1990  Internation.  Symp.  Electromagn.  Compat.,  Aug.  21-23,  Washington, 
pp.  488-491,  1990. 

[6]  J.  T.  Brown,  Using  TEM  cells  for  shielding  performance  evaluation ,  Symp.  Record  IEEE 
1990  Internation.  Symp.  Electromagn.  Compat.,  Aug.  21-23,  Washington,  pp.  495-499, 
1990. 

[7]  D.  N.  Buechler,  D.  H.  Roper,  C.  H.  Durney,  and  D.  A.  Christensen,  Modeling  Sources  in 
the  FDTD  Formulation  and  Their  Use  in  Quantifying  Source  and  Boundary  Condition 
Errors,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  and  Tech.,  vol  43,  pp.  810-814,  1995. 

[8]  M.  Burkhardt,  K.  Pokovic,  M.  Gnos,  T.  Schmid,  and  N.  Kuster,  Numerical  and  Ex¬ 
perimental  Dosimetry  of  Petri  Dish  Exposure  Setups,  Bioelectromagnetics,  vol  17,  pp. 
483-493,  1996 

[9]  J.  H.  Collins  and  P.  Daly,  Calculations  for  Guided  Electromagnetic  Waves  using  Finite- 
Difference  Methods,  J.  Electronics  and  Control,  vol.  14,  pp.  361-380,  1963. 

[10]  M.  L.  Crawford,  Generation  of  Standard  EM  Fields  Using  TEM  Transmission  Cells, 
IEEE  Trans.  Electromag.  Compat,,  vol.  16,  No.  4,  pp.  189-195,  Nov,  1974, 


16 


[11]  0.  R.  Cruzan  and  R.  V.  Garver,  Characteristic  Impedance  of  Rectangular  Coaxil  trans¬ 
mission  lines ,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol.  MTT-12,  pp.  488-495,  1964. 

[12]  S.  K.  Das  and  B.  K.  Sinha  Numerical  Solution  of  Higher  Order  Mode  Cut-Off  Frequencies 
in  Symmetric  TEM  Cells  Using  Finite  Element  Method,  IEEE  Trans.  Electromagn. 
Compat.,  vol  32,  pp.  264-268,  1990. 

[13]  D.  Hansen,  P.  Wilson,  D.  Koenigstein,  and  H.  Schaer,  A  broadband  alternative  EMC 
test  chamber  based  on  a  TEM  cell  anechoic-chamber  hybrid  concept,  in  Int.  Symp.  Elec¬ 
tromag.  Compat.,  Nagoya,  Japan,  Sept.  1989 

[14]  D.  Hansen,  D.  Ristau,  T.  Spaeth,  W.  A.  Radasky,  and  Kenneth  S.  Smith,  Expansions 
on  the  G TEM  Field  Structure  Problem,  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  Electromagnetic  Com¬ 
patibility  Sym.  1995,  Atlanta,  pp.  538-542,  Aug.  1995. 

[15]  D.  Hansen,  D.  Ristau,  W.  A.  Radasky,  and  K.  S.  Smith,  Sources  of  Problems  in  the 
GTEM  Field  Structure  and  Recommended  Solutions,  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE  Electro¬ 
magnetic  Compatibility  Sym.  1996,  Santa  Clara,  pp.  48-51,  Aug.  1996. 

[16]  J.  Van  Ilese,  L.  Martens,  D.  De  Zutter,  C.  De  Wagter,  L.  O.  G.  Malmgren,  B.  R.  R. 
Person,  and  L.G.  Salford,  Simulation  of  the  Effect  of  Inhomogeneities  in  TEM  Trans¬ 
mission  Cells  using  the  FDTD-Method,  IEEE  Trans.  Electromagn.  Compat.,  vol  34,  pp. 
292-298,  1992. 

[17]  K.  Huang  and  W.  Lin,  Calculation  of  Characteristic  Impedance  of  Broadband  TEM  Cell 
(BTEM  Cell),  Microwave  and  Optical  Technology  Letters,  vol.  4,  No.  12,  pp.  555-557, 
Nov.  1991. 

[18]  K.  Huang  and  Y.  Liu,  A  Simple  Method  for  Calculating  Electric  and  Magnetic  Fields  in 
GTEM  Cell ,  IEEE  Trans.  Electromag.  Compat.,  vol.  36,  No.  4,  pp.  355-358,  Nov.  1994. 

[19]  D.  Koenigstein  and  D.  Hansen,  A  new  family  of  TEM-cells  with  enlarged  bandwidth 
and  optimized  working  volume,  in  7th  Symp.  Electromag.  Compat.,  Zurich,  Mar.  pp. 
127-132,  1987. 

[20]  K.  Kunz  and  R.  Luebbers,  The  Finite  Difference  Time  Domain  Method  for  Electromag¬ 
netics,  CRC  Press,  1993. 

[21]  R.  Lampe,  P.  Klock,  D.  Tanner,  and  P.  Mayes,  Analysis  and  Experiment  Concerning 
the  Cutoff  Frequencies  of  Rectangular  Striplines ,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech., 
vol.  MTT-34,  No.  8,  pp.  898-899,  Aug.  1986. 

[22]  R.  De  Leo,  T.  Rozzi,  C.  Svara,  and  L.  Zappelli,  Rigorous  Analysis  of  the  GTEM  Cell, 
IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol.  MTT-39,  No.  3,  pp.  488-500,  Mar.  1991, 


17 


[23]  R.  De  Leo,  L.  Pierantoni,  T.  Rozzi,  and  L.  Zappelli,  Dipole  Excitation  and  Scattering 
ly  Spherical  Objects  in  GTEM  Cell ,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol.  42,  No. 
9,  pp.  1700-1708,  Sep.  1994. 

[24]  Shin-Tsu  Lu,  Satnam,  P.  Mathur,  Yahya  Akyel,  and  Jonathan  Lee,  Ultrawide- Band 
Electromagnetic  Pulses  Induced  Hypotension  in  Rats ,  Physiology  and  Behavior,  vol.  65, 
Nos.  4/5,  pp.  753-761,  1999. 

[25]  William  A.  Radasky,  Kenneth  S.  Smith,  Diethard  Hansen  and  Detlef  Ristau,  Calcula¬ 
tions  and  Measurements  of  Fast  EM  Pulses  in  the  GTEM  Cell ,  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE 
Electromagnetic  Compatibility  Sym.  1996,  Santa  Clara,  pp.  52-57,  Aug.  1996, 

[26]  C.  J.  Railton  and  J.B.  Schneider,  An  Analytical  and  Numerical  Analysis  of  Several 
Locally  Conformal  FDTD  Schemes,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  and  Techniques, 
vol.  47,  no.  1,  pp.  56-66,  1999. 

[27]  R.  J.  Spiegel,  W.  T.  Joines,  C.  F,  Blackman,  and  A.  W.  Wood,  A  Method  for  Calculat¬ 
ing  Electric  and  Magnetic  Fields  in  TEM  Cells  at  ELF ,  IEEE  Trans.  Electromagnetic 
Compatibility,  Vol.  EMC-29,  No.  4,  Nov  1987. 

[28]  C.  Wan,  Conformal  Mapping  Analysis  of  a  Modified  TEM  Cell,  IEEE  Trans.  Electro- 
magn.  compat.,  vol  35,  pp.  109-113,  1993. 

[29]  P.  F.  Wlilson  and  M.  T.  Ma,  Simple  Approximation  Expressions  for  Higher  Order  Mode 
Cutoff  and  Resonant  Frequencies  in  TEM  Cells ,  IEEE  Trans.  Electromag.  Compat., 
vol.  28,  No.  3,  pp.  125-130,  Aug,  1986. 

[30]  K.  S.  Yee,  Numerical  solution  of  initial  boundary  value  problems  involving  MaxwelVs 
equations  in  isotropic  media,  IEEE  Trans.  Antennas  and  Propagation,  vol.  14,  pp.  302- 
307,  1966. 

[31]  J.  Zhang  and  J.  M.  Fu,  Higher  Order  Mode  Cutoff  Frequencies  in  TEM  Cells  Calculated 
with  TLM  Method,  IEEE  Trans.  Electromag.  Compat.,  vol.  30,  No,  4,  pp.  563-567,  Nov, 
1988. 

[32]  J.  Zhang  A  Note  on  the  Cutoff  Frequency  of  TEo  1  Mode  in  TEM  Cells ,  IEEE  Trans. 
Electromag.  Compat.,  vol.  33,  No.  2,  pp.  145-146,  May,  1991. 


18 


