AD. 


Award  Number:  DAMD17-94-C-4069 


TITLE:  Services  to  Operate  and  Maintain  a  Microwave  Research 
Laboratory 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  Yahya  Akyel,  Ph.D. 


CONTRACTING  ORGANIZATION:  McKesson  Bioservices 

Rockville,  Maryland  20850 


REPORT  DATE:  May  1999 


TYPE  OF  REPORT:  Final 


PREPARED  FOR:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT:  Approved  for  Public  Release, • 

Distribution  Unlimited 


The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  author (s)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so 
designated  by  other  documentation. 


4 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


Form  Approved 
OMBNo.  0704-0188 


Public  reporting  burden  for  this  collection  of  information  Is  estimated  to  average  1  hour  per  response.  Including  the  time  for  reviewing  instructions,  searching  existing  data  sources, 
gathering  and  maintaining  the  data  needed,  end  completing  and  reviewing  the  collection  of  Information.  Send  comments  regarding  this  burden  estimate  or  any  other  aspect  of  this 
collection  of  information,  including  suggestions  for  reducing  this  burden,  to  Washington  Headquarters  Services,  Directorate  for  Information  Operations  and  Reports,  1215  Jefferson 
Davis  Highway.  Suite  1204,  Arlington,  VA  22202-4302,  and  to  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget,  Paperwork  Reduction  Project  (0704-01 88).  Washington,  DC  20503. 


1 .  AGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Leave  blank} 


2.  REPORT  DATE 

May  1999 


3.  REPORT  TYPE  AND  DATES  COVERED 
Final  (31  May  94  -  20  May  99) 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

Services  to  Opetate  and  Maintain  a  Microwave  Research  Laboratory 


5.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 
DAMD17-94-C-4069 


6.  AUTHOR(S) 

Yahya  Alg^el,  Hi.D. 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 
McKesson  Bioservices 
Rockville,  Maryland  20850 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 


9.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 
U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


10.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


12a.  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 
Approved  for  Public  Release;  Distribution  Unlimited 


12b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODE 


1 3.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  words) 

Based  on  the  growing  concerns  for  the  health  and  safety  of  military  personnel  and  civilians 
exposed  to  radiofrequency  radiation  a  series  of  research  investigating  behavioral,  biological, 
cardiovascular,  and  retinal  effects  of  high  power  pulsed  microwaves,  ultra  wideband  (UWB),  and 
millimeter  waves  were  accomplished.  It  has  been  determined  that  ultra  wideband  electromagnetic 
pulses  produce  changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in  mice.  Furthermore,  ultra  wideband  induced 
hypotension  in  rats.  On  the  other  hand,  UWB  does  not  effect  UV-induced  recombination  and 
mutagenesis  in  Yeast.  Intense  flashes  of  Ught  were  observed  in  sodium  bicarbonate  and  hydrogen 
peroxide  solutions  when  they  were  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation  and  the  responses  was 
greatly  enhanced  by  a  microwave-absorbing,  biosynthesized  polymer,  diazoluminomelanin. 

Rhesus  monkeys  exposed  to  1 .25  GHz  high  peak  power  microwaves  at  adose  level  of  4  W/kg 
SAR  at  the  retinal  level,  produced  no  evidence  of  degenerative  changes  and  electroretinogram 
depression  in  these  animals  Details  and  accomplishments  of  the  research  program  and  a  list  of 
publications  are  presented  in  this  report. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS 


15.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

_ _ ^175  ' _ 

16.  PRICE  CODE 


High  power  pulsed  microwaves,  ultrawide  band  microwave  fields,  millimeter  waves,  - -  - 

,  .  1 16.  PRICE  CODE 

dosimetry,  retinal  effects,  ocular  effects,  cardiovascular  effects,  cellular  effects,  neurotoxms 


17.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  18.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  20.  LIMITATION  OF 
OF  REPORT  OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  ABSTRACT  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified  Unclassified  Unclassified  Unlimited 


NSN  7540-01-280-5500 


Standard  Form  298  (Rev.  2-89) 

Prescribed  by  ANSI  Std.  Z39-18  298-102 


USAPPC  VI  .00 


FOREWORD 


Opinions,  interpretations,  conclusions  and  recommendations  are 
those  of  the  author  and  are  not  necessarily  endorsed  by  the  U.S. 
Army. 

A  Where  copyrighted  material  is  quoted,  permission  has  been 
obtained  to  use  such  material. 

t( Where  material  from  doctunents  designated  for  limited 
distribution  is  quoted,  permission  has  been  obtained  to  use  the 
material . 

^.Ar  citations  of  commercial  organizations  and  trade  names  in 
this  report  do  not  constitute  em  official  Department  of  Army 
endorsement  or  approval  of  the  products  or  services  of  these 
organi rations . 

_ _  In  conducting  research  using  animals,  the  investigator (s) 

adhered  to  the  "Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Led>oratory 
Animals,"  prepared  by  the  Committee  on  Care  and  use  of  Laboratory 
Animals  of  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources,  national 
Research  Council  (NIH  Publication  No.  86-23,  Revised  1985). 

_  For  the  protection  of  human  subjects,  the  investigator (s) 

adhered  to  policies  of  applicable  Federal  Law  45  CFR  46. 

_  In  conducting  research  utilizing  reccsnbinant  MIA  technology, 

the  investigator (s)  adhered  to  current  guidelines  promulgated  by 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health. 

_  In  the  conduct  of  research  utilizing  recombinzuit  DNA,  the 

investigator (s)  adhered  to  the  NIH  Guidelines  for  Research 
Involving  Recombinant  DNA  Molecules. 

of  research  involving  hazardous  organisms, 
adhered  to  the  CDC-NIH  Guide  for  Biosafety  in 
Biomedical  Laboratories. 


i/.  n 

PI  -  signature  Date 


In  the  conduct 
the  investigator (s) 
Microbiological  euxd 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


Introduction . ^ 

Body  of  the  Report 

The  effects  of  high  peak  power  radio  frequency  radiation  (RFR)  on  the  health 
and  safety  of  military  personnel . 5 

The  ocular  effects  of  L-Band  radiation . 8 

The  biological  hazards  of  UWB  radiation  on  analgesia,  cardiovascular  and 

other  cellular  systems . 1 1 

Millimeter  wavelength  exposure  on  neuronal  and  cellular  functions . 15 

Neurotoxic  effects  of  RFR  exposure . 17 

Major  Accomplishments . 19 

Conclusions . 20 

Personnel . . 21 

Presentations  /  Publications  List . 22 

Volume  II 


Copies  of  Publications/Presentations 


INTRODUCTION 


The  following  report  summarizes  the  performance  of  McKessonHBOC  BioServices 
(MBS)  staff  at  the  Walter  reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  US  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment,  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas  under  the  contract 
DAMD17-94-C-4069. 

MBS  has  a  nine  year  contract  with  the  US  Army  Medical  Research  and  Acquisition 
Activity  (USAMRAA)  to  operate  and  maintain  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch,  a  Government- 
owned  Contractor-operated  (GOCO)  facility.  A  report  summarizing  the  base  three  years  of  this 
contract  (May  20,  1994  -  May  21,  1997)  was  previously  filed  with  the  US  Army  Medical 
Research. and  Materiel  Command,  Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  on  June  20,  1997.  The  present  report 
reflects  the  efforts  of  the  MBS  staff  during  the  first  option  years  (May  21,  1997  -  May  20,  1999) 
of  the  aforementioned  contract. 

Based  on  the  guidance  provided  in  the  contract  and  the  guidance  provided  by  the 
Contracting  Officer’s  Representative  (COR)  Mr.  Bruce  Stuck,  MBS  staff  concentrated  its 
research  efforts  in  the  following  areas: 

♦  Conduct  research  to  assess  the  effects  of  high  peak  power  radio  frequency 
radiation  (RFR)  on  the  health  and  safety  of  military  personnel, 

♦  Complete  the  ocular  effects  of  L-Band  radiation  protocol  and  provide  a  report 
summarizing  all  the  ocular  effects  data  obtained  and  the  implications  to  current 
Army  exposure  limits  and  soldier  performance, 

♦  Conduct  research  on  the  biological  hazards  of  ultra  wide  band  (UWB)  radiation  on 
analgesia  and  the  cardiovascular  systems, 

♦  Complete  analysis  of  millimeter  wavelength  exposure  on  neuronal  and  cellular 
functions,  finalize  and  publish  results,  and 

♦  Conduct  a  series  of  research  studies  exploring  potential  of  neurotoxic  effects  of 
RFR  exposure  after  a  satisfactory  external  science  review. 


BODY  OF  REPORT 


♦  The  effects  of  high  peak  power  radio  frequency  radiation  (RFR)  on  the  health  and 

safety  of  military  personnel 

The  US  Army  Dismounted  Battlespace  Battle  Lab  (DBBL)  ACT  II  Advanced  Membrane 
Transducer  (AMT)  Antenna  was  developed  for  the  US  Army  to  provide  increased  flexibility  while 
operating  in  urban  environment.  It  was  intended  to  be  attached  directly  to  vehicles,  radio  systems 
or  worn  by  the  soldiers.  The  Microwave  Bioefifects  Branch  was  asked  to  evaluate  the  health  and 
safety  of  this  antenna  and  provide  a  technical  assessment.  After  a  series  of  tests  were  conducted 
to  determine  if  the  radio  frequency  radiation  from  the  antenna  conforms  to  the  permissible 
exposure  limits  as  defined  in  DoD  instructions.  A  detailed  report  was  presented  to  Mr.  Bruce 
Stuck,  COR  concluding  that  even  though  the  AMT  antenna  was  found  to  produce  large  electric 
fields  close  to  the  antenna  surface,  the  specific  absorption  rate  was  found  to  be  lower  than  those 
prescribed  in  the  safety  guidelines.  The  induced  currents  in  the  ankle  and  wrist  was  found  to  be 
within  the  safety  limits.  The  report  also  included  specific  recommendations  regarding  the  use  of 
this  device,  when  worn  by  a  soldier.  A  copy  of  this  detailed  report  can  be  found  in  the  Volume  II 
of  this  Final  Report. 

In  a  series  of  experiment  intense  flashes  of  light  were  observed  in  a  sodium  bicarbonate 
and  hydrogen  peroxide  solutions  when  they  were  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation,  and  the 
response  was  greatly  enhanced  by  a  microwave-absorbing,  biosynthesized  polymer, 
diazoluminomelamin.  The  Branch’s  FPS-7B  radar  transmitter  operating  at  1.25  GHz  induced  the 
effect  only  when  appropriate  chemical  interaction  was  present.  This  phenomenon  involved 
acoustic  wave  generation,  bubble  formation,  pulsed  luminescence,  ionized  gas  ejection,  and 
electrical  discharge.  This  type  of  use  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation  to  generate  highly  focused 
energy  deposition  opens  up  the  possibility  of  a  variety  of  biomedical  applications,  including 
targeting  killing  of  microbes  or  eukaryotic  cells. 

In  a  different  experiment,  the  interbeat  interval  duration  in  spontaneously-beating  pieces  of 
the  atrial  wall  of  the  frog  heart  was  used  as  an  endpoint  to  study  biological  effects  of  brief  trains 
of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses.  The  interbeat  interval  duration  decreased  after  brief 
train  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  is  attributed  to  microwave  heating. 


5 


A  method  of  precise  measurement  of  local  heating  and  the  amount  of  microwave  energy 
absorbed  locally  in  a  medium  has  been  proposed  and  verified  for  peak  specific  absorption  rates  of 
up  to  400  kW/g.  Finite-difference  time-domain  (FDTD)  modeling  is  widely  used  to  estimate  local 
SAR  and  its  distribution  in  complex  biological  subjects.  However,  FDTD  predictions  could 
seldom  be  verified  experimentally  due  to  limitations  of  thermometry  methods.  A  few  available 
artifact-free  devices,  such  as  fluoroptic  thermometers,  tend  to  be  slow  and  noisy  and  in  many 
applications  their  fiber  optic  probes  are  too  big.  Termistors  and  thermocouples  may  produce 
artifacts  and  usually  are  avoided  though  little  is  known  about  the  actual  impact  of  these  artifacts. 

MBS  staff  has  analyzed  the  performance  of  a  microthermocouple  in  most  unfavorable 
conditions  (extremely  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses)  and  proved  that  it  can  be  reliably  used 
for  precise  measurements  of  local  microwave  heating  and  local  SAR.  The  proposed  method  of 
local  dosimetry  using  microthermocouple  can  be  employed  to  verify  FDTD  predictions  in  animal 
and  human  models,  including  cellular  phone  safety  studies. 


Relevant  Publications  /  Presentations 

Kiel,  J.  L.,  Seaman,  R.  L.  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Parker,  J.  E.,  Wright,  J.  R.,  Alls,  J  L.,  and  Morales,  P.  J. 
(1999).  Pulsed  microwave  induced  hght,  sound,  and  electrical  discharge  enhanced  by  a 
biopolymer.  Bioelectromagnetics,  20,  216  -  223. 

Kiel,  J.  L.,  Mason,  P.  A.,  Alls,  J.  L.,  Morales,  P.,  and  Seaman,  R.  L.  (1998).  A  mechanism  of 
single-pulse  radio  frequency  radiation  interaction  with  biological  molecules.  Twentieth 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Kiel,  J.,  Parker,  J.,  Alls,  J.,  Morales,  P.,  Seaman,  R.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Wright,  J.  (1997).  Pulsed 
microwave  radiation  induction  of  electrosonoluminescence.  Fourth  Annual  Michaelson 
Research  Conference,  August  15-18,  Canandaigua,  NY. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998).  High  resolution 

microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  NATO  Advanced  Research  Workshop,  October  12- 
16,  Slovenia. 


6 


Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998). 
Immediate  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  on  the  beating  rhythm  in 
isolated  frog  heart  auricle.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society, 
June  7-11,  Florida. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Kiel,  J.  L.  (1998).  Direct  microdosimetry  in 

media  exposed  to  extremely  high  peak  power  microwaves.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of 
the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998).  Dose  dependencies  in  bioeffects  of 
extremely  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  World  Health  Organization  (WHO) 
Annual  Meeting,  18-22  March,  Moscow,  Russia. 


7 


The  ocular  effects  of  L-Band  radiation 


♦ 


Generally,  microwave-induced  alteration  of  biological  endpoints  other  than  behavioral 
disruption  requires  specific  absorption  rates  (SARs)  greater  than  the  4  W/kg  threshold  known  to 
disrupt  ongoing  behaviors.  The  eye  is  one  of  the  critical  organs  which  can  potentially  be  injured 
by  microwave  and  RF  radiation  exposure  and  has  been  an  extensively  studied  organ  regarding  the 
injurious  action  of  microwave  radiation.  To  date,  most  microwave  eye  research  has  concentrated 
on  damage  to  the  lens  in  the  form  of  lenticular  opacities  (cataracts).  Most  investigators  assumed 
that  the  lens  is  more  susceptible  to  microwave  induced  damage  than  other  parts  of  the  eye  due  to 
its  lack  of  vascular  system.  It  was  believed  that  the  lack  of  vascular  system  prevented  adequate 
heat  loss,  thus  exaggerating  the  temperature  rise  in  the  lens. 

Due  to  the  potential  importance  of  microwave  ocular  hazards  in  relation  to  health  and 
safety  of  soldiers,  sailors,  airmen,  and  the  general  public,  an  ocular  study  using  rhesus  monkeys 
was  requested  by  the  TERP.  The  objective  of  the  research  was  to  identify  the  presence  or  the 
absence  of  high  peak  power  microwave  induced  retinal  injuries  by  studying  changes  in  fundus 
photographs,  angiography,  electroretinalgrams,  and  histopathology  of  monkeys  exposed  to  1.25 
GHz  pulsed  microwave  at  0,4,8  and  20W/kg  retinal  SAR.  The  following  special  considerations 
were  incorporated  in  the  experimental  design: 

♦  Extensive  densitometry  and  dosimetry  were  performed  prior  to  experimentation. 

♦  Extensive  pre-exposure  screenings  were  used  to  assure  the  retinal  normality  prior  to  the 
acceptance  of  experimental  subjects  into  the  study. 

♦  Pre-exposure  baselines  were  used  for  individual  control. 

♦  Data  obtained  in  the  exposed  monkeys  were  further  compared  to  those  of  sham-exposed 
monkeys. 

♦  Ketamine  restraint  and  general  anesthesia  were  not  used  during  the  exposure. 

♦  A  minimum  of  a  72  hour  recovery  period  was  mandatory  between  pre-screenings  and 
beginning  of  the  repeated  exposures. 

♦  Exposures  were  randomized. 

♦  All  investigators  except  one  (code  keeper)  were  blind  to  the  experimental  treatments. 

All  these  procedures  were  necessary  to  assure  data  quality  and  to  avoid  introducing 
unidentified  confounding  factors  and  unintentional  biases  by  the  investigators. 


8 


The  following  summarizes  the  Tri-Services  research  efforts  on  the  retinal  effects  of  1.25 
GHz  high  peak  power  microwave  exposure  in  monkeys.  Fundus  photography,  retinal  angiograms 
and  electroretinograms  (ERG)  were  used  _ _ _ 


20  3-R 

uV/aiv  — 
20  :  1<R 

uH/iiv  'wjvr 


20  4'L 

uV/iiv 
20  2'L 

uW/iiv  — V 


5  NS  pcp  Sivision 
i-573  2-974  3-2S9  4-270 

Fig.  1.  An  example  of  Post-Exposure  Enhancement  of 
Photopic  b-wave  Amplitude.  Trace  1,2=^  pre-exposure, 
Trace  3,4- post-expousre,  R=  right  eye,  L=  left  eye. 


prior  to  exposure  to  screen  for  normal 

_  Electroretinogram 

ocular  structure  and  function  of  the  t  2 

monkeys'  eyes,  and  after  exposure  as  f\ 

endpoints  of  the  experiment.  0 

Histopathology  of  the  retina  was  also  used  h  '  J\ 

as  an  endpoint.  Nineteen  monkeys  were  ^  21  4-i ,  ,  /  2 

randomized  to  receive  sham  exposure  or  ^  „u/Si, 

pulsed  microwave  exposures.  Microwaves  . . . . " 

were  delivered  cranially  at  4,  8,  or  20  W/kg  1-572  2-974  2-249  4-27« 

average  retinal  specific  absorption  rates  1 _ _ _ 

.  ,  ,  ,  .  ,.  Fig.  1.  An  example  of  Post-Exposure  Enhancement  of 

(R-SAR).  The  pulse  characteristics  was  Photopic  b-wave  Amplitude.  Trace  1,2= pre-exposure, 

1.04  MW  (« 1.30  MW/kg  peak  SAR),  5.59  Trace  3,4=  post-expousre,  R=  right  eye,  L=  left  eye. 

ps  pulse  width  at  0,  0.59,  1.18  and  2.79  Hz  _ _ _ ^ - 

pulse  repetition  rates.  The  exposure 

yuxLjv/  ^  r  photopic  white  b-WAVE  AMPLITUDE 

regimen  was  4  hours  per  day  and  3  days  per  j  ^  ^  ^  j.ss-.  p<  o'os  j 

^  160  -  A 

weeks  for  3  weeks,  a  total  of  9  exposures.  re) 

150  - 

The  following  preliminary  results  and  ^ 

conclusions  are  a  synopsis  of  data  in  17  ^  ^  oo) 

monkeys.  The  pre-exposure  and  post-  |  ^  ; 

exposure  fundus  pictures  and  angiograms  do  |  ^  ^ 

were  all  within  normal  limits.  The  response  ^ 

1"  1  n  1  0  4  8  12  16  20 

of  cone  photoreceptor  to  light  flash  was  Petinai  sar  (w/kg) 

enhanced  (Fig.  1)  in  monkeys  exposed  at  8  - — - - - 

Fig.  2.Enhancement  of  the  ERG  Photopic  b-wave 

or  20  W/kg  R-SAR  but  not  in  monkeys  Amplitude.  Erwr  bar=  S.E.,  arrow  head^  p<  0. 05  from 

exposed  at  4  w/kg  R-SAR  (Fig.  2).  Retinal 
histopathology  revealed  enhanced  glycogen 

storage  in  photoreceptors  which  was  distributed  evenly  among  sham  (2/5),  8  W/kg  (3/3)  and  20 
W/kg  (2/5)  exposed  monkeys  with  exception  of  the  4  W/kg  (0/4)  exposed  monkeys.  Further 
quantitative  index  of  the  glycogen  storage  in  photoreceptors  is  being  analyzed.  Supranormal  cone 
photoreceptor  b-wave  was  R-SAR  dependent,  and  may  be  an  early  indicator  of  mild  injury. 
However,  no  evidence  of  histopathological  changes  were  seen  in  these  animals.  Thus,  we 


Fig.  2.  Enhancement  of  the  ERG  Photopic  b-wave 
Amplitude.  Error  bar=  S.E.,  arrow  head^  p<  0. 05  from 
shams. 


9 


concluded  that  retinal  injury  is  very  unlikely  at  4  W/kg,  and  functional  changes  that  occur  at 

higher  R-SAR  are  probably  reversible  because  of  lack  of  histopathologic  correlates. 

Relevant  Publications  /  Presentations 

D’ Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J,  Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Merritt,  J.  H.  (1997).  Rhesus  monkey  vision 
after  exposure  to  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  Department  of  Defense 
Electromagnetic  Environmental  Effects  (E3)  Program  Review.  10-14  March,  Everett, 

WA. 

D’Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J,  Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.,  Merritt,  J.  H.,  Johnson,  M,  Lutty,  G.,  Zwick,  H., 
and  Stuck,  B.  (1997).  Rhesus  monkey  vision  after  exposure  to  high  peak  power 
microwave  pulses.  The  Second  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology 
and  Medicine,  June  8-13,  Bologna,  Italy. 

Lu,  S-T.  (1999).  Retinal  effects  of  high  peak  power  microwaves  in  rhesus  monkeys.  Tri  Service 
Report,  US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Naval  Health  Research  Center 
Detachment,  US  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas. 

Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Stuck,  B.,  Zwick,  H.,  D’Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J.  M.,  Merritt,  J.  H., 

Lutty,  G.,  McLeod,  S.,  and  Johnson,  M.  (1998).  Retinal  effects  of  high  peak  power  L- 
band  microwaves  in  monkeys.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

The  copies  of  the  above  references  can  be  found  in  Volume  II  of  this  Final  report. 


10 


The  biological  hazards  of  ultra  wide  band  (UWB)  radiation  on  analgesia,  the 
cardiovascular  and  other  cellular  systems, 


♦ 


mm  imnem  k  o.m  timg  o-W;  ma  wtemctkm;  Fj,^-o.S7;  ns. 

^  30  ( - 1 - 1 - r— — — -T - 1 - 1 - r 


tSSR  SHAU 


arwN  2 

500  Hr,  95*1  kV/m,  1.02  n«,  1.15  mW/em  ^ 
1,000  HZ.  82,0  kV/m.  1.05  ns,  1.95  mW/cm 


The  aim  of  this  research  was  to  evaluate  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  Ultra-Wide  Band 
(UWB)  pulses,  a  new  modality  in  radar  technology.  Forty-five  male  Wistar-Kyoto  (WKY) 
rats  were  used  in  three  experiments.  The  peak  electric  field  of  the  unipolar  UWB  pulses  was 
85  to  95  kV/m  («1.92  to  2.39  kW/cm^)  with 
160  to  200  ps  risetime  and  0.91  to  1.02  ns 
pulse  width.  The  exposure  was  performed  in  a| 

GTEM  cell  with  various  pulse  repetition  rates. 

For  comparison,  equivalent  power  density  was 
calculated  from  peak  electric  field,  pulse 
width,  repetition  rate  and  wave  impedence  (377| 
ohms).  The  pulse  repetition  rates  were  0  Hz 
(sham),  500  Hz  («1.15  mW/cm^)  and  1,000 
Hz  (“1.95  mW/cm^)  in  experiment  I;  0  Hz 

(sham),  125  Hz  (»0.28  mW/cm^)  and  250  Hz  Pig  3  pxP.  I 

(«0.61  mW/cm^)  in  experiment  II,  and  0  Hz  (sham),  500  Hz  (»0.96  W/cm^)  and  1,000  Hz 
(«1.28  mW/cm^)  in  experiment  III.  Exposure  duration  was  6  minutes.  A  non-invasive  tail 
cuff  sphygmonanometer  with  photoelectric  sensor  was  used  to  measure  heart  rate,  systolic, 
mean,  and  diastolic  arterial  pressures  in  unanesthetized  rats.  These  cardiovascular  endpoints 
were  obtained  as  pre-exposure  baseline,  and  0.75  h,  24  h,  72  h,  1  wk,  2  wk,  3  wk  and  4  wk 


24  H  72  H  1  WK  2  WK  3  WK 
TIME  AFTER  EXPOSURE 


after  exposure.  Each  individual  rat  served  as 
its  own  control.  The  data  presented  were 
expressed  as  changes  from  the  pre-exposure 
baseline  level.  Bradycardia  (decreased  heart 
rate)  was  noted  in  one  group  of  animals  only 
(experiment  III,  500  Hz,  0.96  mW/cm^). 
Delayed  reduction  in  arterial  pressures  was 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  0.96, 
1.15,  1.28,  and  1.95  mW/cm^  but  not  in  rats 
exposed  at  0.28  or  0.61  mW/cm^  (Figs.  3,  4, 
5).  Pre-exposure  baselines  of  6  additional  rats 
(a  total  of  51  rats,  297  measurements)  were 


TIME  AFTER  EXPOSURE 


Fig.  4.  EXP.  II 


11 


included  to  determine  the  normal  range  of  systolic  arterial  pressure.  These  data  was  used  to 


determine  the  physiological  status  of  animals 
according  to  a  clinically  accepted  practice  for 
defining  normality/abnormality  status.  In  this 
laboratory,  the  borderline  systolic  hypotension 
[<  (mean  -  1  S.D.)]  was  a  systolic  arterial 
pressure  lower  than  127.4  torr  and  systolic 
hypotension  was  a  systolic  arterial  pressure  [  < 
(mean  -  2  S.D.)]  lower  than  109.8  torr  in 
WKY  rats.  The  probability  of  borderline 
hypotension  and  hypotension  were  determined 
from  all  .the  systolic  arterial  pressure  records 


Fig.  5.  EXP.  Ill 


(n=  81  to  94)  in  rats  (5  rats  in  each  group)  - - - 

between  1  and  3  weeks  after  treatment.  It  was  “  . . . . — 

•  :  <  borderline  hypotension 

apparent  that  rats  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  so :  ‘ ‘  hypotension 

averaged  power  density  higher  than  0.96 

mW/cm^  had  increased  probability  of  becoming  -  i  /  • 

borderline  hypotensive  and  hypotensive  (Fig.  |  :  / 

6).  It  can  be  concluded  that  UWB  pulses  I  20  ^  / 

possess  a  hypotensive  effect  in  rats.  The  UWB  1  ^ 

induced  hypotension  is  dose-dependent,  robust, 

persistent  and  replicable.  The  threshold  for  0 : 

E  .  .  .  I  .  ■  .  .  I  ■  .  ■  _ I _ _ _ _ _ _ _ I _ I — I — 1 — I — I — L-,. — • — 

UWB  induced  hypotension  was  lower  than  1  0°  "  *  '  °  ^  ® 

EQUIVALENT  POWER  DENSITY  (mW/cm^) 

mW/cm^  average  equivalent  power  density  and 

100  kV/m  peak  electric  field.  Pig  5  Dose-Response  Characteritics  of  the 

UWB  Induced  Systolic  Hypotension. 


EQUIVALENT  POWER  DENSITY  (mW/cm 


In  another  experiment,  mice  were  exposed  to  UWB  electromagnetic  pulses  averaging  99- 
105  kV/m  peak  amplitude,  0.97-1.03  ns  duration,  and  155-174  ps  rise  time,  after  intraperitoneal 
administration  of  saline  or  morphine  sulfate.  They  were  then  tested  for  thermal  nociception  on  a 
hot  surface  and  for  spontaneous  activity.  Analysis  of  results  showed  no  effect  of  UWB  pulses  on 
nociception  and  activity  measures  in  CF-1  mice  after  15-,  30-,  or  45-min  exposure  to  pulses  at 
600/s  or  after  30-min  exposure  to  UWB  pulses  at  60/s.  This  result  indicated  lack  of  effect  of  the 
UWB  pulses  used  in  these  experiments  on  nervous  system  components,  including  endogenous 


12 


opioids,  involved  in  these  behaviors. 


In  a  related  experiment  executed  in  our  laboratories  no  evidence  for  excess  genotoxocity 
was  found  in  peripheral  blood  or  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWB. 

Also,  when  cell  samples  of  the  yeast  were  exposed  to  100  J/m^  of  254  nm  ultraviolet  (UV) 
radiation  followed  by  a  30  min  treatment  with  UWB  pulses.  The  effect  of  exposure  was  evaluated 
from  the  colony-forming  ability  of  the  cells  on  complete  and  selective  media  and  the  number  of 
aberrant  colonies.  This  experiment  established  no  effect  of  UWB  exposure  on  the  UV-induced 
reciprocal  and  non-reciprocal  recombination,  mutagenesis,  or  cell  survival. 

Relevant  Publications  /  Presentations 

Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Lee,  J.  C.  (1999).  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses 
induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiology  and  Behavior,  65,  753-761 . 

Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1998).  Dose-response  characteristics  of  an  UWB- 
induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Jauchem,  J.  R.,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  Lehnert,  H.  M.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Ryan,  K.  L.,  and  Frei,  M.  R. 

(1998).  Exposures  of  rats  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses:  Lack  of  effects  on 
heart  rate  and  blood  pressure.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1998).  Ultra-wide 
band  electromagnetic  radiation  does  not  effect  UV-induced  recombination  and 
mutagenesis  in  yeast.  Bioelectromagnetics,  19,  128-130. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  and  Mathur,  S.  P.  (1998).  Ultra-wideband 

electromagnetic  pulses  and  morphine-induced  changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in  mice. 
Physiology  and  Behavior.  65,  (2),  263-270. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  and  Mathur,  S.  P.  (1998).  Ultra-wideband  pulses 


13 


counteract  hyperactivity  but  not  reduced  nociception  induced  by  NOS  inhibitor  L-Name  in 
CF-1  mice.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society,  June  7-11, 
Florida. 


Vyayalaxmi,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Prihoda,  T.  J.  (1999). 
Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  radiation.  InternationalJournal  of  Radiation  Biology,  75  (1), 
115-120. 

The  copies  of  the  above  articles  can  be  found  in  the  Volume  II  of  this  Final  Report. 


14 


♦  Millimeter  wavelength  exposure  on  neuronal  and  cellular  functions 

Dr.  Andrei  Pakhomov  executed  a  series  of  experiments  to  study  the  effects  of  millimeter 
wave  (MMW)  radiation.  In  order  to  establish  whether  MMW  irradiation  alters  conduction  in  a 
polysynaptic  pathway  from  dorsal  root  afferent  fibers  to  efferents  of  the  respective  ventral  root, 
effects  of  41.34  GHz  MMWs  were  studied  in  the  isolated  frog  spinal  cord  preparation.  After 
isolating  and  placement  of  the  cord  in  the  exposure  bath,  the  cord  was  simulated  with  single 
supramaximal  pulses  every  30  s.  Experiments  began  after  30-160  mm  of  stabilization  and  lasted 
for  65  min,  without  any  changes  or  interruptions  of  the  stimulation  routine.  He  concluded  that 
the  effect  of  even  a  short  MMW  irradiation  is  not  limited  to  changes  taking  place  during  this 
irradiation.  The  aftereffect  of  the  first  MMW  exposure  was  not  detectable  by  physiological 
indices,  but  manifested  itself  as  a  change  in  the  sensitivity  to  the  second  exposure.  Moreover,  this 
aftereffect  could  be  either  a  decrease  or  an  increase  in  the  sensitivity  of  the  preparation,  depending 
on  whether  the  preparation  responded  to  the  first  exposure  or  not. 

In  another  series  of  experiment,  effects  of  short-term  exposure  to  millimeter  waves  on  the 
compound  action  potential  (CAP)  conduction  were  studied  in  an  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve 
preparation.  The  low  rate  of  stimulation  did  not  alter  the  functional  state  of  the  nerve,  and  the 
amplitude,  latency,  and  peak  latency  of  CAPs  could  stay  virtually  stable  for  hours.  The  effects 
observed  under  irradiation  at  higher  field  intensity  of  2-3  mW^/cm  were  a  subtle  and  transient 
reduction  of  CAP  latency  and  peak  latency  along  with  a  rise  of  the  test  CAP  amplitude. 

Dr.  Pakhomov  published  an  important  milestone  review  paper  in  1998.  In  this  paper  he 
reviewed  the  current  state  and  implications  of  research  on  biological  effects  of  millimeter  waves. 
This  paper  analyzed  general  trends  in  the  area  and  reviewed  the  most  significant  publications, 
proceedings  from  cell-free  systems,  dosimetry,  and  spectroscopy  issues  through  cultured  cells  and 
isolated  organs  to  animals  and  humans.  The  studies  reviewed  demonstrated  effects  of  low- 
intensity  MMW  on  cell  growth  and  proliferation,  activity  of  enzymes,  state  of  cell  genetic 
apparatus,  function  of  excitable  membranes,  peripheral  receptors,  and  other  biological  systems. 
This  long  over  due  paper  also  outlines  some  problems  and  uncertainties  in  the  MMW  research 
area,  identifies  tasks  for  future  studies,  and  discusses  possible  implications  for  development  of 
exposure  safety  criteria  and  guidelines. 


15 


Relevant  Publications  /  Presentations: 


Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998).  High  resolution 

microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  NATO  Advanced  Research  Workshop,  October  12- 
16,  Slovenia. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998). 
Immediate  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  on  the  beating  rhythm  in 
isolated  frog  heart  auricle.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society, 
June  7-11,  Florida. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Stuck,  B.  E.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998). 

Current  state  and  implications  of  research  on  biological  effects  of  millimeter  waves:  A 
review  of  the  literature.  Bioelectromagnetics,  19,  393-413. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1998).  A  pilot  study  of  the  millimeter-wavelength 
radiation  effect  on  synaptic  transmission.  Electro-magnetobiology,  17,(2),  115-125. 

Pakhomov,  A.  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Nonthermal  physiological  effects  to  microwave  exposure. 
The  33''^  International  Congress  of  Physiological  Sciences,  June  30-  July  5,  St. 
Petersburg,  Russia. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Campbell,  C.  B.  G.  (1997).  Search 
for  frequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter-wave  radiation  on  isolated  nerve  function. 
Bioelectromagnetics,  18,  324-334. 

The  copies  of  the  above  articles  can  be  found  in  the  Volume  II  of  this  Final  Report. 


16 


♦  A  series  of  research  studies  exploring  potential  of  neurotoxic  effects  of  RFR 
exposure.  A  satisfactory  external  science  review  will  be  required  for  each  study 
protocol  before  the  study  is  initiated. 

Upon  the  recommendation  of  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Material  Command 
and  COR  Mr.  Bruce  Stuck,  MBS  staff  submitted  proposals  for  a  Neurotoxin  Exposure  Treatment 
Research  Program.  These  proposed  projects  are: 

♦  Role  of  glutamergic  and  GABAergic  systems  in  neurotoxic  effects  of  microwave. 

This  project  is  designed  to  understand  the  cellular  mechanisms  that  underlie  microwave 
effects  on  the  central  nervous  system  and  to  develop  predictive  models  for  microwave 
radiation  effects.  The  research  is  driven  by  a  clear  hypothesis  about  the  possible  role  of 
microwaves  in  neurodegenerative  diseases.  Evidence  that  pulsed  microwaves  increase 
agonist  binding  to  glutamate  receptors  and  decrease  binding  to  GABA  receptors  suggests 
a  possible  neurotoxic  mechanism.  This  project  plans  to  study  the  effects  of  extremely  high 
powered  microwave  pulses  on  activation  of  the  excitatory  glutamate  system  and 
suppression  of  the  inhibitory  GABA  system. 

♦  Animal  behavior  testing  for  modification  of  the  central  nervous  system  by 
electromagnetic  fields  of  military  relevance.  This  project  will  develop  and  test  a  toxin 
induced  neurodegeneration  model.  It  should  help  determine  the  dependence  of  harmful 
behavioral  effects  on  microwave  exposure  and  indicate  possible  neurotoxic  effects  in 
humans.  The  experiments  on  drug  induced  neurodegeneration  will  help  to  determine  if 
nitric  oxide  plays  a  role  in  the  mechanism  of  these  changes.  The  strengths  of  this  project 
are  the  plausible  rationale  and  the  diverse  set  of  endpoints.  The  rodent  model  of  3- 
nitropropionic  acid  neurotoxicity  is  well  developed. 

4  Behavioral  modalities  to  study  potential  toxic  military  threat  agents.  This  research 
protocol  involves  a  range  of  endpoints  from  simple  sensory  functions  to  higher  mental 
processes,  such  as  learning  and  memory,  in  rats.  Memory  impairment  will  be  studied  with 
various  maze  tasks;  physical  endurance  will  be  measured  with  treadmill  performance;  and 
behavioral  despair  will  use  Porsolt’s  swimming  task,  a  recent  animal  model  for  depression. 
These  studies  should  provide  information  on  the  effects  of  high  power  microwaves  on  the 
behavioral  and  cognitive  performance  of  rats.  This  information  will,  in  turn,  help 


17 


determine  the  potential  for  neurotoxic  effects  in  humans. 


The  American  Institute  of  Biological  Sciences  (AIBS)  conducted  a  two  day  peer  review 
session  at  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  on  December  2-3,  1998,  upon  the  request  of  the 
Army  Operational  Medicine  Research  Program.  The  four  scientist  peer  review  panel  concluded 
that  the  proposed  research  plans  are  clearly  relevant  to  the  objectives  of  the  Army’s  program. 
Furthermore,  the  panel  commented  favorably  on  the  “highly  motivated  operation  struggling  to  do 
its  best  with  limited  resources.”  The  AIBS  panel  recommended  the  restoration  of  full  funding  and 
staffing  of  the  program. 

MBS  fully  understands  the  needs  of  the  Neurotoxin  Exposure  Treatment  Research 
Program,:and  is  dedicated  to  accomplish  the  objectives  of  the  above  approved  proposals.  A  copy 
of  the  AIBS  peer  review  panel  report  can  be  found  in  Volume  II  of  this  Final  Report. 


18 


MAJOR  ACCOMPLISHMENTS 


McKessonHBOC  BioServices’  understanding  of  technical  issues  and  insight  into  scientific 
principles  have  been  the  keystone  of  success  for  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch’s  research 
program.  Due  to  MBS  staff  efforts  in  planning  and  managing  the  research  program,  and  the 
dedication  and  the  enthusiasm  of  the  staff  members,  the  scientific  productivity  of  the  program  has 
risen  dramatically  despite  drastic  budget  cuts.  During  the  last  two  years  the  US  Army’s  program 
continued  to  be  a  well-respected  member  of  the  Tri-Service  Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Program 
at  Brooks  AFB.  A  summary  list  of  our  major  accomplishments  during  the  last  two  years  of  the 
contract  is  as  follows; 

♦;  Besides  two  major  technical  reports,  MBS  staff  presented  and  published  two 
dozen  scientific  papers.  Eleven  of  these  papers  are  published  in  peer-reviewed 
scientific  journals  or  books.  A  list  of  Branch’s  publications  is  presented  at  the  end 
of  this  report.  Volume  II  of  this  report  contains  copies  of  these  publications. 

♦  A  very  positive  peer  review  of  the  Neurotoxin  Exposure  Treatment  Research 
Program  of  the  MBB  is  provided  by  the  American  Institute  of  Biological  Sciences 
(AIBS).  Volume  II  of  this  report  contains  a  copy  of  the  peer  review. 

♦  A  technical  report  investigating  the  safety  of  army  personnel  from  exposure  to 
radio  frequency  radiation  from  the  Advanced  Membrane  Transducer  Anteima  is 
prepared  and  presented  to  Mr.  Bruce  Stuck  (COR).  A  copy  of  this  report  can  be 
found  in  Volume  II  of  this  report. 

♦  A  major  cornerstone  Tri-Service  report  investigating  retinal  effects  of  high  power 
microwaves  in  rhesus  monkeys  is  prepared  under  the  leadership  of  MBS  staff.  A 
copy  of  this  report  can  be  found  in  Volume  II  of  this  report. 

♦  Various  dielectric  measurements  of  brain  tissue  were  accomplished. 

♦  A  new  microdosimetry  method  is  developed  to  study  the  lossy  media  exposed  to 
extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses. 


19 


♦  Frequency-specific  mmWave  effects  on  nerve  conduction  were  studied  and  a 
review  paper  summarizing  the  biological  effects  of  mmWaves  was  published. 

♦  Two  major  health  studies  investigating  the  effects  of  UWB  on  analgesia,  activity 
level,  and  cardiovascular  system  were  accomplished. 

♦  Significant  steps  were  taken  in  UWB  field  characterization  and  system 
improvement. 


CONCLUSIONS 

During  the  last  two  years  of  the  contract  MBS  employees  proved  that  they  were 
determined  to  provide,  under  the  general  guidance  of  the  COR  and  appropriate  WRAIR  Program 
Managers,  high  quality  scientific  products.  Despite  significant  decreases  in  funding  and  number  of 
staff  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  stayed  highly  productive  and  continued  to  support  the  US 
Army’s  needs.  We  were  able  to  publish  and/or  present  24  scientific  articles  over  the  last  two 
years.  This  is  an  excellent  proof  of  the  productivity  and  the  dedication  of  the  McKessonHBOC 
staff.  Our  staff  do  realize  that  the  research  efforts  of  the  US  Army  in  high  power  microwave 
fields  have  little  precedence  and  are  considered  innovative  and  pioneering. 

In  the  next  two  option  years,  MBS  researchers  will  focus  on  the  approved  Neurotoxin 
research  protocols.  We  will  conduct  a  series  of  at  least  three  major  studies  exploring  the  potential 
of  neurotoxic  effects  of  radio  frequency  radiation  exposure.  Furthermore,  MBS  will  continue  to 
conduct  research  on  the  biological  effects  of  ultra  wideband  radiation  on  the  cardiovascular  and 
other  cellular  systems.  We  will  produce  data  to  be  used  to  set  the  guidelines  for  safe  exposure 
criteria  for  this  new  modality  as  promulgated  by  the  Tri  Service  Electromagnetic  Radiation  Panel 
(TERP).  As  recommended  by  the  AEBS  we  will  improve  existing  connections  with  scientists  at 
the  University  of  Texas  and  other  scientists  in  the  immediate  area. 

MBS  is  dedicated  to  continue  to  promote  the  success  of  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute 
of  Research  and  be  the  world  leader  in  military  relevant  biomedical  research.  We  will  help 
WRAIR  to  ensure  that  the  soldiers  will  have  the  best  possible  knowledge  and  protection  against 
environmental  electromagnetic  threats. 


20 


PERSONNEL 


The  following  McKessonHBOC  BioServices  personnel  served  under  the  present  contract: 


♦ 

Dr.  Yahya  Akyel 

Program  Manager  /  Behavioral  Psychologist 

♦ 

Dr.  Shin-TsuLu 

Radiation  Biologist  /  Veterinarian 

♦ 

Dr.  Andrei  Pakhomov 

Electrophysiologist 

♦ 

Dr.  Olga  Pakhomova 

Cellular  Biologist 

♦ 

Dr.  Ronald  Seaman 

Biomedical  Engineer  /  Physiologist 

♦ 

Dr.  Satnam  Mathur 

Electrical  Engineer  /  Antenna  Design 

♦ 

Dr.  Jian  Bao 

Physicist 

♦ 

Ms.  Lori  Allen 

Administrative  Assistant  /  Safety  Officer 

♦ 

Ms.  Joanne  Doyle 

Biomedical  Technician 

♦ 

Mr.  Bryan  Wohlfeld 

Biomedical  Technician 

♦ 

Mr.  Kenneth  Prol 

Biomedical  Engineer 

♦ 

Mr.  Duane  Cox 

Electronic  Technician  /  Machinist 

♦ 

Mr.  Jonathan  Lee 

Electrical  Engineer  /  Computer  Support 

21 


MICROWAVE  BIOEFFECTS  BRANCH 
PRESENTATIONS  /  PUBLICATIONS  LIST 
(MAY  1997  -  MAY  1999) 


Bao.,  J-Z.  (1997).  Picosecond  domain  electromagnetic  pulse  measurements  in  an  exposure 
facility:  An  error  compensation  routine  using  deconvolution  techmques.  Review  of 
Scientific  Instruments,  68  (5),  2221  -  2227. 

Bao,  J-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Belt,  M.  E.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Lu,  S-T.  (1997).  Error 
correction  iii  transient  electromagnetic  field  measurements  using  deconvolution 
techniques.  Ultra-wideband,  Short-Pulse  Electromagnetics  3,  Plenum  Press,  New  York. 

Bao,  J-Z.,  Lu,  S-T.,  and  Hurt,  W.  D.  (1997).  Complex  dielectric  measurements  and  analysis  of 
brain  tissues  in  the  radio  and  microwave  frequencies.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Microwave 
Theory  and  Techniques,  45  (10),  1730  -  1741. 

D’ Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J,  Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Merritt,  J.  H.  (1997).  Rhesus  monkey  vision 
after  exposure  to  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  Department  of  Defense 
Electromagnetic  Environmental  Effects  (E3)  Program  Review.  10-14  March,  Everett, 
WA. 


D’Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J,  Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.,  Merritt,  J.  H.,  Johnson,  M,  Lutty,  G.,  Zwick,  H., 
and  Stuck,  B.  (1997).  Rhesus  monkey  vision  after  exposure  to  high  peak  power 
microwave  pulses.  The  Second  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology 
and  Medicine,  June  8-13,  Bologna,  Italy. 

Jauchem,  J.  R.,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  Lehnert,  H.  M.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Ryan,  K.  L.,  and  Frei,  M.  R. 

(1998).  Exposures  of  rats  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses:  Lack  of  effects  on 
heart  rate  and  blood  pressure.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Kiel,  J.  L.,  Seaman,  R.  L.  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Parker,  J.  E.,  Wright,  J.  R.,  Alls,  J  L.,  and  Morales,  P.  J. 
(1999).  Pulsed  microwave  induced  light,  sound,  and  electrical  discharge  enhanced  by  a 


22 


biopolymer.  Bioelectromagnetics,  20,  216  -  223. 

Kiel,  J.  L.,  Mason,  P.  A.,  Alls,  J.  L.,  Morales,  P.,  and  Seaman,  R.  L.  (1998).  A  mechanism  of 
single-pulse  radio  frequency  radiation  interaction  with  biological  molecules.  Twentieth 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Kiel,  J.,  Parker,  J.,  Alls,  J.,  Morales,  P.,  Seaman,  R.,  Mathur,  S.,  and  Wright,  J.  (1997).  Pulsed 
microwave  radiation  induction  of  electrosonoluminescence.  Fourth  Annual  Michaelson 
Research  Conference,  August  15-18,  Canandaigua,  NY. 

Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Lee,  J.  C.  (1999).  Ultrawide-band  electromagnetic  pulses 
induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Physiology  and  Behavior,  65,  753-761 . 

Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1998).  Dose-response  characteristics  of  an  UWB- 
induced  hypotension  in  rats.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Lu,  S-T.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Stuck,  B.,  Zwick,  H.,  D’Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J.  M.,  Merritt,  J.  H., 

Lutty,  G.,  McLeod,  S.,  and  Johnson,  M.  (1998).  Retinal  effects  of  high  peak  power  L- 
band  microwaves  in  monkeys.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic 
Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998).  High  resolution 

microwave  dosimetry  in  lossy  media.  NATO  Advanced  Research  Workshop,  October  12- 
16,  Slovenia. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998). 
Immediate  effects  of  extremely  high  power  microwave  pulses  on  the  beating  rhythm  in 
isolated  frog  heart  auricle.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society, 
June  7-11,  Florida. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Kiel,  J.  L.  (1998).  Direct  microdosimetry  in 

media  exposed  to  extremely  high  peak  power  microwaves.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of 
the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society,  June  7-11,  Florida. 


23 


Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998).  Dose  dependencies  in  bioefFects  of 
extremely  high  peak  power  microwave  pulses.  World  Health  Organization  (WHO) 
Annual  Meeting,  18-22  March,  Moscow,  Russia. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Stuck,  B.  E.,  and  Murphy,  M.  R.  (1998). 

Current  state  and  implications  of  research  on  biological  effects  of  millimeter  waves;  A 
review  of  the  literature.  Bioelectromagnetics,  19,  393-413. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G,  Prol,  H.  K.,  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1998).  A  pilot  study  of  the  millimeter-wavelength 
radiation  effect  on  synaptic  transmission.  Electro-magnetobiology,  17,(2),  115-125. 

Pakhomov,  A.  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Nonthermal  physiological  effects  to  microwave  exposure. 
The  33’’^  International  Congress  of  Physiological  Sciences,  June  30-  July  5,  St. 

Petersburg,  Russia. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Campbell,  C.  B.  G.  (1997).  Search 
for  frequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter-wave  radiation  on  isolated  nerve  function. 
Bioelectromagnetics,  18,  324-334. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  and  Akyel,  Y.  (1998).  Ultra-wide 
band  electromagnetic  radiation  does  not  effect  UV-induced  recombination  and 
mutagenesis  in  yeast.  Bioelectromagnetics,  19,  128-130. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  and  Mathur,  S.  P.  (1998).  Ultra-wideband 

electromagnetic  pulses  and  morphine-induced  changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in  mice. 
Physiology  and  Behavior .  65,  (2),  263-270. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  and  Mathur,  S.  P.  (1998).  Ultra-wideband  pulses 

counteract  hyperactivity  but  not  reduced  nociception  induced  by  NOS  inhibitor  L-Name  in 
CF-1  mice.  Twentieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetic  Society,  June  7-11, 
Florida. 


Vijayalaxmi,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  and  Prihoda,  T.  J.  (1999). 
Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 


24 


wideband  electromagnetic  radiation.  InternationalJournal  of  Radiation  Biology,  75  (1), 
115-120. 


25 


Physiology  &  pehavior,  Vol.  65,  Nos.  4/5,  pp.  753-761, 1999 
©  1999  Elsevier  Science  Inc. 
Printed  in  the  USA.  All  rights  reserved 
0031-9384/99  $-see  front  matter 

PH  80031-9384(98)00214-5 


ijltrawide-Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  Induced 

Hypotension  in  Rats 


SHIN-TSULU,i  SATNAM  P.  MATHUR,  YAHYA  AKYEL  AND  JONATHAN  C.  LEE 

McKesson  BioServices,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch, 
8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX  78235 


ELSEVIER 


Received  17  December  1997;  Accepted  17  July  1998 


LU  S  -T  S  P  MATHUR  Y.  AKYEL  AND  J.  C  LEE.  Ultrawide-band  electromagnetic  pulses  induced  hypotension 
in  rats,  PHYSIOL  BEHAV  ^(4/5)  753-761, 1999.— The  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  electromagnetic  pulses  are  used  as  a  new 
modality  in  radar  technology.  Biological  effects  of  extremely  high  peak  E-field,  fast  rise  time,  ultrashort  pulse 
trawide  band  have  not  been  investigated  heretofore  due  to  the  lack  of  animal  exposure  facilities.  A  new  biological  effects  data¬ 
base  is  needed  to  establish  personnel  protection  guidelines  for  these  new  type  of  radiofrequency  radiation.  Functional  indices 
of  the  cardiovascular  system  (heart  rate,  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures)  were  selected  to  represent  biological  end 
points  that  may  be  susceptible  to  the  UWB  radiation.  A  noninvasive  tail-cuff  photoelectric  sensor  sphygmomanometer  was 
used.  Male  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  were  subjected  to  sham  exposure,  0.5-kHz  (93  kV/m,  180  ps  rise  time,  1.00  ns  pulse  width, 
whole-body  averaged  specific  absorption  rate,  SAR  =  70  mW/kg)  or  a  1-kHz  (85  kV/m,  200  ps  rise  time,  1.03  ns  pulse 
SAR  =  121  mW/kg)  UWB  fields  in  a  tapered  parallel  plate  GTEM  cell  for  6  min.  Cardiovascular  functions  were  evaluated 
fi-om  45  min  to  4  weeks  after  exposures.  Significant  decrease  in  arterial  blood  pressures  (hypotension)  was  found.  In  ^ntrast, 
heart  rate  was  not  altered  by  these  exposures.  The  UWB  radiation-induced  hypotension  was  a  robust,  consistent,  and  persis¬ 
tent  effect.  ©  1999  Elsevier  Science  Inc. 

Arterial  pressure  Heart  rate  Pulsed  radiofrequency  radiation  Ultrawide-band  radiation  Delayed  effects 


THE  ultrawide-band  (UWB)  radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation 
is  a  new  modality  in  radar  technology.  The  potential  usages  of 
UWB  radar  are  not  limited  to  military  application  only.  At 
much  lower  power,  an  example  of  civilian  UWB  radar  appli¬ 
cation  is  in  automobile  safety.  Devices  designed  as  warning 
systems  for  backing  up  and  parking  are  planned,  and  expected 
to  be  available  in  the  next  few  years.  A  commonly  used  defmi- 
tion  accepted  by  the  Defense  Advanced  Research  Project 
Agency  is  “Ultrawide  band  radar  is  any  radar  whose  frac¬ 
tional  bandwidth  is  greater  than  0.25,  regardless  of  the  center 
frequency  or  the  signal  time-bandwidth  product”  (45).  The 
UWB  is  a  radiofrequency  signal  with  an  ultrashort  pulse 
width  (a  few  ns)  and  a  very  fast  rise  time  (<200  ps).  Because 
of  the  ultrashort  pulse  width,  the  peak  electric  field  of  a  UWB 
pulse  can  be  operated  in  excess  of  the  breakdown  voltage 
without  arcing.  In  fact,  systems  with  peak  electric  field  in  ex¬ 
cess  of  hundreds  of  kV/m  are  known  to  exist.  Another  charac¬ 
teristic  is  a  very  low  duty  cycle  of  these  UWB  devices  result¬ 
ing  from  an  ultrashort  pulse  width. 

Radiofrequency  personnel  protection  guidelines  usually 
are  promulgated  on  a  time-averaged  specific  absorption  rate 


or  power  density.  From  operational  characteristics  of  the 
UWB  devices  with  an  extremely  high  peak  electric  field  and 
very  low  duty  cycle,  the  energy  absorption  rate  per  pulse  in 
humans  can  be  extremely  high  (temporal  peak  SAR),  but  the 
average  specific  absorption  rate  (average  SAR)  can  be  very 
low  if  a  time-average  procedure  is  applied.  The  ratio  of  peak 
to  average  SARs  will  be  much  greater  than  those  of  narrow- 
band  RF  radiation  used  in  the  past  for  evaluation  of  the  bio¬ 
logical  effects  of  pulsed  RF  radiation.  Concerns  on  UWB  ra¬ 
diation  safety  issues  have  been  voiced  (1).  However,  the 
experimental  database  on  UWB  safety  issues  is  very  limited 
(41,48).  Therefore,  there  is  a  need  for  additional  toxicologi¬ 
cal  testing  to  address  the  safety  of  UWB  radiation. 

Interests  in  the  cardiovascular  effects  of  RF  radiation  can 
be  traced  back  to  as  early  as  the  1940s  (37),  and  it  has  contin¬ 
ued  until  today.  Specifically,  cardiovascular  effects  of  RF  ra¬ 
diation  include  human  studies  with  emphasis  on  changes  in 
regional  blood  flow  for  diathermy,  epidemiology,  and  case 
report,  studies  in  experimental  animals  such  as  cardiac  inju¬ 
ries  caused  by  intense  RF  exposure,  cardiovascular  adjust¬ 
ments  to  localized  “low-level”  RF  exposure,  changes  in  arte- 


^To  whom  requests  for  reprints  should  be  addressed.  E-maili  shin-tsu.lu@aloer.brooks.af.mil 

753 


754 


LU  ET  AL. 


rial  pressure,  and  heart  rate  by  moderate  RF  exposure.  The 
effect  of  RF  radiation  on  heart  rate  can  be  further  divided 
into  tachycardia,  bradycardia,  cardiac  pacing,  effects  on  iso¬ 
lated  cardiac  tissue  in  vitro  and  the  RF  interference  of  the  im¬ 
planted  cardiac  pacemaker.  This  database  forms  a  foundation 
for  a  comparative  analysis  between  narrow-band  RF  and 
UWB  radiations.  However,  the  majority  of  these  studies  are 
acute  experiments  employing  a  short-term  (acute)  exposure 
and  studying  cardiovascular  end  points  in  a  short  period  of 
time,  for  example,  during  or  immediately  after  RF  exposure, 
and  usually  under  anesthesia.  Three  studies  used  a  long-term 
(chronic)  RF  exposure,  but  cardiovascular  functions  were  not 
their  main  emphasis;  instead,  they  were  embedded  in  a  bat¬ 
tery  of  end  points  (8,10,46). 

Two  types  of  chronic  cardiovascular  effects  have  been  ob¬ 
served.  They  are  the  cardiovascular  effect  of  a  chronic  expo¬ 
sure  and  the  delayed  effect  of  an  acute  exposure.  The  chronic 
effect  is  represented  by  a  biphasic  (hypertension^normoten- 
sion— ^hypotension)  or  a  monophasic  (hypotension)  arterial 
response  in  rats  chronically  exposed  to  RF  radiation  (37).  The 
delayed  effects  are  from  case  reports  (13,49)  indicating  the 
presence  of  delayed  hypertension  in  conjunction  with  anxiety 
attacks,  which  was  termed  “atypical  post-traumatic  syndrome,” 
months  after  an  accidental  exposure  to  RF  fields.  This  de¬ 
layed  vascular  response  has  never  been  confirmed  experimen¬ 
tally.  In  the  present  experiment,  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure 
in  awake  rats  were  evaluated  periodically  with  a  tail-cuff  pho¬ 
toelectric  sphygmomanometer  from  45  min  to  4  weeks  after 
acute  UWB  exposures. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 
General  Description  of  the  Experimental  Procedure 

Fifteen  male  Wistar-Kyoto  (WKY)  rats  aged  between  71 
and  89  days  were  used  at  the  beginning  of  the  experiment. 
They  were  obtained  at  56  days  of  age  from  a  commercial 
source  (Charles  River,  Portage,  MI).  They  were  maintained  in 
the  vivarium  at  21-23®C  ambient  temperature,  100%  condi¬ 
tioned  fresh  air  for  more  than  10  exchanges  per  hour,  and  a  12 
1^12  D  (lights  on  0600-1800  h)  light  cycle.  Tap  water  and 
feed  (Purina  Rodent  Diet  5008,  Ralston  Purina  Co.,  St.  Louis, 
MO)  were  available  ad  lib.  After  a  10-day  quarantine  period, 
they  were  acclimated  to  a  test  holder  (IITC  Life  Science, 
Woodland  Hills,  CA,  model  81)  1  h  daily  for  3  days.  Preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline  of  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressures  (systolic, 
mean,  and  diastolic)  were  determined  1-2  days  after  the 
holder  acclimation.  Three  to  4  days  later,  they  were  individu¬ 
ally  subjected  to  sham  exposure,  low  UWB,  or  high  UWB  ex¬ 
posure  for  6  min  between  0900  and  1000  h  in  an  exposure 
holder  maintained  at  23-25°C.  On  the  exposure  day,  average 
body  weight  was  250  ±  4  g  (n  =  15,  SE).  Immediately  after  ex¬ 
posure,  the  rat  was  transferred  to  the  test  holder  for  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressure  measurements.  Postexposure  heart  rate 
and  blood  pressures  were  determined  at  45  min,  24  h,  72  h,  1, 
2,  3,  and  4  weeks  after  exposure.  Four  to  six  determinations 
were  obtained  at  each  time  point,  and  the  average  value  was 
used  to  represent  the  cardiovascular  endpoints  at  that  time 
point.  Fifteen  animals  were  divided  randomly  into  three 
groups  of  five  rats  each  for  sham  exposure,  “low”  UWB  and 
“high”  UWB  exposures.  Each  rat  was  assigned  randomly  to 
receive  one  of  the  three  treatments  in  five  experimental  cy¬ 
cles.  The  UWB-exposed  rats  were  always  accompanied  by  at 
least  one  sham-exposed  animal  such  that  the  time-related  ex¬ 
perimental  error  caused  by  different  experimental  cycles  or 
animal  shipments  could  be  minimized. 


Photoelectric  Sphygmomanometer 

An  indirect  tail-cuff  arterial  pressure  measurement  system 
without  external  preheating  in  awake  rats  was  first  introduced 
by  Yen  et  al.  (51).  Validation  of  pressure  markers  (systolic 
and  mean  arterial  pressures),  and  theoretical  analysis  of  this 
indirect  method  based  on  a  photoelectric  sensor  have  been 
performed  by  various  investigators  (4,36,50).  For  the  present 
experiment,  a  commercial  system  (IITC  Life  Sci.,  Woodland  ' 
Hills,  CA)  was  used.  The  system  was  composed  of  a  pulse  am-* 
plifier  (IITC  model  29),  tail-cuff  photoelectric  sensor  assem¬ 
bly  (IITC  model  B-60,  5/8”  cuff),  smaller  bore  tubing  (Tygon, 

1.6  mm  i.d.,  0.8-mm  wall  thickness  for  connecting  tail-cuff, 
pressure  amplifier,  pressurizing  bulb,  and  pressure  gauge)  and 
animal  holder  (IITC  model  81).  Outputs  of  the  pressure  trans¬ 
ducer  and  pulse  sensor  from  the  pulse  amplifier  were  split 
evenly.  One  set  of  outputs  was  monitored  continuously  with  a 
digital  oscilloscope  (Tektronix  2430  A,  Tektronix,  Inc.,  Wilson- 
ville,  OR).  The  other  set  of  outputs  was  converted  to  a  digital 
signal  and  recorded  using  a  strip  chart  program  (AYSTANT+, 
Asyst  Software  Technology,  Rochester,  NY)  by  a  computer 
(Hewlett-Packard  Vectra,  Hewlett  Packard,  Greenley,  CO) 
at  50  Hz  data  acquisition  rate.  The  recorded  data  was  im¬ 
ported  into  a  graphics  program  (SigmaPlot  4.1,  Jandel  Scien¬ 
tific  Softwares,  San  Rafael,  CA)  and  viewed  graphically  and 
digitally.  A  custom-made  microenvironment  chamber  was  fab¬ 
ricated  from  acrylic  tubes  (28  cm  long,  12  and  14  cm  i.d.,  3.2-mm 
wall  thickness).  Plastic  tubing  (Tygon,  6.4  mm  i.d.,  1.6-mm  wall 
thickness,  from  Cole  Palmer,  Vernon  Hills,  IL)  was  wrapped 
around  the  smaller  acrylic  tube  with  tubing  wall  touching  each 
other  to  form  a  coil  18  cm  in  length.  The  larger  acrylic  tube 
was  used  as  an  outer  wall.  Both  ends  of  the  Tygon  tubing  were 
connected  to  the  pump  inlet  and  outlet  port  of  a  precision  cir¬ 
culator  water  bath  (Neslab  RTE-110,  Neslab  Instruments, 
Portsmouth,  NH)  providing  an  microenvironment  within  the 
inner  acrylic  tube  between  26.5  and  27.5°C  to  prevent  sudden 
temperature  surges.  The  microenvironment  chamber  was  mon¬ 
itored  continuously  with  a  thermistor  temperature  probe  (Yel¬ 
low  Springs  405  air  temperature  probe,  Yellow  Springs  Instru¬ 
ment,  Yellow  Springs,  OH)  and  a  digital  thermistor  bridge 
(Cole  Palmer  08502-12,  Cole  Palmer,  Vernon  HiUs,  IL).  The 
pressure  amplifier  output  was  set  at  1.00  volt  per  Torr  (mmHg). 

Light  intensity  and  photosensor  output  amplifier  were  ad¬ 
justed  to  provide  a  tail-pulse  signal  at  no  more  than  5  volts  at 
the  maximum  oscillation.  Pressure  amplifier  output  was  cali¬ 
brated  daily  against  a  certified  sphygomomanometer  before 
use.  The  same  tail-cuff-photoelectric  sensor  assembly  was  used 
throughout  the  entire  experiment. 

Cardiovascular  Parameter  Measurement 

Rats  were  transported  from  the  vivarium  to  the  laboratory 
in  the  morning.  They  were  allowed  to  sit  quietly  in  their  own 
cage  for  at  least  30  min  before  being  transferred  to  the  test 
holder.  The  rat  and  test  holder  were  then  inserted  into  the  mi¬ 
croenvironment  chamber.  Heating  in  the  microenvironment 
chamber  caused  by  animal  body  heat  was  offset  by  adjusting 
the  waterbath  temperature.  After  20  min  in  the  microenviron¬ 
ment  chamber,  the  rat  tail  was  passed  through  the  tail  cuff.  • 
The  tail-cuff/photoelectric  sensor  was  then  attached  to  the 
test  holder,  by  this  time,  characteristic  tail  pulses  could  be  de¬ 
tected  if  the  tail  cuff  was  inflated  to  40-60  Torr  (mmHg). 
When  the  presence  of  tail  pulses  was  ascertained,  tail  cuff  was 
quickly  inflated  to  200-220  Torr  until  tail  pulses  disappeared. 

The  cuff  was  then  deflated  immediately  afterwards  at  approx¬ 
imately  2  Torr  per  heart  beat  for  25.6  s.  Systolic  pressure  {Pf) 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


TIME  (SECONDS) 


FIG.  1.  An  example  of  the  indirect  arterial  pressure  measurement  in 
the  rat. 

was  determined  during  the  deflation  cycle  as  the  corresponding 
cuff  pressure  at  the  reappearance  of  the  tail  pulse  while  mean 
pressure  was  the  cuff  pressure  when  amplitude  of  the  tail 
pulse  reached  a  maximum.  Diastolic  pressure  {P^  was  calculated 
by  =  (p^  X  3  -  Ps)l2  (42).  Heart  rate  was  determined  from 
the  average  of  pulse-to-pulse  intervals  for  at  least  60  beats. 
An  example  of  this  deflation  cycle  is  shown  in  Fig.  1.  The  arte¬ 
rial  pressure/heart  rate  measurement  was  repeated  for  four  to 
six  times  separated  by  a  5-min  interval  between  determinations 
to  avoid  the  collapse  of  the  tail  artery  during  measurement. 

UWB  Exposure 

The  UWB  exposure  system  was  originally  designed  and 
built  at  the  Sandia  National  Laboratories  (Albuquerque,  NM). 


755 

The  UWB  pulses  were  generated  by  a  spark  gap  pulse  genera¬ 
tor  and  transmitted  into  a  GTEM  cell  (Gigahertz  Transverse 
Electromagnetic  cell,  a  flared  rectangular  coaxial  transmission 
line)  (Fig.  2).  The  rise  time  and  pulse  width  were  180  ps  and 
1.00  ns,  respectively,  when  the  system  was  operated  at  500  Hz, 
and  they  were  200  ps  and  1.03  ns  when  operated  at  1,000  Hz. 
The  pulsed  electric  field  was  measured  with  a  EG&G  (Welles¬ 
ley,  MA)  D-dot  sensor  (model  ACD-IR)  (33).  Outputs  of 
the  D-dot  sensors  were  measured  with  a  4.5-GHz  bandwidth 
Tektronix  SCD5000  transient  sampling  scope.  A  transfer 
function  was  used  for  data  compensation  of  the  pulsed  electric 
field.  The  transfer  function  was  based  on  deconvolution  tech¬ 
nique  of  a  standard  pulse  generated  by  a  Picosecond  Pulse 
Laboratories  4050  B  picosecond  step  generator  with  5100 
pulse  forming  network.  The  corrected  D-dot  values  were  con¬ 
verted  into  E  field  intensity  (2).  For  UWB  exposures,  the  rat 
was  placed  in  an  exposure  holder  fabricated  from  an  acryUc 
tube  (6.5-cm  i.d.,  3.2-mm  wall  thickness,  28  cm  long,  6.4  X  50-mm 
slots  separated  by  19  mm  for  ventilation)  and  polyethylene 
endcaps.  No  metallic  parts  was  used,  and  this  holder  was  used 
to  align  the  animal  position  to  lJWB  fields.  The  long  axis  of 
the  tube,  i.e.,  the  major  axis  of  the  animal  was  placed  in  paral¬ 
lel  with  magnetic  vector  on  the  ground  plane  at  72.7  cm  from 
the  source  end  of  GTEM  cell.  The  animal  was  isolated  from 
the  ground  plane  by  placing  the  exposure  holder  4.2  cm  from  the 
ground  plane  on  an  acrylic  stand.  After  transferring  the  ani¬ 
mal  into  the  GTEM  cell,  a  5-min  equilibration  period  was 
given  before  exposure.  Three  exposure  protocols  were  used: 
sham  exposure,  low-UWB  and  high-UWB  exposures  for  6 
min.  During  the  sham  exposure,  all  UWB  exposure  conditions 
were  maintained  except  trigger  pulses  were  never  generated 
to  cause  discharge  across  the  spark  gap.  Table  1  lists  pertinent 
pulse  parameters  used.  Figure  3  shows  the  pulse  characteris¬ 
tics  operated  at  500  ELz  (low-UWB)  and  1,000  Hz  (high- 
UWB)  repetition  rate. 


FIG.  2.  The  UWB  exosure  system  for  rats. 


756 


TABLE  1 

CHARACTERISTICS  OF  THE  UWB  PULSES 


LU  ET  AL. 


Pulse  Parameters 

Sham 

Low  UWB* 

High  UWB* 

Risetime 

— 

180  ±  7  ps 

200  ±  5  ps 

Pulse  width 

— 

1.00  ±0.004  ns 

1.03  ±  0.02  ns 

Peak  E  field  intensity 

OkV/m 

93.0  ±  5.0  kV/m 

84.6  ±  4.0  kV/m 

Pulse  repetition  rate 

OHz 

500  Hz 

1,000  Hz 

Average  power  density 

0  mW/cm2 

1.15  mW/cm2 

1.96mW/cm2 

Total  radiant  exposure 

0  J/cm2 

0.41  J/cm2 

0.70J/cm2 

Highest  frequency! 

— 

2.78  GHz 

2.50  GHz 

Medium  frequency! 

•  — 

0.50  GHz 

0.49  GHz 

Lowest  frequency! 

— 

0.09  GHz 

0.10  GHz 

Fractional  bandwidth! 

— 

187% 

185% 

*Mean  ±  SD,  obtained  in  five  exposures. 

tEstimated  according  to  Foster  (14).  Ultrawide  band  radar  is  a  radar  whose 
fractional  bandwidth  is  greater  than  25%,  regardless  of  the  center  frequency  or 
the  signal  time-bandwidth  product  (45).  The  fractional  bandwidth  of  these 
pulses  was  wider  than  the  minimum  required  to  qualify  as  UWB  radar. 


Data  Analysis 

The  present  experiment  utilized  a  factorial  design  with  re¬ 
peated  observations.  The  time  after  exposure  was  designated 
as  “blocks”  (r  =  7),  UWB  treatments  {t  —  3)  as  treatments 
and  five  observations  {s  =  5)  were  included.  Therefore,  the 
present  experiment  was  a  7  X  3  X  5  experiment  which  con¬ 
tained  105  experimental  units.  For  each  experimental  unit,  the 
average  of  four  to  six  measurements  was  used.  To  limit  the  in¬ 
dividual  variation,  the  use  of  individual  control  was  incorpo¬ 
rated  prior  to  the  commencement  of  the  experiment.  There¬ 
fore,  the  end  points  were  changes  from  the  preexposure 
baseline  in  each  individual  rat.  Postexposure  heart  rate  and 
blood  pressure  data  were  the  magnitude  of  change  from  the 
preexposure  baseline  of  the  same  rat  under  study.  An  analytic 
method  based  on  an  analysis  of  variance  with  multiway  classi¬ 
fication  and  multiple  observations  was  used.  The  sources  of 
variation  were  identified,  and  the  variance  and  degree  of  free¬ 
dom  (df)  were  computed.  These  various  variances  associated 
with  the  present  experiment  were  total  (experimental  units, 
df  =  m  —  1  =  104),  time  after  exposure  (df  =  r  -  1  =  6), 
UWB  treatments  (df  =  r  -  1  =  2),  interaction  [df  =  (r  -  1) 
(t-l)  =  12]  and  error  [df  =  rr  (5  ~  1)  =  84].  Dunnett’s  test 


FIG.  3.  The  UWB  pules  operated  at  500  and  1,000  Hz  repetition  rate. 


was  used  for  post  hoc  analysis  when  a  significant  UWB  treat¬ 
ment  effect  was  found.  Null  hypothesis  was  rejected  at  the 
0.05  level. 

RESULTS 

Body  Weight 

Body  weight  of  animals  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Data  are  body 
weight  before  exposure,  24  h,  72  h,  1  week,  2, 3,  and  4  weeks 
after  exposure.  Other  than  an  initial  insignificant  weight  loss 
in  sham  and  500  Hz  exposed  rats,  weight  gains  were  similar 
among  these  three  groups  of  animals. 

Preexposure  Baseline 

Figure  5  shows  the  preexposure  baseline.  Average  heart 
rate  ranged  between  332  and  351  beats  per  minutes  (bpm). 
The  ranges  in  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  pressures  were 
146.1  to  147.7, 120.1  to  123.6,  and  107.2  to  112.1  Torr,  respec¬ 
tively.  Difference  among  groups  in  any  of  the  preexposure 
baseline  was  not  found. 

Heart  Rate 

Figure  6  shows  the  changes  in  heart  rate  from  the  preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline.  Heart  rate  usually  decreased  from  the  preexpo¬ 
sure  baseline  irrespective  of  UWB  treatments.  The  UWB 
treatments,  time  after  exposure  and  interaction  between 
UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure  were  not  signifi¬ 
cantly  different  in  this  study. 

Systolic  Pressure 

Systolic  pressure  of  the  sham-exposed  rats  had  a  tendency 
to  increase  (Fig.  7).  In  contrast,  the  systolic  pressure  was  con¬ 
sistently  lower  than  the  preexposure  baseline  in  rats  exposed 
to  500  or  1,000  Hz  UWB  fields.  UWB  treatments  were  the 
only  significant  factor  noted,  F(2,84)  =  16.62,/?  <  0.001.  Time 
after  exposure,  F(6,  84)  =  1.00,  NS,  and  interaction  between 
UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure,  F(12,84)  =  0.75, 
NS,  were  not  statistically  significant.  The  largest  changes  from 
the  respective  preexposure  baseline  were  +13.65  Torr  at  4 
weeks  after  sham  exposure,  —23.0  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  expo¬ 
sure  to  500  Hz  and  —22.8  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  exposure  to 
1,000  Hz  UWB.  Post  hoc  analysis  revealed  that  decreased  sys- 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


757 


no.  4.  Body  weight  of  WKY  rats  exposed  to  UWB.  Data  shown  are 

preexposure,  24  h,  72  h,  1  week,  2  weeks,  3  weeks,  and  4  weeks  after 
exposure. 


tolic  pressure  occurred  at  45  min,  24  h,  1, 2,  and  4  weeks  after 
exposure  but  not  at  72  h,  and  3  weeks  after  exposure  in  the 
500  Hz  exposed  rats.  In  the  1,000  Hz  exposed  rats,  significant 
decreases  in  systolic  pressure  occurred  at  45  min,  1,  2,  and  4 
weeks  after  exposure  but  not  at  24  h,  72  h,  and  3  weeks  after 
exposure.  In  comparison  to  the  systolic  pressure  in  sham- 
exposed  rats,  the  most  intense  systolic  hypotension  occurred 
at  2  weeks  after  exposure.  The  magnitude  of  systolic  pressure 
decrease  from  the  sham-exposed  group  was  34.9  Torr  in  the 
500  Hz  group,  and  34.7  Torr  in  the  1,000  Hz  group. 

Mean  Arterial  Pressure 

Changes  in  mean  arterial  pressure  were  similar  to  changes 
in  systolic  pressure  (Fig.  8).  Mean  arterial  pressure  had  a  ten¬ 
dency  to  increase  from  the  preexposure  baseline  in  sham- 
exposed  rats  while  decreased  mean  arteriaT  pressure  was 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  500  and  1,000  Hz  UWB.  Results  of 
the  factorial  analysis  of  variance  revealed  that  UWB  treat¬ 
ments,  F(2,84)  =  18.55,  p  <  0.001,  was  statistically  significant, 
but  the  times  after  exposure,  F(6,84)  =  0.57,  NS  was  not.  In¬ 
teraction  between  UWB  treatments  and  time  after  exposure 
was  statistically  insignificant,  F(12,84)  =  0.37,  NS.  The  largest 


UWB  TREATMENT:  N.S.  TIME:  0-95;  N.S.  INTERACTION: 


FIG.  6.  Heart  rates  in  UWB-exposed  rats.  * 


changes  from  their  respective  baseline  were  +8.5  Torr  at  72  h 
after  sham  exposure,  —15.9  Torr  at  24  h  after  500  Hz,  and 
-16.9  Torr  at  2  weeks  after  1,000  Hz  UWB  exposure.  In  com¬ 
parison  to  sham-exposed  rats,  significant  lower  mean  arterial 
pressure  was  noted  in  500  Hz-exposed  rats  at  all  times  after 
exposure  except  at  3  weeks  after  exposure,  and  in  1,000  Hz- 
exposed  rats  at  all  time  except  at  24  h  and  3  weeks  after  expo¬ 
sure.  The  largest  magnitude  of  hypotension  was  20.6  Torr  in 
500  Hz  and  21.89  Torr  in  1,000  Hz-exposed  groups.  Both  of 
these  occurred  at  2  weeks  after  exposure. 

Diastolic  Pressure 

Although  systohc  and  mean  arterial  pressures  can  be  de¬ 
termined  with  a  photoelectric  sphygmomanometer  in  rats,  the 
diastolic  pressure  can  only  be  estimated  because  a  characteris¬ 
tic  pulse  marker  is  not  available  for  identifying  the  diastolic 
pressure  rehably  during  the  deflection  cycle.  It  is  known  that 
the  mean  arterial  pressure  is  equal  to  the  sum  of  diastolic 
pressure  and  1/3  of  the  pulse  pressure  (difference  between 
systolic  and  diastolic  pressures)  (42).  Therefore,  the  diastolic 
pressure  can  be  estimated  from  the  systohc  and  mean  arterial 
pressures.  Changes  in  diastohc  pressure  were  similar  to  systohc 
and  mean  arterial  pressure  (Fig.  9).  In  comparison  to  the  pre- 


UWB  TREATMENT:  16.62;  p<  0.01  TIME:  F^g  g^j®  1.00;  N.S.  INTERACTION:  N.S. 


FIG.  5.  Preexposure  cardiovascular  baseline. 


FIG.  7.  UWB-induced  systolic  hypotension  in  WKY  rats. 


758 


LU  ET  AL. 


FIG.  8.  UWB-induced  decreases  in  mean  arterial  pressure  in  WKY  rats. 


exposure  baseline,  change  in  sham-exposed  rats  was  primar¬ 
ily  an  increase  in  diastolic  pressure,  while  decreases  were 
noted  in  rats  exposed  to  500  or  1,000  Hz  UWB.  The  largest 
change  from  baseline  was  -1-9.6  Ton:  at  72  h  after  sham  expo¬ 
sure,  -16.6  Ton-  at  45  min  after  exposure  to  500  Hz,  and 
-14.0  Torr  at  3  weeks  after  exposure  to  1,000  Hz  UWB. 
Again,  the  UWB  treatments  were  statistically  significant, 
E(2,84)  =  16.30,  p  <  0.001,  but  the  time  after  exposure, 
F(6,84)  =  0.46,  NS,  and  the  interaction  between  UWB  treat¬ 
ments  and  time  after  exposure,  F(12,84)  =  0.37,  NS  were  not. 
Diastolic  hypotension  was  found  in  four  of  the  sfac  sampUng 
points,  i.e.,  at  45  min,  24  h,  72  h,  1,  and  3  weeks  but  not  at  two 
and  four  weeks  after  exposure,  in  rats  exposed  to  500  Hz 
UWB.  Rats  exposed  to  1,000  Hz  UWB  had  a  lower  diastolic 
pressure  than  sham-exposed  rats  in  five  of  the  six  postexpo¬ 
sure  sampling  points.  Diastolic  h)fpotension  was  not  noted  in 
rats  at  24  h  after  exposure  to  1,000  Hz  UWB.  In  comparison 
to  sham  exposure,  the  largest  magnitude  of  changes  in  dias- 
toUc  pressure  was  -22.5  Torr  at  1  week  after  500  Hz  and 
-16.7  Torr  at  4  weeks  after  1,000  Hz. 

DISCUSSION 

The  observation  of  a  delayed,  robust,  and  persistent  de¬ 
crease  in  arterial  pressures  (delayed  hypotension)  without 


FIG.  9.  UWB-induced  diastolic  hypotension  in  WKY  rats. 


changes  in  the  heart  rate  in  rats  subjected  to  an  acute  UWB 
exposure  is  uncommon,  no  matter  what  the  cause  is.  The 
heart  rate  is  knovm  to  covary  with  blood  pressure,  or  to  be 
more  susceptible  than  the  blood  pressure  to  RF  perturbation 
(37).  As  indicated  in  the  introduction,  the  anticipated  UWB- 
induced  change  in  the  cardiovascular  function,  if  any,  was  hy¬ 
pothesized  to  be  hypertension  (increased  arterial  pressure)  as 
part  of  “atypical  post-traumatic  syndrome,”  which  included 
emotional  lability,  irritability,  headaches,  insomnia,  and  de¬ 
layed  hypertension.  In  addition,  the  cardiovascular  effect  ot 
UWB  radiation  appears  to  be  different  from  the  effect  in¬ 
duced  by  conventional  RF  radiation.  Results  of  a  recent  series 
of  experiments  (15-18,23-30)  on  thermogenic  effects  of  RF 
radiation  on  cardiovascular  functions  also  supported  the  con¬ 
cept  that  susceptibilities  of  the  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressure 
to  thermogenic  RF  radiations  were  different. 

Jauchem  and  Frei  (15—18,23—30)  evaluated  the  cardiovas¬ 
cular  responses  of  rats  exposed  to  discrete  narrow-band  mi¬ 
crowave  radiation  at  1.2  (30),  1.2-1.8/1.2-1.4  (26),  2.45  (17,23, 
27),  2.8  (16,24,28),  5.6  (17,29),  9.3  (15),  and  25  GHz  (18).  Ex¬ 
cept  in  one  experiment  (26),  these  investigators  utilized  ket- 
amme-anesthetized  rats  as  the  experimental  model.  Their  ex¬ 
perimental  design  involved  a  comparison  of  cardiovascular 
end  points,  mean  arterial  pressure,  and  heart  rate,  in  micro- 
wave  exposed  rats  when  their  rectal  temperature  reached  38.5 
and  39.5'’C  during  the  course  of  microwave  exposure.  Occa¬ 
sionally,  the  cardiovascular  end  points  were  the  time  sequen¬ 
tial  data  in  a  lethal  exposure.  The  whole-body  average  SAR 
used  in  these  experiments  ranged  between  6  and  16.8  W/kg. 
Because  ketamine-anesthetized  rats  could  not  maintain  a  rec¬ 
tal  temperature  at  38.5  and  39.5°C,  sham-exposure  data  was 
not  presented  in  these  experiments.  Thermal  tachycardia  and 
thermal  hypertension  were  usually  concluded.  In  contrast,  the 
specific  aims  of  the  present  experiment  were  to  study  the  late 
cardiovascular  sequelae  of  UWB  exposure  in  unanesthetized 
rats  without  confounding  factors  such  as  postsurgical  comph- 
cations  and  anesthesia.  In  addition,  the  magnitude  of  response 
of  each  individual  rat  was  adjusted  with  its  own  preexposure 
baseline  in  the  present  experiment.  Furthermore,  the  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses  studied  in  the  present  experiment  were 
compared  to  the  end  points  obtained  from  sham-exposed  rats. 
Because  of  these  differences  in  experimental  approaches,  it  is 
difficult  to  compare  the  results  obtained  in  these  two  labora¬ 
tories.  Lacking  a  comparable  experiment  on  RF-induced  de¬ 
layed  cardiovascular  effects,  the  uniqueness  of  the  UWB- 
induced  delayed  hypotension  cannot  be  ascertained  at  the 
present  time. 

Arterial  pressure  is  determined  by  the  cardiac  output  and 
total  peripheral  resistance.  Based  on  hemodynamics  princi¬ 
ples,  the  cause  of  a  decrease  in  arterial  pressure  in  the  absence 
of  heart  rate  alteration  (therefore,  no  change  in  cardiac  out¬ 
put)  is  a  decrease  in  total  peripheral  resistance.  Rats  are  known 
to  possess  a  baroreceptor  reflex  mechanism,  which  serves  to 
maintain  a  constant  arterial  pressure  by  increasing  heart  rate 
(therefore,  cardiac  output)  if  arterial  pressure  decreases  or  by 
decreasing  the  heart  rate  if  arterial  pressure  increases  (31). 
The  absence  of  compensation  by  baroreceptor  reflexes  can  re¬ 
sult  from  baroreceptor  reset,  alterations  in  autonomic  out¬ 
flows  or  alterations  in  adrenergic  receptors.  The  exact  mecha¬ 
nism  of  the  UWB-delayed  hypotension  is  not  known. 

The  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Spontaneous  Hyper¬ 
tensive  Rats  has  recommended  the  use  of  an  indirect  blood 
(arterial)  pressure  measurement  method  for  determining  the 
arterial  pressure  in  rats  (22).  Indirect  arterial  pressure  mea¬ 
surement  requires  restraint.  Restraint  is  a  known  psychogenic/ 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


759 


emotional  stress.  It  is  known  to  cause  tachycardia  and  hyper¬ 
tension  through  sympathetic  arousal  in  animals  (3,5,38,40). 
The  WKY  rats  used  in  the  present  experiment  were  accli¬ 
mated  to  the  holder  to  prevent  novelty  stress.  Successful  accli¬ 
mation  to  novelty  stress  was  indicated  by  the  absence  of  reluc¬ 
tance  to  be  placed  in  holder,  absence  of  defecation  and  urination, 
and  the  reduction  in  number  of  restless  episodes  during  the  1-h 
period  in  the  holder.  A  recent  study  (5)  has  shown  that  the 
peak  tachycardia  response  to  restraint  was  not  affected  after 
to  acclimation  sessions.  Acclimation,  however,  did  accelerate 
the  return  of  the  tachycardia  to  baseline.  Interpretation  of  re¬ 
sults  in  the  present  study  should  include  the  possibility  that 
the  method  of  indirect  blood  pressure  measurement  is  a  “stress 
test”  rather  than  a  test  procedure  for  the  basal/resting  cardio¬ 
vascular  functions.  It  is  possible  that  demonstration  of  the 
induced  h)fpotension  requires  additional  “stimuli”  associated 
with  the  indirect  blood  pressure  measurement  procedure. 

Genetic  predisposition  appears  to  be  an  important  factor 
in  animal’s  response  to  stress.  Sudakov  (44)  used  a  30-h  con¬ 
tinuous  restraint  to  differentiate  three  types  of  cardiovascular 
changes  to  restraint:  resistant,  adaptive,  and  sensitive.  More 
than  50%  of  Wistar  rats  that  did  not  exhibit  heart  rate  and  ar¬ 
terial  pressure  responses  to  the  prolonged  restraint  were  clas¬ 
sified  as  resistant.  Forty  to  65%  of  Wistar,  Vegh,  August,  and 
mixed  strains  that  exhibited  initial  hypertension  or  hypoten¬ 
sion  followed  by  a  return  almost  to  the  initial  level  at  the  end 
of  30-h  restraint,  were  classified  as  adaptive.  Approximately 
30%  of  August  and  Vegh  rats  were  classified  as  sensitive;  they 
perished  during  the  30-h  restraint  bearing  ECG  T-wave 
changes  and  myocardial  infarction.  Genetic  predisposition 
was  also  considered  to  be  an  important  factor  in  the  basal/ 
resting  cardiovascular  functions,  and  the  magnitude  of  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses  to  various  emotional  stresses  (3,6,32,35, 
44).  The  WKY  rats  appeared  to  be  adaptive  because  the  car¬ 
diovascular  indices  were  different  from  those  of  Wistar  rats, 
their  parent  strain,  which  is  classified  as  resistant. 

It  has  been  reported  that  responses  of  heart  rate  and  arte¬ 
rial  pressures  reached  a  plateau  and  remained  reasonably 
constant  after  10  min  in  the  restrainer  (3).  In  addition,  studies 
in  several  animal  species  including  rats  demonstrated  that  ar¬ 
terial  pressure  and  heart  rate  were  characterized  by  a  large 
spontaneous  variability  in  an  unanesthetized  state  (12).  To 
limit  the  spontaneous  variation  and  genetic  predisposition,  we 
have  instituted  strenuous  measurement  controls  such  as 
sources  of  animals,  strain  of  rats,  ambient  temperature  (26.5- 
27.5‘’C),  time  of  day  (0900-1200  h),  duration  in  the  test  holder 
(between  20  and  60  min),  and  interval  between  testing  (5 
min).  These  controls  were  used  to  maintain  a  consistent  level 
of  stimulus  during  indirect  arterial  pressure  measurement 
procedure.  In  addition,  the  average  value  of  multiple  mea¬ 
surements  was  used  to  represent  the  cardiovascular  functions 
at  each  datum  point  for  each  animal  to  minimize  sampling  errors. 

The  heart  rate  and  arterial  pressure  data  obtained  in  rats 
bearing  chronic  arterial  cannula  (direct  blood  pressure  mea¬ 
surement)  in  their  home  cages  were  accepted  as  stress-free 
measurements.  Representative  data  for  heart  rate  ranged  be¬ 
tween  279  ±  10  (mean  ±  SE,  n  =  5)  and  345  ±  9  (n  =  6)  bpm 
and  mean  arterial  pressure  between  115  ±  3  (n  =  7)  and  122  ± 
4  («  =  6)  Torr  in  male  adult  cannulated  WKY  rats  by  various 
investigators  (6,35,40).  The  ranges  of  the  preexposure  cardio¬ 
vascular  baseline  of  the  present  experiment  were  332  ±  9  (n  = 
5)  to  351  ±  8  (n  =  5)  bpm  for  heart  rate  and  120  ±  5  (n  =  5) 
to  124  ±  5  (n  =  5)  Torr  for  mean  arterial  pressure.  Therefore, 
these  baseline  values  in  the  present  study  compared  well  to 
other  reported  ranges  in  the  literature. 


A  decrease  in  blood  pressure  may  not  be  a  hypotension 
if  the  blood  pressure  is  within  the  normal  ranges  of  the  species 
under  study.  The  mean  arterial  pressures  of  the  UWB-induced 
hypotension  at  the  lowest  point  were  108  ±  7  (n  =  5, 500  Hz) 
and  107  ±  8  (n  =  5, 1,000  Hz)  which  qualify  these  values  in 
the  range  of  true  hypotension  instead  of  a  decrease  in  arterial 
pressure  in  WKY  rats.  On  the  other  hand,  the  range  of  stress- 
free  mean  arterial  pressure  of  Wistar  rats,  the  parent  strain  of 
WKY  rats,  was  between  97  ±  2  (n  =  6)  and  112  ±  3  (n  =  10) 
Torr  (36,47).  The  stress-free  mean  arterial  pressure  of  the 
Sprague— Dawley  rats  was  also  lower  than  that  of  WKY 
rats.  The  range  reported  were  85  ±  5  (n  =  4)  to  115  ±  3  (n  = 
12)  Torr  (3,12,20,43).  The  UWB-induced  changes  in  arterial 
pressure  in  the  present  experiment  was  a  mild  form  of  hy¬ 
potension  in  the  WKY  rats  and  should  be  asymptomatic  if 
the  mean  arterial  pressures  of  various  strains  of  rats  are  con¬ 
sidered. 

In  comparison  to  studies  using  narrow-band  RF,  the  aver¬ 
aged  exposure  intensity  of  the  present  UWB  exposure  is  rela¬ 
tively  low — 1.15  and  1.96  mW/cm^.  Conventional  dosimetry 
methods,  such  as  thermometry  and  calorimetry,  lack  of  sensi¬ 
tivity  to  determine  the  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  from 
exposure  to  these  low  intensities.  Equipment,  instrumentation 
and  techniques  for  measuring  the  internal  electric  field  are 
not  available.  To  estimate  the  whole-body  average  SAR,  the 
relative  power  spectrum  was  computed  from  the  padded  data 
file,  from  10  ns  to  100  ns  for  a  10  MHz  resolution  of  the  UWB 
pulse  by  Mathcad’s  Maximum  Entropy  Method  in  the  Numer¬ 
ical  Recipes  Function  Pack.  It  appeared  that  the  majority  of 
power  was  below  200  MHz  (Fig.  10,  power  spectrum,  dashed 
line).  The  relative  power  (RP)  spectrum  was  then  convolved 
with  the  SAR  vs.  Frequency  curve  (11)  in  a  spheroidal  model 
of  a  medium  rat  for  H  polarization  (Fig.  10,  SAR,  dotted  line), 
also  at  10  MHz  intervals  from  10  MHz  to  10  GHz.  The  convo¬ 
luted  curve  (Fig.  10,  SAR  X  RP,  solid  line)  represented  the 
absorption  spectrum  of  a  rat  exposed  to  the  UV^  pulse  used 
in  the  present  experiment.  Ninety  %  of  the  spectrum  power 
was  between  10  MHz  and  1.08  GHz.  The  maximum  value  of 
the  absorption  for  a  single  discrete  frequency  was  at  90  MHz, 
which  indicated  that  SAR  was  less  than  1.3  mW/kg/mW/cm^ 
according  to  the  value  presented  in  the  SAR  curve.  Integra¬ 
tion  of  the  convolved  curve  (SAR  X  RP)  and  normalized  by 
the  area  under  the  RP  curve  yielded  a  whole-body  SAR  at 
61.7  mW/kg/mW/cm^  for  the  high  UWB  pulse.  Analysis  of  the 
low  UWB  pulse  (500  Hz)  yielded  a  similar  result  in  relative 
power  spectrum,  absorption  spectrum,  and  whole-body  SAR 
(60.9  mW/kg/mW/cm^).  For  the  1,000  Hz  group,  total  absorp¬ 
tion  in  6  min  was,  therefore,  in  the  order  of  43.5  J/kg  or  less, 
which  is  incapable  of  inducing  any  significant  temperature  in¬ 
crease  in  the  animal.  The  mechanism  of  the  UWB-induced 
hypotension  is  not  known. 

A  widely  known  effect  specific  to  pulsed  microwave  radia¬ 
tion  with  high  peak  power  in  the  induced  auditory  sensation 
elicited  by  microwave  pulses.  This  effect  has  been  the  subject 
of  several  reviews  (7,34,39).  It  is  generally  accepted  that  the 
pulsed  microwave-induced  audible  sound  is  generated  from  a 
thermoelastic  expansion  of  cranial  tissue  and  launches  an 
acoustic  wave  that  is  detected  by  hair  cells  in  the  cochlea.  For 
pulsed  microwave  with  pulse  width  shorter  than  30  p,s,  the  mi¬ 
crowave-induced  auditory  threshold  was  independent  of  tem¬ 
poral  peak  power  density  (or  temporal  peak  specific  absorp¬ 
tion)  and  it  is  entirely  dependent  on  the  energy  density  of  the 
microwave  pulse  or  specific  absorption  (SA)  per  pulse.  The 
auditory  threshold  SA  per  pulse  has  been  determined  in  hu¬ 
man  volunteers,  cat  (19)  and  rats  (9),  16, 10,  to  12  and  0.9  to 


760 


LU  ET  AL. 


HG.  10.  Power  spectrum  and  absorption  spectrum  of  the  UWB  pulse. 


1.8  mJ/kg,  respectively.  The  temporal  peak  SAR  of  the  high 
UWB  pulse  used  in  the  present  experiment  was  2.09  kW/kg 
(duty  cycle  «10“6).  Due  to  an  extremely  short  pulse  (pulse 
width  =  1.03  ns),  the  SA  per  pulse  from  the  high  UWB  pulses 
was  around  2.15  pJ/kg,  which  was  three  orders  of  magnitude 
lower  than  the  known  auditory  threshold  in  rats.  Therefore, 
the  UWB-induced  delayed  hypotension  was  not  a  sequela  of 
an  audiogenic  effect. 

The  estimated  threshold  SAR  (0.002  W/kg,  high  UWB 
pulse)  for  UWB-induced  hypotension  in  rats  was  200  times 
less  than  0.4  W/kg,  the  basis  for  the  IEEE  C95.1-1991  safety 
standard  in  a  controlled  environment  (21).  The  threshold 
peak  electric  field  of  the  UWB  pulses  was  less  than  the  allow¬ 
able  peak  electric  field  (100  kV/m)  used  in  this  standard.  Hy¬ 
potension  is  known  to  possess  adverse  health  implications. 
The  UWB-induced  hypotension  is  a  recent  finding  that  has 
not  been  addressed  during  the  promulgation  of  personnel 


protection  guidelines.  Further  research  on  effect  replication 
and  dose-response  characteristics  are  highly  recommended. 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  under  the  contract  No.  DAMD17-94-C-4069  with 
McKesson  BioServices.  The  authors  acknowledge  the  contributions  of 
Jian-Zhong  Bao  for  providing  a  transfer  function  for  field  measure¬ 
ment,  Pamela  J.  Henry  for  technical  assistance,  D.  Duane  Cox  for  fab¬ 
rication  of  the  microenvironment  chambers,  and  Bruce  E.  Stuck  for 
valuable  suggestions  during  the  preparation  of  the  manuscript.  In  con¬ 
ducting  this  research,  the  investigators  adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the 
Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals”  and  pohcies  of  the  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  and  U.S.  Air  Force  Armstrong  Labora¬ 
tory.  Disclaimer:  The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in 
this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an 
official  Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy,  and  decision. 


REFERENCES 


1.  Albanese,  R.;  Blaschak,  J.;  Median,  R.;  Penn,  J.:  Ultrashort  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  signals:  Biophysical  questions,  safety  issues,  and 
medical  opportunities.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  65:A116- 
A120;  1994. 

2.  Bao,  J.-Z.;  Lee,  J.  C.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Seaman,  R.  L.;  Akyel,  Y.:  Analy¬ 
sis  of  ultra-wide-band  pulses  in  a  GTEM  cell.  In:  Brandt,  H.  E., 
ed.  Intense  microwave  pulses  III,  Proc.  Spie  2557.  Danvers:  Inter¬ 
national  Society  for  Optical  Engineering;  1995:237-248. 

3.  Barron,  B.  A.;  Van  Loon,  G.  R.:  Role  of  sympathoadrenomedul- 
lary  system  in  cardiovascular  response  to  stress  in  rats.  J.  Autonomi 
Ner.  Syst.  28:179-188;  1989. 

4.  Bunag,  R.  D.;  Butterfield,  J.  B.:  Tail-cuff  blood  pressure  mea¬ 

surement  without  external  preheating  in  awake  rats.  Hyperten¬ 
sion  4:898-903;  1982.  ^ 

5.  Chen,  X.;  Herbert,  J.:  Regional  changes  in  c-fos  expression  in  the 
basal  forebrain  and  brainstem  during  adaptation  to  repeated 
stress:  Correlations  with  cardiovascular,  hypothermic  and  endo¬ 
crine  responses.  Neuroscience  64:675-685;  1995. 


6.  Chiueh,  C.  C;  Kopin,  I.  J.:  Hyperresponsivity  of  spontaneously 
hypertensive  rat  to  indirect  measurement  of  blood  pressure  Am 
J.  Physiol.  H690-H695;  1978. 

7.  Chou,  C.  K.;  Guy,  A.  W.;  Galambos,  R.:  Auditory  perception  of 
radio-frequency  electromagnetic  fields.  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am.  71-1321- 
1334; 1982. 

8.  Chou,  C.-K.;  Guy,  A.  W.;  Kunz,  L.  L.;  Johnson,  R.  B.;  Crowley, 
J.  J.;  Krupp,  J.  H.:  Long-term,  low-level  microwave  irradiation  of 
rats.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:469-496;  1992. 

9.  Chou,  C.-K.,  Yee,  K.-C.;  Guy,  A.  W.:  Auditory  response  in  rats 
exposed  to  2,450  MHz  electromagnetic  fields.  Bioelectromaenet- 
ics  6:323-326;  1985. 

10.  DAndrea,  J.  A.;  Gandhi,  O.  P.;  Lords,  J.  L.;  Dumey,  C.  H.; 
Astle,  L.;  Stensaas,  L.  J.;  Schoenberg,  A.  A.:  Physiological  and 
behavioral  effects  of  prolonged  exposure  to  915-MHz  micro- 
waves.  J.  Microwave  Power  15:123-135;  1980. 

11.  Du^ey,  C.  H.;  Massoudi,  H.;  Iskander,  M.  F.:  Radiofrequency 
radiation  dosimetry  handbook,  4th  ed.  Brooks  AFB:  USAF 


UWB-INDUCED  HYPOTENSION 


761 


School  of  Aerospace  Medicine  Aerospace  Medical  Division 
(USAFSAM-TR-85-73)  1985:617. 

12.  Ferrari,  A.  U.;  Dafffonchio,  A.;  Albergati,  F.;  Mancia,  G.:  Inverse 
relationship  between  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  variabilities 
in  rats.  Hypertension  10:533-537;  1987. 

13.  Foreman,  S.;  Holmes,  C.;  McManamon,  V.;  Wedding,  W.:  Psy¬ 
chological  symptoms  and  intermittent  hypertension  following 
acute  microwave  exposure.  J.  Occupat.  Med.  24:932-934;  1982. 

14.  Foster,  P.  R.:  Antennas  and  UWB  signals.  In:  Taylor,  J.  D.,  ed. 
Introduction  to  ultra-wideband  radar  systems.  Boca  Raton,  FL: 
CRC  Press;  1995:237-248. 

15.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Thermoregulatory  response  of  rats 
exposed  to  9.3-GHz  microwave:  A  comparison  of  E  and  H  orien¬ 
tation.  Physiol  Chem.  Phys.  Med.  NMR  24:1-10;  1992. 

16.  Frei,  M.;  Jauchem,  J.;  Heinmets,  F.:  Physiological  effects  of  2.8 
GHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  A  comparison  of  pulsed  and  con¬ 
tinuous-wave  radiation.  J.  Microwave  Power  23:85-93;  1988. 

17.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Price,  D.  R.;  Padilla,  J.  M.:  Field  ori¬ 
entation  effects  during  5.6-GHz  radiofrequency  irradiation  of 
rats.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  61:1125-1129;  1990. 

18.  Frei,  M.  R.;  Ryan,  K.  L.;  Berger,  R.  E.;  Jauchem,  J.  R.:  Sustained 
35-GHz  radiofrequency  irradiation  induces  circulatory  failume. 
Shock  4:289-293;  1995. 

19.  Guy,  A.  W.;  Chou  C.  K.;  Lin,  J.  C:  Microwave-induced  acoustic 
effects  in  mammalian  auditory  systems  and  physical  materials. 
Ann.  NY  Acad,  Sci.  247:194-218;  1975. 

20.  Houdi,  A.  A.;  Dowell,  R.  T.;  Diana,  J.  N.:  Cardiovascular 
responses  to  cigarette  smoke  exposure  in  restrained  conscious 
rats,  J.  Pharmacol.  Exp.  Tlier,  275:646-653;  1995. 

21.  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers:  IEEE  C95.1 
Standard  for  safety  levels  with  respect  to  human  exposure  to 
radio  frequency  electromagnetic  fields,  3  kHz  to  300  GHz.  New 
York:  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers;  1992, 

22.  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources:  Committee  on  care  and  use  of 
spontaneously  hypertensive  (SHR)  rats.  Spontaneously  hyper¬ 
tensive  (SHR)  rats:  Guidelines  for  breeding  care  and  use,  vol  19. 
Washin^on,  DC:  ILAR  News;  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.-Natl.  Res.  Coun¬ 
cil,  1976:G1-G20. 

23.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Chang,  K.  S.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  TolazoUne  decreases 
survival  time  during  microwave-induced  lethal  heat  stress  in 
anesthetized  rats.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  211:236-243;  1996. 

24.  Jauchem,  J,  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  Cardiovascular  changes  in  unanesthe¬ 
tized  and  ketamine-anesthetized  Sprague-Dawley  rats  exposed 
to  2.8-GHz  radiofrequency  radiation.  Lab.  Anim.  Sci.  41:70-75; 
1991. 

25.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frie,  M.  R.:  Cardiorespiratory  changes  during 
microwave-induced  lethal  heat  stress  and  p-adrenergic  blockage. 
J.  Appl.  Physiol.  77:434-440;  1994. 

26.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.:  High-peak  power  microwave  pulses: 
Effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  unanesthetized  rats. 
Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:992-997;  1995. 

27.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Chang,  K,  H.;  Berger,  R.  E.:  Micro- 
wave-induced  lethal  heat  stress:  Effect  of  phentolamine,  prazosin 
and  metoprodol.  Methods  Find.  Exp,  Clin,  Pharmacol.  17:241- 
248;  1995. 

28.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Heinmets,  F.:  Thermal  bradycardia 
during  radiofrequency  irradiation.  Physiol.  Chem.  Phys.  Med. 
NMR  15:429-434;  1983. 

29.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Heinmets,  F.:  Heart  rate  changes  due 
to  5.6  GHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  Relation  to  average  power 
density.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp.  Biol.  Med.  177:383—387;  1984. 

30.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Padilla,  J.  M.:  Thermal  and  physio¬ 
logic  responses  in  1200-MHz  radiofrequency  radiation:  Differ¬ 
ence  between  exposure  in  E  and  H  orientation.  Proc.  Soc.  Exp. 
Biol.  Med.  194:358-363;  1990. 

31.  Kirchheim,  A.  R.:  Systemic  arterial  baroreceptor  reflexes.  Phys¬ 
iol.  Rev,  56:100-176;  1976. 

32.  Lawer,  J.  E.;  Barker,  G.  F,;  Hubbard,  J.  W.;  Schaub,  R.  G.:  Effect 
of  stress  on  blood  pressure  and  cardiac  pathology  in  rats  with  bor¬ 
derline  hypertension.  Hypertension  3:496-505;  1981, 


33.  Lee,  J.;  Bao,  J.-Z.;  Lu,  S.-T.;  Seaman,  R.  L,:  An  ultra-wide-band 
exposure  system  for  studying  biological  effects.  In:  Abstract  book 
of  the  seventeenth  annual  meeting  of  the  bioelectromagnetics 
society.  Fredrick:  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  Fredrick;  1995:160. 

34.  lin,  J.  C.:  Microwave  auditory  effects  and  applications.  Spring- 
field,  IL:  Charles  C.  Thomas;  1978. 

35.  Ludin,  S.;  Ricksten,  S.-E.;  Thoren,  P.:  Interaction  between  “men¬ 
tal  stress”  and  baroreceptor  reflexes  concerning  effects  on  heart 
rate,  mean  arterial  pressure  and  renal  sympathetic  activity  in  con¬ 
scious  spontaneously  hypertensive  rats,  Acta.  Physiol.  Scand. 
120:273-281;  1984. 

36.  Mauck,  G.  W.;  Smith,  C.  R.;  Geddes,  L.  A.;  Bourland,  J.  D.:  The 
meaning  of  the  point  of  maximum  oscillations  in  cuff  pressure  in 
the  indirect  measurement  of  blood  pressure— Part  II.  J.  Biomech. 
Eng.  102:28-33;  1980. 

37.  Michaelson,  S.  M.;  Lin,  J.  C.:  Cardiovascular  effects.  In:  Michael- 
son,  S.  M.;  Lin,  J.  C.,  eds.  Biological  effects  and  health  implica¬ 
tions  of  radiofrequency  radiation.  New  York:  Plenum  Press;  1987: 
451^88, 

38.  Nagasaka,  T,;  Hirata,  K,;  Shibata,  H.;  Sugano,  Y.:  Metabolic  and 
cardiovascular  changes  during  physical  restraint  in  rats.  Jpn.  J. 
Physiol.  30:799-803;  1980. 

39.  NCRP  Report  86:  Perception  of  RFEM  fields.  In:  Biological 
effects  and  exposure  criteria  for  radiofrequency  fields.  Bethesda, 
MD:  National  Research  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and 
Measurements;  1986:175-180. 

40.  Sakaguchi,  A.;  LeDoux,  J.  E.;  Reis,  D.  J.:  Sympathetic  nerves  and 
adrenal  medulla:  Contributions  to  cardiovascular-conditioned 
emotional  responses  in  spontaneous  hypertensive  rats.  Hyperten¬ 
sion  5:728-738;  1983. 

41.  Sherry,  C.  J.;  BUck,  D.  W.;  Walters,  T.  W.;  Brown,  G.  C;  Murph, 
M,  R.:  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after 
exposure  to  ultrawideband  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the 
microwave  frequency  range.  Radiat.  Res.  143:93-97;  1995, 

42.  Sodeman,  W.  A.,  Jr.;  Sodeman,  W.  A.:  Systemic  arterial  pressure. 
In:  Pathological  physiology.  Philadelphia,  PA:  W.  B.  Saunders 
Co.;  1974:177-205. 

43.  Sparrow,  M.  G.;  Roggendorf,  H.;  Vogel,  W.  H.:  Effect  of  ethanol 
on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  nonstressed  and  stressed  rats. 
Life  Sci.  40:2551-2559;  1987. 

44.  Sudakov,  K.  V.:  Organization  of  cardiovascular  functions  under 
experimental  emotional  stress.  J.  Autonom.  Nerv.  Syst.  4:165- 
180;  1981. 

45.  Taylor,  J.  D.:  Ultra-wideband  radar  overview.  In:  Taylor,  J.  D., 
ed.  Introduction  to  ultra-wideband  radar  systeiiis.  Boca  Raton, 
FL:  CRC  Press;  1995:1-10. 

46.  Toler,  J.;  Popovic,  V.;  Bonasera,  S.;  Popovic,  P.;  Honeycutt,  C.; 
Sgoutas,  D.:  Long-term  study  of  435  MHz  radio-frequency  radia¬ 
tion  on  blood-borne  end  points  in  cannulated  rats.  Part  II:  Meth¬ 
ods,  results  and  summary.  J.  Microwave  Power  23:105-136;  1988. 

47.  Van  Den  Berg,  D.  T.  W.  M.;  De  Jong,  W.;  De  Kloet,  E.  R.:  Min- 
eralocorticoid  antagonist  inhibits  stress-induced  blood  pressure 
response  after  repeated  daily  warming.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  267:E921- 
E9926;  1994. 

48.  Walters,  T.  J.;  Mason,  P.  A.;  Sherry,  C.  J.;  Steffen,  C;  Memtt, 
J.  H.:  No  detectable  bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high 
peak  power  ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats. 
Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  66:562-567;  1995. 

49.  Williams,  R.;  Webb,  T.:  Exposure  to  radiofrequency  radiation 
from  an  aircraft  radar  unit.  Aviat.  Space  Environ.  Med.  51:1243- 
1244;  1980. 

50.  Yamakoshi,  K.-L;  Kamiya,  A.:  Noninvasive  measurement  of  arte¬ 
rial  blood  pressure  and  elastic  properties  using  photoelectric 
plethysmography  technique.  Med.  Prog.  Technol.  12:123-143; 
1987. 

51.  Yen,  T.  T.;  Powell,  C.  E.;  Pearson,  D.  V.:  An  indirect  method  of 
measuring  the  blood  pressure  of  rats  without  heating.  In:  Sponta¬ 
neous  hypertension:  Its  pathogenesis  and  complications.  Bethesda, 
MD:  U.S.  Public  Health  Service  (DHEW  Publication  No.  77-1179); 
1977:486-490. 


Bioelectromagnetics  19:393-413  (1998) 


Review  Article 

Current  State  and  Implications 
of  Research  on  Biological  Effects 
of  Millimeter  Waves: 

A  Review  of  the  Literature 

Andrei  G.  Pakhomov,^*  Yahya  Akyel,^  Olga  N.  Pakhomova,^ 

Bruce  E.  Stuck, ‘  and  Michael  R.  Murphy^ 

^McKesson  BioServices,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 
Army  Medical  Research  Detachment  of  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute 
of  Research,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 
^Directed  Energy  Bioeffects  Division,  Human  Effectiveness  Directorate,  Air  Force 
Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 

In  recent  years,  research  into  biological  and  medical  effects  of  millimeter  waves  (MMW)  has  expanded 
greatly.  This  paper  analyzes  general  trends  in  the  area  and  briefly  reviews  the  most  significant 
publications,  proceeding  from  cell>free  systems,  dosimetry,  and  spectroscopy  issues  through  cultured 
cells  and  isolated  organs  to  animals  and  humans.  The  studies  reviewed  demonstrate  effects  of  low- 
intensity  MMW  (10  mW/cm^  and  less)  on  cell  growth  and  proliferation,  activity  of  enzymes,  stote 
of  cell  genetic  apparatus,  function  of  excitable  membranes,  peripheral  receptors,  and  other  biological 
systems.  In  animals  and  humans,  local  MMW  exposure  stimulated  tissue  repair  and  regeneration, 
alleviated  stress  reactions,  and  facilitated  recovery  in  a  wide  range  of  diseases  (MMW  therapy).  Many 
reported  MMW  effects  could  not  be  readily  explained  by  tenq)erature  changes  during  irradiation.  The 
paper  outlines  some  problems  and  uncertainties  in  the  MMW  research  area,  identifies  tasks  for  future 
studies,  and  discusses  possible  implications  for  development  of  exposure  safety  criteria  and  guidelines. 
Bioelectromagnetics  19:393-413,  1998.  ©  1998  wiiey-Uss,  inc. 

Key  words:  electromagnetic  fields;  bioeffects;  mm  wave  band;  millimeter  waves,  review 


INTRODUCTION 

The  term  “millimeter  waves”  (MMW)  refers  to 
extremely  high-frequency  (30-300  GHz)  electromag¬ 
netic  oscillations.  Coherent  oscillations  of  this  range 
are  virtually  absent  from  the  natural  electromagnetic 
environment.  This  absence  might  have  had  important 
consequences.  First,  living  organisms  could  not  have 
developed  adaptation  to  MMW  during  the  course  of 
evolution  on  Earth.  Second,  some  specific  features  of 
MMW  radiation  and  the  absence  of  external  “noise” 
might  have  made  this  band  convenient  for  communica¬ 
tions  within  and  between  living  cells  [Golant,  1989; 
Betzky,  1992].  These  arguments,  although  not  ade¬ 
quately  proven,  are  often  used  to  explain  the  high  sensi¬ 
tivity  to  MMW  of  biological  subjects.  Indeed,  MMW 
have  been  reported  to  produce  a  variety  of  bioeffects, 
many  of  which  are  quite  imexpected  from  a  radiation 


penetrating  less  than  1  mm  into  biological  tissues.  A 
number  of  theoretical  models  have  been  set  forth  to 
explain  peculiarities  and  primary  mechanisms  of 
MMW  biological  action  [Frohlich  1980, 1988;  Golant, 
1989;  Grundler  and  Kaiser,  1992;  Belyaev  et  al., 
1993a;  Kaiser,  1995]. 

One  of  the  most  remarkable  events  in  contempo- 


Ccmtract  grant  sponsor:  U.S,  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Com¬ 
mand;  Contract  grant  sponsor:  U.S.  Air  Force  Armstrong  Laboratory; 
Contract  grant  number:  U.S.  Army  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  (to 
McKesson  BioServices). 

♦Correspondence  to:  Andrei  G.  Pakhomov,  USA-MCMR,  McKesson 
BioServices,  8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base, 
San  Antonio,  TX  78235-5324.  E-maiL  andrei.pakhomov@aloer.brooks, 
af.mil 

Received  for  review  21  October  1997;  final  revision  received  30  January 
1998 


©  1998  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 


394 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


1975-76  77-78  79-80  81-82  83-84  85-86  87-88  89-90  91-92  93-94  95-96 

years 

Fig.  1.  Absolute  numbers  and  percentages  of  publications  on 
topics  related  to  biological  action  of  millimeter  waves  vs.  years 
of  publication.  The  graph  is  based  on  counts  of  citations  in  the 
EMF  Database  version  3.0,  1997.  Studies  by  the  former  Soviet 
Union  (FSU)  scientists  and  by  all  other  (non-FSU)  were  counted 
separately.  Vertical  scale  is  the  number  of  published  MMW  stud¬ 
ies  per  2-year  time  Intervals  (abscissa).  Numbers  next  to  the 
datapoints  Indicate  the  weight  (%)  of  MMW  studies  In  the  FSU 
and  non-FSU  bloelectromagnetic  research  (i.e.,  the  percentage 
of  MMW  studies  relative  to  the  total  number  of  studies  included 
In  the  EMF  database  for  the  respective  time  periods). 


raiy  electromagnetic  biology  is  a  surge  in  interest  in 
MMW  biological  and  medical  effects  in  the  countries 
of  the  former  Soviet  Union  (FSU).  A  striking  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  FSU  and  “non-FSU”  research  activity  in 
this  area  can  be  seen  from  counts  of  related  publica¬ 
tions.  For  example,  the  EMF  Database^  version  3.0 
(1997)  lists  a  total  of  463  FSU  publications  on  MMW- 
related  topics,  and  only  261  such  publications  from  the 
rest  of  the  world.  Although  these  numbers  should  not 
be  taken  as  exact  (the  Database  includes  most  but  cer¬ 
tainly  not  all  relevant  citations),  the  situation  in  general 
is  portrayed  correctly  and  is  particularly  explicit  in  a 
historic  perspective  ^ig.  1).  The  non-FSU  production 
reached  its  peak  of  52  papers  (including  meeting  ab¬ 
stracts)  in  1983-1984,  when  MMW  titles  were  3.3% 
of  all  non-FSU  publications  in  the  bioelectromagnetics 
area.  Then  it  gradually  declined  to  only  seven  papers 


*The  EMF  Database  is  produced  by  Informatioii  Ventures,  Inc.  (Phila¬ 
delphia,  PA)  and  covers  topics  related  to  biological  effects  of  electro¬ 
magnetic  fields,  firom  DC  to  submillimeter  wavelengths.  The  Database 
contains  over  20,000  citations  of  relevant  publications  fi:om  various 
sources,  including  peer-reviewed  journals,  books,  proceedings,  and 
meeting  abstracts.  Available  citations  are  assimilated  in  the  Database 
without  any  preselection  based  on  the  language,  affiliation  of  the  authors, 
or  relevance  to  a  particular  EMF  frequency  range. 


(0.5%)  in  1989-1990.  Concurrently,  MMW  research 
in  the  FSU  expanded  greatly:  Both  the  count  of  publi¬ 
cations  (up  to  120  in  1995—1996)  and  their  portion  in 
the  FSU  bioelectromagnetic  research  (20  to  30%)  far 
exceeded  these  numbers  for  non-FSU  publications. 

Aside  from  the  number  of  studies,  there  are  im¬ 
portant  qualitative  differences.  Western  (non-FSU)  re¬ 
search  was  largely  driven  by  concerns  for  public  safety. 
However,  safety  issues  occupy  a  relatively  small  por¬ 
tion  of  the  FSU  research,  whereas  far  more  studies 
are  related  to  medical  applications  of  MMW.  Over 
50  diseases  and  conditions  have  been  claimed  to  be 
successfully  treated  with  MMW  alone  or  in  combina¬ 
tion  with  other  means.  Lebedeva  and  Betskii  [1995] 
have  reported  more  than  a  thousand  MMW  therapy 
centers  in  the  FSU  and  over  3  million  people  who 
received  this  therapy.  Naturally,  the  extensive  medical 
use  of  MMW  has  stimulated  basic  research  as  well. 

Nowadays,  MMW  technologies  are  increasingly 
being  used  in  practical  applications  (e.g.,  wireless  com¬ 
munication,  traffic  and  military  radar  systems),  maVing 
it  imperative  that  bioeffects  data  be  available  for  health 
hazard  evaluation  and  restoring  the  interest  to  MMW 
biological  research  in  the  West.  The  number  of  non- 
FSU  publications  on  this  topic  is  again  increasing.  A 
specialized  MMW  session  appeared  at  the  1996  meet¬ 
ing  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  and  the  1997 
Second  World  Congress  on  Electricity  and  Magnetism 
in  Biology  and  Medicine,  and  the  first  Infrared  Lasers 
and  MMW  Workshop  was  held  at  Brooks  Air  Force 
Base,  Texas  in  1997.  Unfortunately,  the  FSU  research, 
a  rich  source  of  MMW  bioeffects  data,  is  not  readily 
available  in  the  West  and  is  scarcely  known  by  Western 
scientists. 

The  present  paper  is  intended  to  fill  in  this  gap 
by  reviewing  recent  research  in  the  MMW  field,  from 
molecules  and  cells  to  MMW  therapy.  We  have  ana¬ 
lyzed  over  300  original  FSU  publications  and  about  50 
non-FSU  papers  and  selected  those  which  appeared 
more  interesting  and  credible.  This  review  is  primarily 
focused  on  experimental  and  clinical  findings  reported 
during  the  last  decade.  Therefore,  it  includes  only  a 
few  essential  citations  of  earlier  publications  and  does 
not  cover  such  topics  as  theoretical  modeling  of  possi¬ 
ble  interaction  mechanisms.  Interested  readers  should 
see  other  reviews  for  additional  information  [Frochhch, 
1980,  1988  (ed.);  Gandhi,  1983;  Gruntfier,  1983; 
Postow  and  Swicord,  1986;  Belyaev,  1992]. 

PHYSICOCHEMICAL  EFFECTS,  MMW 
ABSORPTION,  AND  SPECTROSCOPY 

A  number  of  independent  studies  have  shown 
specific  MMW  effects  in  the  absence  of  living  subjects. 


Bloeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


395 


i.e.,  in  solutions  of  biomolecules  and  even  in  pure  wa¬ 
ter.  Fesenko  and  Gluvstein  [1995]  analyzed  MMW  ef¬ 
fects  on  periodic  voltage  oscillations  during  discharge 
of  a  water  capacitor.  The  capacitor,  which  was  a  dis¬ 
tilled  water  sample  in  a  1-mm  capillaiy,  was  charged 
by  18  V,  1-ms-wide  unipolar  rectangular  pulses.  The 
capacitor  discharged  within  500-600  ms  after  a  pulse. 
The  discharge  curve  contained  periodic  voltage  oscilla¬ 
tions  reaching  10-15  mV.  The  Fourier  spectrum  of 
these  oscillations  included  two  strong  peaks,  at  5.25 
and  46.8  Hz,  and  these  peaks  did  not  change  during  at 
least  2  h  of  experimentation.  The  water  sample  was 
exposed  at  36  GHz  from  an  open-ended  waveguide 
(7.2  X  3.4  mm  cross-section).  Irradiation  at  50  pW 
ou^ut  power  greatly  reduced  the  46.8  Hz  peak  in 
1  min  and  virtually  eUminated  it  in  10  min;  the  5.25  Hz 
peak  shifted  to  6.75  Hz.  These  changes  showed  little 
or  no  recovery  within  2-60  min  after  cessation  of  a 
10-min  exposure.  Irradiation  at  5  mW  output  power 
produced  similar  changes,  but,  unexpectedly,  was  far 
less  effective:  the  changes  developed  more  slowly,  and 
the  original  peaks  were  restored  more  quickly.  Mecha¬ 
nisms  of  the  phenomenon  itself,  its  anomalous  power 
sensitivity,  and  the  long-lasting  “memory”  of  water 
were  not  understood.  The  authors  suggested  that 
MMW-induced  changes  in  water  properties  could  un¬ 
derlie  biological  effects. 

Direct  MMW  effects  on  pure  water  properties 
were  also  observed  by  holographic  interferometry  [Be- 
rezhinskii  et  al.,  1993;  Litvinov  et  al.,  1994].  Refraction 
of  light  in  fluid  was  determined  from  the  width  and 
number  of  interference  bands  formed  by  a  He-Ne  laser 
beam  (630  nm)  passing  through  the  fluid  and  a  referent 
beam.  Irradiation  of  distilled  water  at  10  mW  output 
power  for  5—7  min  caused  no  effect  at  41.5  GHz,  but 
decreased  the  number  of  the  interference  bands  from 
6  to  5  at  51.5  GHz;  the  distance  between  the  bands 
increased  1.2  times.  These  changes  developed  faster 
and  were  more  profound  in  a  2%  human  blood  plasma 
solution.  The  effect  reached  saturation  in  6-7  min  and 
was  completely  reversible.  Both  theoretical  calcula¬ 
tions  and  direct  measurements  established  that  maxi¬ 
mal  MMW  heating  was  about  1  ®C.  MMW-induced 
changes  in  the  light  refraction  coefficient  were  almost 
an  order  of  magnitude  greater  than  produced  by  con¬ 
ventional  heating  by  1  °C  and,  therefore,  were  attrib¬ 
uted  to  a  specific  effect  of  MMW. 

Other  properties  of  blood  plasma,  such  as  dielec¬ 
tric  permittivity  and  absorption  coefficient,  could  be 
altered  by  MMW  irradiation  as  well  [Belyakov  et  al., 
1989].  Changes  of  only  0.05-0.5%  in  these  parameters 
were  measured  but  were  well  beyond  the  limits  of 
the  method  used  (0.01%).  The  sensitivity  of  plasma 


samples  to  particular  radiation  wavelengths  strongly 
varied  from  one  blood  donor  to  another. 

Khizhnyak  and  Ziskin  [1996]  analyzed  peculiari¬ 
ties  of  MMW  heating  and  convection  phenomena  in 
water  solutions.  Besides  the  most  expected  reaction 
(gradual  temperature  rise),  irradiation  could  induce  ei¬ 
ther  temperature  oscillations  and  a  decrease  in  average 
temperature  or  a  biphasic  response  in  which  the  tem¬ 
perature  initially  rises  and  then  decreases.  These  anom¬ 
alous  effects  resulted  from  convective  processes,  i.e., 
the  formation  of  a  toroidal  vortex.  When  the  vortex 
became  stable,  the  temperature  decreased  after  the  ini¬ 
tial  rise  phase,  although  the  irradiation  was  constantly 
maintained.  The  local  temperature  could  decrease  with 
increasing  power  density,  and,  in  biological  systems, 
this  would  appear  as  an  effect  opposite  to  heating. 
Probably,  this  phenomena  could  explain  some  of  re¬ 
ported  “nonthermal”  MMW  effects.  If  irradiation  con¬ 
tinued  for  a  long  time  (30-40  min),  the  convection 
phenomena  disappeared  and  could  not  be  reintroduced, 
even  after  restoration  of  the  initial  temperature.  This 
observation  suggested  that  some  irreversible  process 
had  occurred  in  the  liquid,  which  resembles  findings 
of  the  water  “memory”  cited  above. 

The  supposed  role  of  water  as  a  primary  target 
for  MMW  radiation  motivated  Zavizion  et  al.  [1994] 
and  Kudryashova  et  al.  [1995]  to  study  how  MMW 
absorption  at  the  wavelengths  of  2.0,  5.84,  and  7.12  mm 
is  affected  by  the  presence  of  other  substances,  namely 
a-amino  acids  (0.25—2.5  mol/1).  Because  MMW  ab¬ 
sorption  by  amino  acid  molecules  is  negligible,  the 
absorption  of  solutions  in  most  cases  decreased  propor¬ 
tionally  to  the  amino  acid  concentration.  This  differ¬ 
ence  in  absorption  by  pure  water  and  solutions,  called 
“absorption  deficit,”  increased  with  increasing  length 
of  the  hydrophobic  radical  in  a  series  of  homologous 
amino  acids  (glycine,  alanine,  GABA,  valine).  Para¬ 
doxically,  the  absorption  deficit  was  negative  for  sar- 
cosine  at  5.84  mm  and  7.12  nun  and  for  glycine  at  all 
the  wavelengths,  meaning  that  these  two  amino  acids 
can  increase  MMW  absorption  by  water  molecules. 

A  detailed  theoretical  analysis  of  MMW  absorp¬ 
tion  in  flat  structures  with  high  water  content  was  per¬ 
formed  by  Ryakovskaya  and  Shtemler  [1983].  The  au¬ 
thors  produced  dependencies  of  the  specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR)  on  the  radiation  frequency,  temperature, 
thickness  of  the  absorptive  medium,  and  presence  of 
dielectric  layer(s)  above  and/or  underneath.  This  work 
modeled  most  common  biological  setups,  such  as  irra¬ 
diation  of  cell  suspensions  in  Petri  dishes,  cuvettes,  etc. 
The  wavelength  in  the  medium,  reflection  coefficients, 
depth  of  penetration,  and  SAR  at  the  surface  of  a  semi¬ 
infinite  absorptive  medium  were  calculated  for  wave¬ 
lengths  from  1  to  10  mm,  using  l-nun  steps.  For  exam- 


396 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


pie,  the  depth  of  penetration  for  1-  and  10-mm  wave¬ 
lengths  at  20  ®C  equals  0.195  nun  and  0.56  mm,  respec¬ 
tively,  and  the  respective  surface  SARs  are  79.4  and 
15.5  mW/cm^  per  1  mW/cm^.  Exposure  through  a  thin 
dielectric  layer  (e.g.,  bottom  of  a  Petri  dish)  may  de¬ 
crease  reflection  and  further  increase  SAR  by  up  to  2.5 
times.  SAR  in  thin  absorptive  films  (0.1-0.01  nun) 
increases  greatly  and  may  exceed  SAR  at  the  surface 
of  a  semi-infinite  medium  more  than  10-fold.  Further¬ 
more,  presence  of  a  dielectric  above  or  below  the  thin 
absorptive  film  may  increase  SAR  in  the  film  by  as 
much  as  20-fold.  Apparently,  the  possibility  of  reach¬ 
ing  very  high  SAR  levels  and  of  local  heating  caimot 
be  underestimated,  even  for  the  incident  power  levels 
that  are  often  regarded  as  nonthermal  (0.1-1  mW/cm^). 


MMW  EFFECTS  AT  SUBCELLULAR,  CELLULAR, 
AND  TISSUE  LEVELS 

Growth  Rate  Effects 

Debates  about  resonance  growth  rate  effects  of 
MMW  have  been  going  on  for  over  20  years,  and  this 
problem  was  widely  discussed  in  earlier  reviews.  In 
brief,  Grundler  and  coauthors  [1977,  1982,  1988]  re¬ 
ported  that  the  growth  rate  of  the  yeast  Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae  may  be  either  increased  by  up  to  15%  or 
decreased  by  up  to  29%  by  certain  frequencies  of 
MMW  within  a  41.8—42.0  GHz  band.  The  effect  was 
established  by  different  methods,  both  in  suspended 
cells  and  in  monolayer.  According  to  recent  observa¬ 
tions  [Grundler  and  Kaiser,  1992],  an  effect  of  about 
the  same  magnitude  is  produced  by  field  intensities 
fi'om  5  pW/cm^  to  10  mW/cm^  (8  kHz  modulation). 
Ihe  width  of  the  resonance  peaks  increased  with  the 
intensity  from  about  5  MHz  to  12-15  MHz  over  the 
above  intensity  range.  However,  thorough  independent 
attempts  to  replicate  these  findings  were  not  successful 
[Furia  et  al.,  1986;  Gos  et  al.,  1997],  suggesting  that 
these  MMW  effects  could  be  dependent  on  (or  even 
produced  by)  some  as  yet  unidentified  and  uncontrolled 
conditions. 

Dardanoni  and  coauthors  [1985]  observed  fre¬ 
quency-  and  modulation-dependent  effects  on  the 
growth  of  yeast  Candida  albicans.  MMW  modulated 
at  1  kHz  reduced  the  growth  rate  by  about  15%  at 
72  GHz,  but  not  at  71.8  or  72.2  GHz.  A  3-h  continuous 
wave  (CW)  irradiation  at  72  GHz  had  the  opposite 
effect,  i.e.,  the  growth  rate  increased  by  about  25%  over 
the  sham-irradiated  control.  Remarkable  variability  of 
the  results  was  noted,  which  could  be  a  result  of  cell 
subpopulations  with  different  sensitivity. 

Golant  and  coauthors  [1994]  reported  that  a 
marked  synchronicity  of  periodic  fluctuations  in  the 


growth  rate  and  bud  formation  in  the  culture  of  S. 
cerevisiae  can  be  induced  by  0.03  mW/cm^  46  GHz 
irradiation  for  50  min.  This  effect  was  claimed  to  per¬ 
sist  for  over  20  cell  generations.  Periodicity  of  bud 
formation  was  observed  in  control  samples  as  well,  but 
it  was  less  pronounced  and  had  a  different  time  dura¬ 
tion  (60  min  vs.  80  min  after  MMW  exposure). 

Synchronizing  effects  of  MMW  were  also  ob¬ 
served  in  higher  plant  specimens  (Shestopalova  et  al., 
1995).  Barley  seeds  were  exposed  for  20  min  at 
0.1  mW/cm^  (61.5  GHz),  and  then  the  exposed  and 
control  seeds  (150  seeds  per  group)  were  put  into  an 
incubator  for  sprouting.  The  incubator  was  maintained 
at  either  28  ®C  or  8  ®C.  Cytologic  examination  estab¬ 
lished  that  the  degree  of  synchronization  of  cell  divi¬ 
sion  in  MMW-exposed  sprouts  increased  by  36% 
(28  °C)  and  50%  (8  ®C)  over  the  respective  control 
plants. 

Levina  et  al.  [1989]  studied  MMW  effects  on  the 
development  of  a  protozoan  Spirostum  sp.  cell  popula¬ 
tion.  The  population  was  begun  in  a  saline  me^um 
with  beer  yeast  (550  mg/1)  as  food  by  adding  of  5-6 
protozoan  cells/ml.  The  culture  was  exposed  once  for 
30  min  at  1.5  mW/cm^  (7.1 -mm  wavelength),  between 
days  2  and  11  of  growth.  Unexposed  cultures  grew 
exponentially  up  to  a  density  of  100  cells/ml  on  day 
1 1,  then  rapidly  died  without  reaching  stationary  phase, 
obviously  due  to  poisoning  by  waste  products.  Expo¬ 
sures  on  days  2,  4,  or  7  caused  the  populations  to  enter 
the  stationary  phase  on  or  aioimd  day  9.  Exposures  on 
day  9  or  11  postponed  the  population  death  by  5  days, 
and  the  final  cell  content  increased  to  115-135  cells/ml 
on  day  14.  Irradiation  on  day  2  also  increased  the  prolifer¬ 
ation  rate,  and  by  day  7  the  cell  density  was  nearly  twice 
as  high  as  in  control  san:q)les.  In  another  series  of  experi¬ 
ments,  the  population  began  with  an  initial  concentration 
of  1-2  protozoan  cells/ml  and  stabilized  in  8-10  days 
at  12—13  ceUs/ml.  In  these  cultures,  MMW  exposure 
suppressed  proliferation,  and  the  final  cell  density  was 
only  6—10  ceUs/ml.  This  study  indicated  that  irradiation 
affects  the  population’s  own  growth  control  meebanisms 
and  that  the  effect  depends  on  the  stage  and  other  particu¬ 
lars  of  the  population  development. 

Exposure  for  30  min  at  2.2  mW/cm^  7.1-mm 
wavelength  enhanced  the  growth  of  a  blue-green  algae 
Spirulina  platensis  by  50%  [Tambiev  et  al.,  1989], 
whereas  8.34-mm  wavelength  produced  no  changes 
compared  with  sham  control.  The  alga  growth  rate 
more  than  doubled  when  a  30-min  irradiation  at 
7.1  mm  was  immediately  followed  by  exposure  to 
high-peak  power  microwave  pulses  (15  pulses,  10-ns 
pulse  width,  6-min  pause,  3-cm  wavelength,  200  kW/crn^ 
peak  incident  power  density).  Concurrently,  photosyn¬ 
thetic  oxygen  evolution  increased  about  1.5  times.  The 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


397 


observed  stimulatory  effects  are  of  considerable  prom¬ 
ise  in  biotechnology,  in  which  5.  platensis  is  used  for 
production  of  food  protein  and  biologically  active  com¬ 
pounds. 

Other  publications  by  the  same  authors  [Tambiev 
and  Kirikova,  1992]  and  independent  investigators  [Re¬ 
brova,  1992;  Shub  et  al.,  1995]  presented  MMW  effects 
on  the  growth  rate  of  several  species  of  bacteria,  Cyan¬ 
obacteria,  algae,  yeasts,  and  higher  plants  (fennel,  let¬ 
tuce,  tomato).  For  example,  in  the  yeasts  5.  cerevisiae 
and  S,  carlsbergensis  MMW  shortened  the  phases  of 
culture  growth  2.3 -6.0  times  and  could  increase  the 
biomass  production  rate  by  up  to  253%.  Effects  on 
Escherichia  coli  growth  could  be  either  stimulatory  or 
inhibitory,  depending  on  the  wavelength  (6.0-  to 
6.7-mm  band,  1  mW/cm^  for  30  min).  However,  all 
three  papers  were  summaries  of  the  authors’  multiyear 
experiences  with  studying  these  and  other  MMW  ef¬ 
fects  and  did  not  provide  enough  detail  for  full  evalua¬ 
tion  or  possible  replication. 

Chromosonfie  Alterations  and  Genetic  Effects 
of  MMW 

Absence  of  mutagenic  or  recombinagenic  effects 
of  MMW  radiation  was  clearly  demonstrated  in  the 
late  1970s  [Dardalhon  et  al.,  1979,  1981],  and  later 
investigations  were  consistent  with  this  conclusion.  At 
the  same  time,  a  number  of  studies  indicated  that 
MMW  could  affect  the  fine  chromosome  structure  and 
function,  cell  tolerance  to  standard  mutagens,  and  le¬ 
sion  repairs. 

Best  known  is  the  recent  work  by  Belyaev  and 
coauthors  [1993a,  b,  1994,  1996],  who  discovered 
sharp  frequency  resonances  by  using  an  anomalous 
viscosity  time  dependence  (AVTD)  technique.  This 
technique  is  supposed  to  reflect  fine  changes  in  DNA 
conformation  and  DNA-protein  bonds.  At  a  resonance 
frequency,  biological  changes  could  be  produced  by 
field  intensities  as  low  as  10"^^  W/cm^.  The  magnitude 
of  changes  gradually  increased  with  the  field  intensity 
and  reached  a  plateau  between  10“^^  and  10"®  W/cm^, 
depending  on  cell  density  in  exposed  samples.  Reso¬ 
nance  peaks  for  E.  coli  cells  were  found  at  51.76  and 
41.34  GHz;  these  values  decreased  in  strains  with  in¬ 
creased  haploid  genome  length.  These  results  pointed 
to  the  chromosomal  DNA  as  a  target  for  resonance 
interaction  between  living  cells  and  MMW.  The  width 
of  the  resonances  increased  from  units  to  tens  of  mega¬ 
hertz  by  increasing  the  incident  power,  and  this  depen¬ 
dence  is  in  notable  agreement  with  the  one  reported  for 
cell  growth  rate  effects  [Grundler  and  Kaiser,  1992]. 

However,  the  AVTD  test  is  not  a  conventional 
technique  in  cell  biology.  Interpretation  of  AVTD  data 
is  uncertain  and  functional  consequences  of  AVTD 


changes  have  not  yet  been  convincingly  defined.  A 
discussion  is  continuing  as  to  whether  super-low  radia¬ 
tion  intensities  in  these  studies  were  measured  correctly 
[Osepchuk  and  Petersen,  1997a,  1997b;  and  a  reply  by 
Belyaev  et  al.,  1997].  Supposedly,  some  power  at  a 
harmonic  frequency  might  be  transmitted  to  tiie  sample 
despite  large  attenuation  at  the  fundamental  frequency. 
Whether  this  was  the  case  or  not,  consistent  observa¬ 
tions  of  resonance  effects  represent  an  important  find¬ 
ing,  which  requires  understanding  and  independent  rep¬ 
lication. 

MMW-induced  visible  changes  in  giant  chromo¬ 
somes  of  salivary  glands  of  the  midge  Acricotopus 
lucidus  [Kremer  et  al.,  1988].  A  certain  puff,  the  Balbi- 
ani  ring  BRl  in  the  chromosome  H,  reduced  in  size 
after  irradiation  at  67.2  ±0.1  GHz  or  68.2  ±0.1  GHz 
(5  mW/cm^),  and  this  effect  seemed  to  be  unrelated  to 
heating.  Numerous  alterations  in  the  giant  chromosome 
morphology  were  also  independently  found  in  Chiro- 
nomus  plumosus  (Diptera)  after  a  15-min  exposure  at 
1  mW/cm^  [BriU’  et  al.,  1993]. 

Exposure  of  ultraviolet  (UV)-treated  E.  coli  cul¬ 
ture  to  MMW  at  61  ±  2.1  GHz,  1  mW/cm^  increased 
cell  survival  [Rojavin  and  Ziskin,  1995].  The  most 
likely  mechanism  of  this  effect  was  either  direct  or 
indirect  activation  of  the  dark  repair  system.  No  sur¬ 
vival  effects  were  found  if  the  sequence  of  exposures 
was  reversed,  i.e.,  when  UV  irradiation  was  performed 
immediately  after  a  10-  to  30-min  MMW  exposure. 

Genetic  effects  of  61.02-61.42  GHz  radiations 
were  studied  in  the  D7  strain  of  the  yeast  S.  cerevisiae 
[Pakhomova  et  al.,  1997].  MMW  exposures  lasted  for 
30  min  at  0.13  mW/cm^,  and  were  followed  in  60  min 
by  a  100  J/m^  dose  of  254  nm  UV  radiation.  Compared 
with  the  parallel  control,  the  MMW  pretreatment  did 
not  affect  cell  survival  or  the  rate  of  reverse  mutations, 
but  significantly  increased  the  incidence  of  gene  con¬ 
versions.  Sham-exposed  samples  showed  no  differ¬ 
ences  from  respective  parallel  control  groups.  The  data 
suggested  that  MMW  did  not  alter  the  UV-induced 
mutagenesis,  but  might  facilitate  UV-induced  recombi¬ 
nagenic  processes.  A  thermal  mechanism  for  this  effect 
was  improbable,  but  could  not  be  ruled  out  entirely. 

Excitable  Tissues  and  Membranes 

Along  with  the  genetic  apparatus,  the  cell  mem¬ 
brane  is  another  site  suspected  to  be  a  primary  target  for 
MMW  radiation.  Many  of  the  works  discussed  below 
established  profound  MMW  effects;  however,  only  a 
few  attempts  have  been  made  to  replicate  them. 

Brovkovich  et  al.  [1991]  reported  that  61  GHz, 
4  mW/cm^  radiation  significantly  activates  the  Ca*^"^ 
pump  in  the  sarcoplasmic  reticidum  (SR)  of  skeletal 
and  heart  muscles  of  the  rat.  The  rate  of  Ca'^'^  uptake 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


by  SR  membranes  was  measured  by  an  ion-selective 
electrode  in  an  ATP-containing  me<bum.  An  intermit¬ 
tent  MMW  treatment  (5-min  exposure,  15-min  pause, 
3  cycles)  of  skeletal  muscle  SR  increased  the  rate  of 
Ca'^'^  uptake  by  23%,  and  this  increased  level  was 
retained  for  1  h  after  the  exposure.  Uninterrupted 
MMW  irradiation  had  no  effect  in  10  min,  but  in¬ 
creased  Ca"^^  uptake  by  27%  in  20  min;  and  the  effect 
reached  maximum  (48%)  in  40  min.  In  heart  muscle 
SR,  even  a  5-min  exposure  enhanced  Ca"*"^  uptake 
by  18%. 

Geletyuk  and  coauthors  [1995]  used  patch-clamp 
(inside-out  mode)  to  study  42.25  GHz  radiation  effects 
on  single  Ca^ ‘^-activated  channels  in  cultured 

kidney  cells  (Vero).  Exposure  for  20-30  min  at 
0.1  mW/cm^  CW,  greatly  modified  the  activation  char¬ 
acteristics  of  the  chaimels,  particularly  the  open  state 
probability.  The  field  increased  the  activity  of  channels 
with  a  low  initial  activity  and  inhibited  channels  with 
initially  high  activity.  In  a  subsequent  study  [Fesenko 
et  al.,  1995],  these  eftects  were  reproduced  without 
direct  irradiation  of  the  membrane,  just  by  applying 
bathing  solution  pre-exposed  for  30  min  at  2  mW/cm^, 
42.25  GHz.  Irradiation  of  the  solution  did  not  alter  its 
pH  or  Ca"^"^  eoncentration,  and  the  nature  of  the  MMW- 
introduced  channel-modifying  properties  of  the  solu¬ 
tion  is  not  understood.  The  solution  retained  its  biologi¬ 
cal  efficacy  for  at  least  10-20  min  after  cessation  of 
the  exposure. 

Kataev  and  coauthors  [1993]  used  a  voltage  clamp 
to  study  membrane  currents  in  giant  alga  cells  (Nitelhpsis 
obtusa,  Characea).  Irradiation  for  30-60  min  at  41  GHz, 
5  mW/cm^  suppressed  the  chloride  current  to  zero  with 
no  recovery  for  10—14  h.  Marked  inhibitoiy  effects  were 
also  found  at  50  and  71  GHz,  whaeas  most  of  other 
fiequencies  tested  in  the  38—78  GHz  range  enhaneed  the 
chloride  current  up  to  200-400%  (49, 70, 76  GHz).  This 
activation  was  reversible,  and  reeovoy  to  the  initial  value 
took  30-40  min.  Moreover,  “activating”  fiequencies 
could  restore  the  chloride  current  after  its  complete  and 
normally  irreversible  suppression  by  “inhibitory”  fie¬ 
quencies.  MMW  heating  did  not  exceed  1  ®C,  and  neither 
activating  nor  inhibitory  effects  were  related  to  or  could 
be  explained  by  it  Calcium  current  also  changed  during 
irradiation,  but  this  effect  was  not  frequency  dependent 
and  could  be  adequately  explained  by  heating.  The  au¬ 
thors  noted  that  algae  collected  in  the  fall  of  1990  and 
stored  over  the  winter  had  entirely  lost  MMW  sensitivity 
by  February  1991. 

Experiments  with  artificial  bilayer  membranes 
and  snail  neurons  did  not  reveal  any  frequeney-specific 
effects  of  MMW  [Alekseev  and  Ziskin,  1995;  Alekseev 
et  al.,  1997].  The  capacitanee  of  artifieial  membranes, 
ionic  chatmel  cmrents,  and  the  transport  of  tetraphe- 


nylboron  anions  changed  proportionally  to  MMW  heat¬ 
ing,  regardless  of  the  frequency  (53-78  GHz  range) 
or  modulation  used.  Irra^ation  of  snail  nemons  at 
75  GHz  (600-4200  W/kg)  produced  biphasic  alter¬ 
ations  of  their  firing  rate,  which  were  similar  to  those 
caused  by  equivalent  conventional  heating. 

Burachas  and  Mascoliunas  [1989]  studied  MMW 
effects  on  the  compound  action  potential  (CAP)  in  iso¬ 
lated  frog  sciatic  nerve.  CAP  decreased  exponentially 
and  fell  10-fold  within  50-110  min  of  exposure  at 
77.7  GHz,  10  mW/cm^.  CAP  restored  entirely  soon 
after  the  exposure,  but  the  nerve  became  far  more  sensi¬ 
tive  to  MMW:  CAP  suppression  due  to  the  next  expo¬ 
sures  became  increasingly  steep  and  finally  took  only 
10-15  min.  This  sensitized  state  persisted  for  at  least 
16  h.  In  addition  to  this  “slow”  response,  switching 
the  field  on  increased  CAP  amplitude  instantly  by 
5-7%,  and  switching  it  off  caus^  the  opposite  reac¬ 
tion.  These  effects  were  found  in  “winter”  frogs,  but 
weakened  and  finally  disappeared  in  spring. 

A  different  effect  in  the  isolated  frog  nerve  was 
described  by  Chemyakov  and  coauthors  [1989].  The 
exposures  lasted  for  2-3  h,  either  with  a  regular  fre¬ 
quency  change  by  1  GHz  every  8-9  min  or  with  a 
random  frequency  change  every  1-4  min  (53-78  GHz 
band,  0.1 -0.2  mW/cm^).  The  latter  regimen  induced  an 
abrupt  CAP  “rearrangement”  in  11  of  12  exposed 
preparations:  the  position,  magnitude,  and  polarity  of 
CAP  peaks  (the  initial  CAP  was  polyphasic)  drastically 
changed  in  an  unforeseeable  manner.  The  other  expo- 
sine  regimen  altered  the  amplitude  and  duration  of  late 
CAP  components  in  30-40  min.  The  authors  supposed 
that  MMW  increased  CAP  conduction  velocity  in  fast 
nerve  fibers  and  decreased  it  in  slow  fibers. 

Neither  of  these  effects  on  CAP  conduction  was 
observed  by  Pakhomov  et  al.  [1997a].  Irradiation  for 
10-60  min,  either  at  various  constant  frequencies  or 
with  a  stepwise  fi-equeney  change  did  not  alter  CAP  at 
0.2—  1  mW/cm^.  At  2.0— 2.8  mW/cm^,  it  produced  mi¬ 
nor  changes,  which  were  independent  from  the  fre¬ 
quency  and  matched  the  effect  of  heating.  At  the  same 
time,  a  different  MMW  effect  was  revealed  using  a 
high-rate  nerve  stimulation  test.  MMW  attenuated  the 
stimulation-indueed  CAP  decrease  in  a  frequency- 
dependent  manner.  The  effect  reached  maximum  at 
41.34  GHz  [Pakhomov,  1997b],  and  at  this  frequency 
the  magnitude  of  changes  was  the  same  (20-25%)  at 
0.02,  0.1,  and  2.6  mW/cm^  [Pakhomov  et  al.,  1997c]. 
A  100  MHz  deviation  firom  41.34  GHz  (to  41.24  or 
41.44  GHz)  reduced  the  effect  about  twofold,  and  a 
200  MHz  deviation  eliminated  it.  The  field  distribution 
over  the  preparation  at  these  frequencies  was  virtually 
the  same,  so  different  MMW  absorption  or  heating 
patterns  could  not  account  for  the  frequency  specificity 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


399 


of  the  effect.  Interestingly,  the  most  effective  frequency 
in  these  experiments  happened  to  be  the  same  as  the 
resonance  frequency  in  the  cell  genome  studies  of 
Belyaev  et  al.  [1993a]. 

Low-intensity  MMW  radiation  effectively  changed 
membrane  functions  in  striated  muscle  and  cardiac 
pacemaker  cells  [Cherny akov  et  al.,  1989].  Exposure 
at  0.1-0.15  mW/cm^  for  90  s  or  less  (frequencies  be¬ 
tween  54  and  78  GHz)  decelerated  the  natural  loss  of 
transmembrane  potential  in  myocytes,  or  even  in¬ 
creased  it  by  5-20  mV.  Exposure  reduced  the  over¬ 
shoot  voltage,  action  potential  amplitude,  and  conduc¬ 
tion  velocity.  This  effect  was  observed  in  80%  of  expo¬ 
sures,  with  no  clear  dependence  on  the  radiation 
frequency.  MMW  influence  on  pacemaker  activity  was 
analyzed  in  990  experiments  with  80  tissue  strip  prepa¬ 
rations  from  the  frog  heart  sinoatrial  area.  In  most 
cases,  irradiation  immediately  decreased  the  interspike 
interval,  often  in  less  than  2  s.  The  maximal  effect  was 
reached  within  30  s.  The  changes  linearly  increased 
with  the  incident  power  increase  in  the  range  from  20- 
30  to  500  pW/cm^  The  frequency  dependence  of  the 
effect  was  individual,  with  at  least  four  maximums  in 
the  studied  range.  Maximal  preparation  heating  after  a 
2  s  exposure  at  1  mW/cm^  was  calculated  as  0.005  °C. 
With  a  physiologic  response  latency  of  less  than  2  s, 
this  response  could  not  be  thermal.  Exposure  to  infra¬ 
red  light  (4  to  6  pm  wavelength)  often  evoked  the 
same  effects  as  MMW,  but  the  threshold  intensity  was 
hundreds  of  times  greater. 

In  other  experiments  described  in  the  same  paper, 
low-intensity  MMW  synchronized  firing  of  urinary 
bladder  mechanoreceptors,  suppressed  and  altered  the 
T-peak  on  electrocardiography  of  in  situ  exposed  myo¬ 
cardium,  enhanced  respiration,  altered  membrane  cal¬ 
cium  binding,  and  reduced  the  contractility  of  cardio- 
myocytes.  Summarizing  their  results,  the  authors  stated 
that  the  dependence  of  bioeffects  upon  radiation  fre¬ 
quency  is  not  monotonic.  Peaks  of  this  dependence  are 
individual  and  are  not  fixed  at  particular  frequencies, 
and  they  become  smoother  with  increased  complexity 
of  physiologic  control  mechanisms  involved. 

Other  In  Vitro  Effects 

Bulgakova  et  al.  [1996]  studied  how  MMW  expo¬ 
sure  of  Staphylococcus  aureus  affects  its  sensitivity  to 
antibiotics  with  different  mechanisms  of  action.  Irradi¬ 
ations  lasted  from  1.5  to  60  min  (54  or  42.195  GHz, 
or  66-78  GHz  band  with  1  GHz  steps,  10  mW/cm^). 
MMW  heating  did  not  exceed  1.5  °C.  Over  1000  exper¬ 
iments  wifii  14  antibiotics  were  completed.  A  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  growth  of  exposed  cells  compared  with 
control  cells  was  most  often  observed  with  polypeptide 
antibiotics,  which  affect  the  cell  membrane  (gramicidin 


group),  but  not  with  inhibitors  of  cell  wall  synthesis 
(penicillin  group),  of  DNA-dependent  RNA  synthesis 
(actinomycin  D),  of  the  RNA  polymerase  and  RNA 
synthesis  (heliomycin),  or  protein  biosynthesis  inhibi¬ 
tors  (neomycin,  tetracycline,  etc.).  Lratfiation  either  in¬ 
creased  or  decreased  the  antibiotic  sensitivity,  and  the 
probability  of  these  opposite  effects  depended  on  the 
antibiotic  concentration.  MMW  could  induce  sensitiv¬ 
ity  to  subbactericidal  antibiotic  concentrations,  which 
normally  would  not  affect  the  cell  growth.  Within  stud¬ 
ied  limits,  the  effect  showed  no  clear  dependence  on 
the  radiation  intensity  or  frequency.  The  data  suggested 
that  some  membrane  processes  might  be  a  target  for 
the  MMW  effect.  The  authors  also  noted  that  MMW 
treatment  can  reveal  (or  even  induce)  the  heterogeneity 
of  the  sensitivity  of  a  cell  population  to  certain  antibi¬ 
otics. 

Rebrova  [1992]  reviewed  various  MMW  effects 
on  cell  metabolism,  synthesis  of  enzymes,  and  other 
processes  in  unicellular  organisms,  e.g.,  frequency-de¬ 
pendent  enhancement  and  suppression  of  colicin  syn¬ 
thesis  in  E.  coli,  stimulation  of  synthesis  of  fibrinolytic 
enzymes  in  Bacillus  firmus,  increasing  of  the  contents 
of  peptides,  DNA,  and  RNA  in  B.  mucilaginous,  and 
suppression  of  tolerance  to  antibiotics  in  5.  aureus.  The 
maximal  magnitude  of  MMW-induced  changes  ranged 
from  20  to  90%,  depending  on  the  wavelength  and  the 
inirial  condition  of  the  strain.  In  contrast  to  bacteria, 
reproduction  rate  and  biosynthetic  properties  of  fungi 
Aspergillus  sp.,  Endontyces  fibuliger,  and  Dacthilyum 
dendraides  changed  only  after  repeated  exposures  (10 
times).  Certain  MMW  frequencies  increased  alpha  am¬ 
ylase  activity  in  A.  orizae  by  67%  and  suppressed  glu- 
coamylase  by  30%;  others  had  the  opposite  effect.  In 
yeast  species,  MMW  accelerated  maltose  fermentation 
by  73%,  whereas  synthesis  of  diacetil  and  aldehydes 
decreased  by  20%.  New  biosynthetic  culture  properties 
introduced  by  exposure  persisted  in  at  least  100  (5. 
carlsbergensis)  and  300  (S.  cerevisiae)  cell  genera¬ 
tions.  The  selective  stimulation  of  production  of  some 
enzymes  and  suppression  of  others  is  promising  for 
biotechnology. 

An  unusual  “double-resonance”  effect  of  MMW 
was  described  by  Gapeev  et  al.  [1994].  Spontaneous 
locomotor  activity  of  the  protozoan  Paramecium  cau- 
datum  was  not  affected  by  irradiation  unless  both  the 
radiation  frequency  and  modulation  were  tuned  to 
“resonance”  values.  These  values  were  42.25  GHz 
and  0.0956  Hz,  respectively  (0.5  duty  ratio).  At  these 
parameters,  the  threshold  field  intensity  was  about 
0.02  mW/cm^.  The  effect  reached  maximum  (about 
20%)  at  0.1  mW/cm^  and  remained  at  this  level  at 
intensities  up  to  50  mW/cm^  despite  increasing  heat 
production  (0.1 -0.2  ®C  at  5  mW/cm^).  CW  irradiation 


400 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


or  modulation  rates  of  16,  8,  1,  0.5,  0.25,  or  0.05  Hz 
produced  no  effect,  regardless  of  the  field  intensity  or 
heating.  At  the  resonance  modulation  frequency,  a  shift 
of  the  carrying  frequency  to  42.0  or  42.5  GHz  elimi¬ 
nated  the  reaction.  No  effects  were  observed  with  heat¬ 
ing  of  samples  by  other  means,  e.g.,  infrared  light 
modulated  at  0.0956  Hz.  Locomotor  activity  changes 
similar  to  the  MMW  effect  could  be  evoked  by  increas¬ 
ing  the  level  of  intracellular  calcium,  pointing  to  a 
possible  mechanism  of  the  MMW  action.  However, 
reasons  for  the  ‘  ‘double-resonance’  ’  dependence  of  this 
MMW  effect  remain  unclear. 

More  reported  MMW  effects  in  various  in  vitro 
systems  are  summarized  in  Table  1. 


ANIMAL  AND  HUMAN  STUDIES 
MMW  Effects  on  Peripheral  Receptors 

Abundant  evidence  for  MMW  effects  in  speci¬ 
mens  directly  exposed  in  vitro  neither  explains  nor 
predicts  possible  effects  at  the  organism  level.  It  is 
clearly  understood  that  MMW  penetration  into  biologi¬ 
cal  tissues  is  rather  shallow,  and  any  primary  response 
must  occur  in  skin  or  subcutaneous  structures,  or  at  the 
eye  surface.  This  primary  response  would  then  mediate 
all  subsequent  reactions  by  means  of  neural  and/or 
humoral  pathways.  The  nature  of  the  primary  response 
and  consequent  events  has  been  a  subject  of  intense 
speculation  [Golant,  1989;  Mikhno  and  Novikov,  1992; 
Rodshtadt,  1993],  but  there  is  Httle  experimental  proof. 
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  link  between  cellular  and  organ- 
ismal  effects  is  missing  and  remains  the  least  under¬ 
stood  area  in  the  MMW  field.  However,  several  studies 
have  suggested  that  peripheral  receptors  and  afferent 
nerve  signaling  could  be  involved  in  the  whole  organ¬ 
ism’ s  response  to  a  local  MMW  exposure. 

Akoev  et  al.  [1992]  studied  the  response  of  elec¬ 
troreceptor  Lorencini  capsules  in  anesthetized  rays. 
Spontaneous  firing  in  the  afferent  nerve  fiber  from  the 
capsule  could  be  either  enhanced  or  inhibited  by  MMW 
irradiation  (33—55  GHz,  CW).  The  most  sensitive 
receptors  increased  their  firing  rate  at  intensities  of 
1  -4  mW/cm^,  which  produced  less  than  0.1  temper¬ 
ature  rise.  Intensities  of  10  mW/cm^  ^d  higher  could 
evoke  a  delayed  inhibition  of  firing,  so  the  response 
became  biphasic.  The  authors  emphasized  that  what 
they  observed  was  not  merely  a  bioeffect  of  MMW, 
but  was  indeed  a  specific  response  of  the  receptor. 

Chemyakov  and  coauthors  [1989]  were  able  to 
induce  heart  rate  changes  in  anesthetized  frogs  by 
MMW  irradiation  of  remote  skin  areas.  The  latency  of 
the  changes  was  about  1  min.  Complete  denervation 
of  the  heart  did  not  prevent  the  reaction,  but  decreased 


its  probability.  The  data  suggested  a  reflex  mechanism 
of  the  MMW  action,  maybe  involving  certain  periph¬ 
eral  receptors. 

TTiese  data  are  in  agreement  with  later  findings 
by  Potekhina  et  al.  [1992].  Certain  frequencies  from 
the  53-78  GHz  band  (CW)  effectively  changed  the 
natural  heart  rate  variability  in  anesthetized  rats.  The 
radiation  was  applied  to  the  upper  thoracic  vertebrae 
for  20  min  at  10  mW/cm^  or  less.  The  frequencies  of 
55  and  73  GHz  caused  pronounced  arrhythmia:  the 
variation  coefficient  of  the  R-R  interval  increased  four 
to  five  times.  Exposure  at  61  or  75  GHz  had  no  effect, 
and  other  tested  frequencies  caused  intermediate 
changes.  Skin  and  whole-body  temperature  of  the  ani¬ 
mals  remained  unchanged.  Similar  frequency  depen¬ 
dence  was  observed  in  additional  experiments  with 
3-h  exposures;  however,  about  25%  of  experiments 
were  interrupted  because  of  sudden  anii^  death 
that  occurred  after  2.5  h  of  exposure  at  51,  61,  and 
73  GHz.  A  possible  role  for  receptor  structures  and 
neural  pathways  in  the  development  of  the  MMW- 
induced  arrhythmia  was  discussed. 

Sazonov  et  al.  [1995]  compared  alterations  of 
spontaneous  afferent  firing  in  the  bladder  nerve  in  frogs 
when  the  bladder  was  exposed  to  infrared  radiation 
md  to  MMW  (42.19  ±  0.15  GHz,  10  mW/cm%  The 
infrared  intensity  was  adjusted  to  produce  the  same 
heating  as  MMW.  In  control  experiments,  the  firing 
rate  was  stable  for  at  least  1-1.5  h,  but  MMW  in¬ 
creased  it  instantly  from  30.9  to  32  spikes/s  (P  <  .05) 
and  to  48.3  spikes/s  (P  <  .01)  by  the  end  of  a  20-min 
exposure.  Immediately  after  cessation  of  irradiation, 
the  rate  fell  to  35.8  spikes/s,  which  was  still  signifi¬ 
cantly  higher  (P  <  .05)  than  before  the  treatment.  Infra¬ 
red  irradiation  did  not  cause  statistically  significant 
changes.  This  difference  was  interpreted  as  a  proof  of 
a  specific  (nonthermal)  MMW  effect,  which  might  in 
principle  take  place  in  skin  receptors  as  well. 

In  contrast,  infrared  light  and  MMW  at  equivalent 
intensities  produced  similar  effects  on  the  firing  rate 
of  crayfish  stretch  receptor  [Khramov  et  al.,  1991]. 
Changes  were  proportional  to  the  average  incident 
power,  regardless  of  modulation  or  radiation  fre¬ 
quency,  and  were  regarded  as  merely  thermal. 

The  possibility  of  modifying  the  peripheral  recep¬ 
tor  function  by  low-intensity  MMW  has  been  demon¬ 
strated  directly  by  Enin  and  coauthors  [1992].  An  elec¬ 
trodynamic  mechanostimulator  was  used  to  apply 
mechanical  stimuli  (50-ms  duration,  1  to  2  mm  ampli¬ 
tude)  to  individual  skin  mechanoreceptors  on  the  sole 
of  the  hind  limb  of  anesthetized  rats.  Responses  to  the 
stimuli  were  recorded  from  afferent  fibers  in  the  iso¬ 
lated  and  cut  peripheral  end  of  the  tibial  nerve.  The 
sole  was  exposed  to  55,  61,  or  73  GHz  radiation  at 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


401 


2.S-S  S. 

Isis 

p  a  eg  »r< 


^  ’2  a  i 

ii 

B  &'°  =*■ 
O  2  ^  2 

t-h  i>  00 

JX>  ^  ^ 

SvA  § 

•S  6 

iijj 

§  fa  ^  <s 

fa  K  -S  ^ 

-I  S  « 


II  I 

^i| 

III 

d  0)  S 


^  fl  H  g 

8-|  a  S  I 

its  g  I  a « 

2  8  o  «c 


•5  CC  ^ 

II  - 

o  eg 
O  XJ  ^ 


j  i  H 

1  §  I 

•S 1 1 

s  -S  * 

€  s  u 

•s  §-« 

O  «'S 

Itl 

ill 

III 

►S 


I  g  .  I: 
■s|?S' 
>»*^  I  *■ 

ll^  r 

fa  o  8  .g  r 

•fa  2  g  M 

-S  o  §  .a  ' 

11^1 
6.^  0  ?• 
-o  M  ; 

l-g  §5 

!!  I’sl 

«a  g>«  ; 

a  S  I 

fl>  CO  fa  1 

s  ««  S  ‘ 

«  .2  fa  ^  1 
CO  fa  o  CO 

§li|: 

■9  "  g  2  ' 

II 

fa  fa  »-^  O 

tut 

I  ls£ 


s  §  =* 

^  ^  J2 

l|i 

1^3: 

fa4  B  5 
B  **  Mh 

^  a  ° 

"s  s  g 


L  el) 

I  ;?  e  2  & 

I  ^  2  crt  O  CO 

;  •§  o  “  5  s 

fa  fa  ^  S  a 

I  fa  I  ®  I 

i 

'  8  "2  f  ® 

: 

I  § i z' ! 
I 

i  -3  i”i  ^ 

I  si  Is. S'* 

“  a  8  CO  ^  1^’ 

:”a<S-i|8§’ 

s  o  fl)  *-•  -fa  5 

>  ^  ®  rS  ^  a 

;  *fa  bo  ■fa  J3  '(U  > 

:  1  8  .S  §  I  O  • 

^  eg  J  cf  &’ 

!  o  5P'°  -rt  efa  ^ 

i  ^  1 1  .g  ts  <  , 

j  ^  -fa  fa  S  o  « 

)  ^  *fa  fa  -fa  Q  ’ 

>  Q  'S  -  fa  ^  fa 


|gga22§S&y 


I  itfl^ 

fa  fa  Ciifa  fa 


a  o 

-si  V 

®i  m ‘I 

lo  00  ^ 
\o  ^  ^ 


oC  ^  *1 

r4  ^  o 
Tj-  ^  m 


E  J  2 

l^'sl  o 

^  <2  fa  N  nT 

3|l$l 

s  i  ^rr- 1 


fa  *B 


VO  I  2  § 

£S2  ^e 


« i  ®  8 

Hi! 


\i  ^ 
8  .& 

!-S  i  B 

I  I ! 

i  rS  ^  8 

'  fa  N  fa 
I  ^ 

S  8^ 

iili 

L.  W  wj  fa 


li* 

O  4)  t^ 

"  p  s 


fa  fa  fa 

■g'^’S 
o  00 

I'il  ■ 

■R  ■§<’“ 

||| 


I  I  § 

i'g  I 
S  ^  I 
^  -9  Co 
.a  •€  -o 
s'g  s 
f  I 's 


Kazbekov  and  No  nonthermal  effects  in  6-  to  7.8-nim  wavelengths  MMW  either  had  no  effect  on  studied  parameters  (thymine  and  thymidine 

Vyacheslavov,  prototrophic,  thymidine-  5  mW/cm^  uptake,  potassium  leakage,  hydrogen  ion  release,  uptake  of  DNA,  etc.),  or 

1937  deficient,  and  tryptophan-  produced  the  same  changes  as  conventional  heating  by  1  -2  ®C. 

requiring  strains  of  E,  coli  and 

fl.  subtilis  _  _ 


402 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


0.75,  2.90,  or  7.81  mW/cm^,  respectively.  Exposure 
lasted  for  35  min  and  caused  no  changes  in  the  sVin 
temperature  (0.01  °C  accuracy).  MMW  did  not  excite 
mechanoreceptors,  but  markedly  altered  the  threshold 
and  latency  of  their  response  to  mechanic  stimuli.  In 
some  receptors,  the  threshold  gradually  increased,  up 
to  180%  of  the  initial  value.  In  others,  the  threshold 
initially  decreased  by  8—12%,  recovered  within 
10  min,  and  increased  to  160%  by  the  25th  min  of 
irradiation.  After  that,  the  receptors  became  completely 
inactive  and  no  longer  responded  to  mechanical  stim¬ 
uli.  The  receptor  response  latency  under  exposiure 
could  fall  to  70%  or  rise  to  120%;  the  changes  could 
also  be  biphasic.  The  MMW-induced  changes  were 
maximum  at  73  GHz,  intermediate  at  55  GHz,  and 
minimum  at  61  GHz,  despite  that  the  incident  power 
at  61  GHz  was  4-fold  greater  than  at  55  GHz.  The 
authors  supposed  that  sensations  reported  by  patients 
under  MMW  therapy  (vibration,  warmth,  numbness, 
etc.)  may  result  from  functional  disturbances  and 
blockage  of  receptors. 

Hie  ability  of  humans  to  detect  weak  MMW  has 
also  been  repeatedly  established  under  double-blind 
conditions  [Lebedeva,  1993, 1995;  Kotrovskaia,  1994]. 
An  examinee  was  situated  in  an  isolated  room  and  haH 
no  contact  with  the  experimenter.  The  outer  surface  of 
the  hand  was  exposed  20  times,  for  1  min  each.  Expo¬ 
sures  were  separated  by  1  min  intervals  and  random¬ 
ized  with  sham  exposures.  Ihe  start  and  end  of  each 
irradiation  and  placebo  were  accompanied  by  sound 
clicks.  The  examinee  had  to  push  a  button  when  he 
felt  the  field.  Neither  examinee  nor  researcher  knew 
the  sequence  of  exposures  and  sham  exposures;  correct 
and  incorrect  reactions  were  recorded  automatically. 
Field  perception  was  characterized  by  the  reaction  re¬ 
liability  (the  percent  of  MMW  exposures  detected)  and 
the  false  alarms  level  (the  percentage  of  sham  expo¬ 
sures  erroneously  detected).  An  examinee  was  regarded 
as  capable  of  detecting  the  field  if  the  reaction  reliabil¬ 
ity  consistently  and  statistically  significantly  exceeded 
the  false  alarm  level.  With  different  frequencies  (37.7, 
42.25,  53.57  GHz),  intensities  (from  5  to  15  mW/cm^) 
and  bandwidths,  the  radiation  was  detected  by  30  to 
80%  of  examinees.  Interestingly,  37.7  GHz  radiation 
at  15  mW/cm^  was  detected  by  far  fewer  people  than 
42.25  GHz  at  5  mW/cm^.  Hie  reaction  latency  was 
usually  between  40  and  50  s.  It  was  speculated  that 
MMW  perception  could  involve  some  types  of  mecha¬ 
noreceptors  and  nociceptors. 

Teratogenic  effects  of  MMW 

The  only  study  of  MMW  teratogenic  effects  was 
performed  in  Drosophila  flies  by  Belyaev  et  al.  [1990]. 
Embryos  of  the  blastula  and  gastrula  stages  (2.5—3  h 


after  laying)  and  pupas  at  the  stage  of  imago  tissue 
formation  were  exposed  in  a  waveguide  at  46.35, 46.42, 
or  46.50  GHz,  for  4-4.5  h  at  0.1  mW/cm^  followed  by 
incubation  at  25  °C.  Irradiation  at  46.35  GHz,  but  not  at 
46.42  or  46.50  GHz,  caused  marked  effects.  Exposure  of 
pupas  increased  incidence  of  morphologic  abnormalities 
2-4.5  times  {P  <  .05),  but  did  not  influence  imago  sur¬ 
vival.  Exposure  of  embryos  decreased  survival  by  about 
30%  (P  <  .05)  and  enhanced  morphologic  abnormalities, 
but  this  effect  was  rather  variable.  Supposedly,  MMW 
disturbed  DNA-protein  interactions  that  determine  die  re¬ 
alization  of  the  ontogenetic  program. 

High-Power  MMW  Effects 

Over  the  past  several  years,  physiologic  effects 
of  high  levels  of  MMW  radiation  have  been  intensively 
studied  by  Frei  et  al.  [1995],  Frei  and  Ryan  [1997], 
and  Ryan  et  al.  [1996, 1997].  In  ketamine  anesthetized 
rats,  exposure  to  35  GHz,  75  mW/cm^  radiation 
(12-13  W/kg  whole  body  SAR)  increased  the  subcuta¬ 
neous  temperature  by  0.25  °C/min  and  the  colonic  tem¬ 
perature  by  0.08  °C!/min.  Concurrently  with  the  hyper¬ 
thermia,  mean  arterial  blood  pressure  first  increased 
slightly  and  then  fell  until  the  point  of  death.  Hypoten¬ 
sion  was  accompanied  by  vasodilation  in  the  mesen¬ 
teric  vascular  bed,  similar  to  what  occurs  in  heat  stroke 
induced  by  environmental  heating.  However,  the  onset 
of  vasodilation  and  hypotension  occurred  at  much 
lower  colonic  temperatures  (<  37.5  °C  vs.  >  41.5  °C). 
The  lethal  effect  became  irreversible  when  the  mean 
arterial  pressure  fell  to  75  nun  Hg,  even  if  the  exposure 
was  discontinued.  Most  intriguing,  pathologic  exami¬ 
nation  of  the  skin  of  lethally  exposed  animals  revealed 
no  significant  thermal  damage  or  fiiU-thickness  bum, 
and  cardiovascular  responses  did  not  mimic  those  ob¬ 
served  in  traditional  bum  models.  Searching  for  physi¬ 
ologic  mechanisms  mediating  the  hypotensive  re¬ 
sponse,  the  authors  established  that  nitric  oxide,  plate¬ 
let-activating  factor,  and  histamine  did  not  contribute 
to  it.  Exposure  of  rats  at  94  GHz  at  a  similar  SAR 
produced  a  comparable  pattern  of  heating  and  cardio¬ 
vascular  responses. 

Experimental  MMW  Therapy:  Animal  Studies 

Except  those  cited  above,  virtually  all  animal 
studies  on  MMW  effects  have  been  related  to  various 
issues  of  MMW  therapy,  such  as  stress  relief,  wound 
healing,  tissue  regeneration,  and  protection  from  ioniz¬ 
ing  radiations.  Paradoxically,  these  animal  studies  are 
still  less  numerous  and  comprehensive  than  reports  on 
MMW  therapy  in  humans.  Many  applications  of  the 
MMW  therapy  seem  to  have  never  been  adequately 
tested  in  animal  experiments.  For  example,  we  coimted 
38  publications  (including  meeting  abstracts)  on  van- 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


403 


ous  clinical  aspects  of  the  MMW  therapy  for  peptic 
ulcers,  but  could  find  just  one  animal  study  on  this 
subject.  It  seems  that  in  some  cases  animal  studies  did 
not  precede  the  clinical  use  of  MMW  (as  one  would 
expect),  but  were  carried  out  to  create  experimental 
justification  for  already  reported  clinical  data. 

Tissue  repair  and  regeneration.  Among  possible  ther¬ 
apeutic  applications  of  MMW,  the  more  plausible  and 
understandable  are  treatments  of  surface  lesions 
(wounds,  bums,  ulcers),  which  are  directly  reachable 
by  the  radiation.  Indeed,  this  application  has  gained 
sound  experimental  support  from  several  independent 
works.  Other  studies  have  demonstrated  that  repair  of 
deep  tissues  (bone  and  nerve)  could  also  be  stimulated 
by  MMW,  suggesting  that  such  effects  are  mediated 
by  activation  of  the  organism’s  own  recovery  mecha¬ 
nisms. 

Zemskov  et  al.  [1988]  studied  MMW  effects  on 
healing  of  skin  woimds  in  rabbits.  The  animals  were 
randomly  assigned  to  four  groups;  wounds  in  groups 
1  and  2  were  kept  aseptic,  and  those  in  groups  3  and 
4  were  infected  with  a  pathogenic  Staphylococcus.  The 
wound  surface  in  groups  1  and  3  was  treated  with  37 
or  46  GHz  CW  MMW  at  1  mW/cm^  for  30  min,  twice 
a  day  for  5  days.  A  hom  irradiator  was  placed  2-5  mm 
over  the  wound  surface.  Rabbits  in  groups  2  and  4 
served  as  untreated  control  animals.  MMW  decreased 
swelling  of  woimd  edges,  hyperemia,  and  infiltration, 
and  rapidly  reduced  the  wound  area  in  the  first  24  h; 
it  also  stimulated  phagocytosis  and  reduced  bacterial 
contamination.  Complete  healing  of  aseptic  wounds  in 
the  exposed  group  took  2.9  days  less  than  in  the  control 
group.  Infected  wounds  cleaned  up  and  filled  with 
granulation  tissue  on  days  14—16  in  the  exposed  group 
and  only  on  days  21  -23  in  the  respective  control  ani¬ 
mals. 

A  similar  protocol  was  used  in  a  double-blind 
replicative  study  by  Korpan  et  al.  [1994].  Rabbits  with 
4X6  cm  cutaneous  wounds  were  randomly  divided 
into  four  groups  of  18  animals  each.  The  wounds  of 
two  groups  were  rendered  septic  by  inoculating  them 
with  10®  Staphylococcus  cells.  The  wound  was  exposed 
for  30  min  a  day  (37  GHz  CW,  1  mW/cm^),  for  5  days 
in  one  aseptic  group  and  for  7  days  in  a  septic  one. 
The  hom  aperture  was  10  cm  from  the  wound  surface. 
The  other  two  groups  were  sham-irradiated  and  served 
as  aseptic  and  septic  control  groups.  In  irradiated  am- 
mals,  woimd  edge  swelling  and  hyperemia  subsided 
faster,  and  granulation  tissue  filled  the  wound  earlier. 
On  day  7,  for  example,  the  surface  area  of  septic 
wounds  decreased  by  19%  in  the  control  group,  and  by 
44%  in  the  irradiated  group.  The  mean  daily  decrease 
in  wound  surface  area  of  the  irradiated  animals  was 


significantly  greater  than  in  the  control  animals:  7.9% 
vs.  3.2%  in  the  aseptic  groups,  and  6.3%  vs.  2.7% 
in  the  septic  groups  (P  <  .05).  Exposures  stimulated 
phagocytic  activity  of  neutrophils  and  decreased  the 
blood  level  of  circulating  immune  complexes.  Thus, 
MMW  irradiation  enhanced  both  septic  and  aseptic 
wound  healing  and  stimulated  immune  function. 

Detlavs  et  al.  [1993,  1994,  1995, 1996]  have  ex¬ 
tensively  studied  MMW  effects  on  the  composition  of 
granulation  fibrous  tissue  (GFT)  during  early  stages  of 
wound  healing.  Their  experiments  were  performed  in 
rats  with  incised  fiill-thickness  dermal  wounds.  The 
injured  area  was  exposed  for  30  min  daily  for  5  days 
at  10  mW/cm^  (53.53  or  42.19  GHz  CW,  or  42.19  G¥iz 
with  200  MHz  frequency  modulation.  Control  ani¬ 
mals  underwent  the  same  manipulations,  but  were 
sham  exposed.  GFT  samples  from  the  wound  were 
taken  for  analysis  on  the  7th  day.  CW  irradiation  sig¬ 
nificantly  decreased  the  GFT  contents  of  glycoproteins 
(hexosamines,  hexoses,  and  sialic  acids),  indicating  a 
suppression  of  the  inflammatory  process.  In  contrast, 
modulated  MMW  enhanced  the  inflammation  and  in¬ 
creased  the  production  of  glycoproteins.  CW  exposure 
decreased  the  GFT  content  of  hydroxyproline,  which 
is  a  marker  for  total  collagen,  to  79—85%  of  the  control 
(P  <  .01),  whereas  the  modulated  regimen  increased 
it  to  126-133%  (P  <  .001).  CW  radiation  at  53.53  GHz 
usually  was  more  effective  than  at  42.19  GHz.  Both 
the  anti-  and  proinflammatory  effects  of  MMW  could 
be  useful  in  clinical  practice.  CW  exposure  can  be 
recommended  for  early  stages  of  the  wound  healing 
when  control  of  the  inflammatory  reaction  is  desirable. 
Modulated  radiation  can  be  used  to  promote  ultimate 
recovery  in  slow-healing  wounds  or  in  cases  of  healing 
deceleration  in  the  late  stages  of  tissue  repair. 

Ragimov  et  al.  [1991]  used  MMW  to  stimulate 
the  repair  of  an  experimentally  produced  bone  defects 
in  rabbits.  A  hole  6  mm  in  diameter  was  drilled  in  the 
lower  jaw  bone,  and  the  wound  was  sutured.  The  first 
exposure  for  30  or  60  min  was  performed  the  next  day, 
and  six  more  exposures  were  done  over  the  next 
2  weeks.  The  shaven  nape  was  exposed  from  a  hom 
(2-cm^  aperture)  placed  3—4  mm  from  the  skin 
(5.6-mm  wavelengfli,  25  mW  output  power).  Control 
animals  were  handled  similarly.  Five  animals  from 
each  group  were  killed  every  week  for  morphologic 
and  roentgenographic  analysis  of  bone  repair.  One 
week  after  the  operation,  the  extent  of  reparative  os¬ 
teogenesis  was  the  same  in  all  the  groups.  Later  on, 
the  regeneration  was  faster  in  exposed  animals,  particu¬ 
larly  in  the  group  with  60-min  exposures.  By  the  end 
of  the  observation  period  (28  days),  the  appearance  of 
the  traumatic  defect  in  the  control  group  was  nearly 
the  same  as  it  was  in  exposed  animals  on  day  21. 


404 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


Hence,  irradiation  shortened  the  bone  repair  time,  by 
approximately  1  week. 

Kolosova  and  coauthors  [1996a]  estabhshed  that 
MMW  treatment  could  promote  regeneration  of  a  dam¬ 
aged  peripheral  nerve.  The  sciatic  nerve  in  40  rats  was 
transected  in  the  thigh  region  and  sutured.  Skin  over 
the  injury  area  was  irradiated  every  third  day  for 
10  min  with  4-mW/cm^  54-GHz  radiation  for  7  or 
20  days;  control  rats  were  sham  irradiated.  Exposures 
did  not  change  the  skin  temperature  (0.1  °C  accuracy). 
Upon  the  completion  of  the  treatment  course,  the  nerve 
was  isolated,  and  the  extent  of  regeneration  was  as¬ 
sessed  electrophysiologicaUy.  After  the  7-day  course, 
the  regeneration  distance  was  4.8  mm  vs.  3.0  mm  in 
the  control  animals  (P  >  .05).  After  the  20-day  course, 
the  effect  became  statistically  significant:  the  regenera¬ 
tion  distance  was  18.4  ±  0.4  mm  versus  14.0  ± 
1.4  mm  {P  <  .01).  The  nerve  conduction  velocity  also 
significantly  increased,  whereas  the  amplitude  and  du¬ 
ration  of  the  action  potential  were  not  affected. 

In  a  continuation  study  [Kolosova  et  al.,  1996b], 
the  same  irradiations  were  performed  for  2  weeks  after 
the  injury,  and  the  nerve  was  isolated  for  examination 
in  5  months.  Indices  of  regeneration  were  the  com¬ 
pound  action  potential  amplitude  and  conduction  ve¬ 
locity  at  different  distances  (5  to  19  mm)  distal  from 
the  suture.  Both  parameters  were  higher  in  the  exposed 
animals.  For  example,  19  mm  from  the  suture,  the 
velocity  was  20.4  ±  0.9  m/s  vs.  15.5  ±  0.9  m/s  in 
control  animals  (P  <  .05),  and  the  amphtude  was  313 
±  34  nV  versus  156  ±  15  (P  <  .001).  Hence, 
exposures  not  only  stimulated  the  growth  of  nerve  fi¬ 
bers,  but  facilitated  their  functional  maturation  as  well. 

Tumor  growth  and  development.  Experiments  by 
Smirnov  et  al.  [1991]  were  designed  to  evaluate  the 
possible  use  of  MMW  for  the  treatment  of  cancer. 
VMR  tumor  cells  with  a  high  metastasizing  activity 
were  inoculated  into  the  tibial  muscle  of  A/SNL  line 
mice  at  5  X  10®  cells/animal.  Exposure  for  5  days,  1  h 
daily  (12.5  mW/cm^  7.09-  to  7.12-mm  wavelength, 
50  Hz  modulation),  increased  the  average  life  span  by 
17%  compared  with  sham  control  cells.  The  number 
of  visible  metastases  decreased  by  more  than  50%  in 
lungs,  liver,  kidney,  and  adrenal  gliids,  but  not  in 
lymph  nodes.  The  authors  noted  variability  of  the 
MMW  effect,  and  in  one  series  exposure  even  intensi¬ 
fied  metastasizing. 

C3iemov  et  al.  [1989]  attempted  to  suppress  ma¬ 
lignant  growth  by  extremely  high  peak  power  nanosec¬ 
ond  MMW  pulses.  Rats  were  exposed  immediately 
after  inoculation  with  10, 25,  or  50  (X  IC^)  Walker  tumor 
cells  and  received  two  more  exposures  during  the 
next  2  days.  Each  exposure  consisted  of  43  pulses 


delivered  at  40-s  intervals.  Two  regimens  were 
tested:  8-trmi  wavelength  at  4-5  MW  output  power, 
yielding  20  kV/cm  E-field  level  at  the  skin  surface, 
and  5  mm,  8-10  MW,  30  kV/cm,  respectively.  The 
first  of  these  regimens  retarded  tumor  growth  1.5 
times  and  increased  the  life  span  by  17-25  days  after 
the  inoculations  with  10  and  25  (X  10^)  cells  the 
other  regimen  was  less  effective.  The  antitumor  ef¬ 
fect  was  presumably  mediated  by  stimulation  of  im¬ 
mune  system,  namely  the  so-called  skin-associated 
lymphoid  tissue.  Preliminary  studies  with  exposure 
before  tumor  inoculation  showed  that  MMW  re¬ 
tarded  the  tumor  growth  nearly  twofold. 

Because  of  concern  about  possible  adverse  effects 
of  MMW  use  in  cancer  patients.  Brill’  and  Panina 
[1994]  studied  the  transplantabihty  and  growth  of  a 
benign  tumor  (mammary  fibroadenoma)  in  rats.  Two 
tumor  pieces  were  implanted  to  the  right  and  left  sides 
through  a  cut  in  the  middle  of  the  abdomen.  In  20  of 
49  operated  animals,  tissues  in  the  cut  were  exposed 
to  MMW  (42.0—43.3  GHz  band)  for  15  min  before  the 
implantation,  the  other  animals  served  as  control.  In 
3  weeks,  39  of  58  tumors  (67.3%)  resolved  in  the 
control  group,  but  only  11  of  40  (27.5%)  resolved  in 
the  exposed  animals  (P  <  .001).  The  percentages  of 
stable  and  growing  unresolved  tumors  in  both  the 
groups  were  the  same.  Hence,  a  single  MMW  exposure 
of  the  implantation  area  increased  tumor  transplantabil- 
ity,  although  did  not  affect  its  proliferation. 

Stress  alleviation  and  prevention  effects.  Temur’iants 
and  Chuyan  [1992]  demonstrated  that  MMW  can  alle¬ 
viate  immobihzation-induced  stress  in  rats.  The  authors 
estabhshed  that  this  MMW  effect  differed  in  specimens 
with  different  characteristic  levels  of  exploratory  activ¬ 
ity,  as  evaluated  by  an  open-field  testing.  In  further 
studies,  the  open-field  testing  was  always  done  before 
stressing  and  MMW  exposures,  to  divide  the  popula¬ 
tion  into  appropriate  groups. 

One  of  these  studies  [Temur’iants  et  al.,  1993] 
was  performed  on  350  animals  divided  by  low  (LA), 
medium  (MA),  and  high  (HA)  activity.  Each  activity 
level  was  subdivided  into  five  groups;  group  1  was 
cage  control,  and  groups  2—5  were  housed  for  9  days 
in  individual  boxes  restricting  their  motion.  Animals 
in  groups  3—5  received  daily  30-min  MMW  exposures 
of  the  occipital  area,  left  hip,  or  right  hip,  respectively 
(5.6-mm  wavelength,  10  mW/cm^).  Stress  severity  was 
quantified  by  indices  of  the  ‘  ‘nonspecific  resistivity’  ’  of 
the  orgamsm,  which  included  the  Hpids  and  peroxidase 
contents  in  neutrophils,  and  succinate  and  alpha-2- 
glycerophosphate  dehydrogenases  activities  in  lym¬ 
phocytes.  A  typical  stress  reaction  developed  in  unex¬ 
posed  MA  rats:  by  days  6-9,  the  contents  of  lipids  and 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


405 


peroxidase  decreased  by  21—24%,  and  the  activity  of 
dehydrogenases  fell  by  36-46%.  Occipital  or  right  hip 
MMW  irradiation  prevented  die  stress  reaction  in  MA 
rats,  whereas  the  left  hip  exposure  was  not  effective. 
The  immobilization  stress  was  the  most  pronounced  in 
unexposed  HA  animals;  MMW  exposures  of  the  left 
hip  or  occipital  area  prevented  stress,  whereas  expo¬ 
sures  of  the  right  hip  had  little  effect.  In  LA  animals, 
the  stress  reaction  was  relatively  weak,  and  all  the  types 
of  MMW  treatment  alleviated  it. 

The  next  study  used  640  albino  rats,  all  with  a 
medium  level  of  locomotor  activity  [Temur’ iants  et  al., 
1994].  The  same  indices  as  above  were  compared  in 
four  groups:  cage  control,  hypokinesia  without  expo¬ 
sures,  exposures  without  hypokinesia,  and  both.  The 
occipital  area  was  exposed  for  30  min/day,  9  days  at 
either  5.6-  or  7.1-mm  wavelength.  Exposures  without 
hypokinesia  strongly  activated  succinate  dehydroge¬ 
nase  (up  to  twofold,  P  <  .05).  Irradiation  at  5.6  mm 
(but  not  at  7.1  mm)  increased  the  activities  of  acid  and 
alkaline  phosphatases  and  glycerophosphate  dehydro¬ 
genase  by  20-30%.  Both  wavelengths  prevented  or 
reversed  stress-induced  changes,  5.6  mm  was  more 
effective.  Further  experiments  with  5.6-mm  radiation 
established  that  exposures  for  15  min/day  were  less 
effective  than  for  30  min/day,  and,  paradoxically,  in¬ 
creasing  the  exposure  duration  to  60  min/day  elimi¬ 
nated  its  antistress  effect. 

A  similar  exposure  technique  was  independently 
used  by  Arzumanov  et  al.  [1994].  The  occipital  area 
was  exposed  at  5.6  mm  simultaneously  with  immobili¬ 
zation  of  the  rat’s  head  for  60  min/day  for  10  days. 
This  stressing  suppressed  feeding  and  sexual  behavior. 
It  also  increased  the  motor  activity  in  a  swimming  test 
to  the  same  degree  in  exposed  and  unexposed  groups. 
The  authors  hypothesized  that  the  immobilization 
stress  was  too  severe  and  might  mask  MMW  effects, 
so  in  the  next  series  rats  were  immobilized  and  exposed 
for  only  30  min/day  for  9  days.  The  stress  effect  was 
assessed  by  the  electric  shock  threshold,  free-access 
water  consumption,  and  Vogel’s  choice  test  (consump¬ 
tion  of  water  when  each  attempt  to  drink  is  accompa¬ 
nied  by  an  electric  shock).  Immobilization  without  ex¬ 
posure  decreased  threefold  the  number  of  attempts  to 
drink  in  Vogel’s  test;  but,  when  immobilization  was 
combined  with  MMW  exposures,  this  index  remained 
the  same  as  in  cage  control  animals.  The  shock  thresh¬ 
old  and  free-access  water  consumption  were  not 
changed  by  MMW. 

It  is  interesting  to  note  some  parallelism  in  the 
above  two  studies.  Using  the  same  exposure  proce¬ 
dures,  but  different  protocols  and  end  points,  both  re¬ 
search  groups  established  that  there  is  an  anti-stress 
effect  of  a  30-min  irradiation,  but  there  is  no  such 


effect  if  the  exposure  duration  is  60  min.  The  decreased 
efficacy  of  a  more  prolonged  MMW  irradiation  has 
been  observed  in  some  other  clinical  and  experimental 
studies  as  well,  but  this  unusual  time  dependence  has 
not  yet  been  discussed  or  explained. 

Combined  MMW  and  ionizing  radiation  exposure. 
Gubkina  et  al.  [1996]  researched  whether  low-intensity 
MMW  can  alleviate  the  effect  of  X-rays  in  rats.  The 
abdominal  area  was  shaved  and  exposed  to  MMW  in  a 
frequency-sweep  regimen  (38  to  53  GHz)  at  7  mW/cm^ 
for  23  days,  30  min/day.  Control  animals  not  treated  by 
MMW  undawent  all  the  same  manipulations,  including 
shaving.  Exposures  to  150  keV  X-rays  were  performed 
daily  during  the  last  8  days  of  the  MMW  course  up  to  a 
total  dose  of  24  roentgen.  Blood  serum  and  brain  tissue 
samples  w^  collected  the  next  day  after  the  end  of 
exposures.  MMW  alone  did  not  alter  the  serum  glucose 
level  (6.24  ±  0.79  mM  versus  6.53  ±  0.80  mM  in  con¬ 
trol  animals);  X-ray  exposure  increased  it  to  10.37  ± 
0.75  mM  (F  <  .05),  but  combming  X-rays  with  MMW 
prevented  this  rise  (6.81  ±  0.37  mM).  MMW  decreased 
the  content  of  the  soluble  form  of  the  acidic  glial  fibrillar 
protein  (s-AGFP)  1.5-2  times  (F  <  .05)  in  all  analyzed 
structures  of  the  brain  (cerebellum,  midbrain,  and  medulla 
oblongata)  and  did  not  change  the  content  of  its  fibrillar 
form  (f-AGFP).  X-rays  decreased  the  levels  of  bofla  forms 
of  the  protein  two  to  three  times.  After  combined  treat¬ 
ment  with  MMW  and  X-rays,  both  s-  and  f-AGFP  levels 
did  not  differ  ftom  control  animals  and  were  significantly 
(F  <  .05  and  F  <  .01)  higher  than  after  X-rays  only. 
The  authors  concluded  that  MMW  alleviated  the  effect 
of  X-rays  at  both  cellular  and  organism  levels. 

Two  other  studies  are  of  interest,  although  they 
are  only  brief  reports  that  do  not  contain  essential  ex¬ 
perimental  details.  Kuzmanova  and  Ivanov  [1995] 
studied  changes  in  the  surface  electrical  charge  of 
erythrocytes  after  MMW  and  y-ray  exposures  in  rats.  The 
shin  of  the  right  hind  limb  was  exposed  to  5.6-mm 
radiation  for  10  days,  20  min/day  at  1.1  mW/cm^ 
followed  with  a  6  Gy  whole-body  dose  of  ^^^Co  y-rays. 
The  surface  charge  of  erythrocytes  was  assessed  from 
their  electrophoretic  mobility  (EPM)  3,  7,  14,  21,  and 
30  days  after  the  exposures.  The  MMW  treatment  alone 
had  practically  no  effect,  whereas  y-rays  alone  de¬ 
creased  EPM  for  the  whole  period  of  observation. 
When  y-irradiation  was  preceded  by  MMW,  the  EPM 
remained  the  same  as  in  control  animals.  The  authors 
concluded  that  MMW  stabilized  the  membrane  struc¬ 
ture  and  increased  its  resistivity  to  y-radiation. 

Tsutsaeva  et  al.  [1995]  examined  MMW-induced 
survival  changes  in  mice  after  a  lethal  dose  of  X-rays. 
Irradiation  with  pulse-modulated  MMW  at  1  |iW/cm^ 
continued  for  80  or  24  h  before  X-ray  exposure  or  was 


406 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


simultaneous  with  the  X-ray  exposure.  All  tested  X- 
ray  doses  (7,  7.5,  and  8  Gy)  were  100%  lethal  with  an 
average  life  span  of  6-8  days;  the  first  fatalities  oc¬ 
curred  on  days  4-6.  MMW  treatment  for  80  h  before 
7  Gy  of  X-rays  delayed  the  first  deaths  until  day  14; 
50%  of  the  population  died  within  30  days,  and  100% 
of  the  animals  died  by  day  96.  The  MMW  treatment 
for  24  h  appeared  even  more  effective:  first  deaths 
occurred  on  day  8,  50%  of  the  animals  died  within  30 
days,  but  no  more  fatalities  were  observed  through  day 
96.  Microwave  irradiation  simultaneously  with  the  X- 
rays  (7  Gy)  increased  the  survive  and  life  span  of  mice 
approximately  fivefold.  The  protective  effect  of  24-h 
MMW  pretreatment  decreased  with  increasing  X-ray 
dose  to  7.5  Gy  and  became  insubstantial  at  8  Gy. 

MMW  Therapy:  Clinical  Studies 

The  first  clinical  trials  of  MMW  therapy  began 
in  1977,  and  today  the  method  has  been  officially  ap¬ 
proved  by  the  Russian  Ministry  of  Health  and  is  used 
widely.  As  mentioned  in  the  bitroduction  section,  by 
1995  over  3  million  people  have  been  treated  at  more 
than  a  thousand  specialized  centers  as  well  as  at  regular 
hospitals  [Lebedeva  and  Betskii,  1995]. 

General  issues  of  the  MMW  therapy.  MMW  therapy 
involves  repetitive  local  exposures  of  certain  body 
areas  with  low-intensity  MMW.  The  area(s)  to  be  ex¬ 
posed,  the  radiation  wavelength,  and  daily  duration  of 
procedures  are  determined  by  the  physician  based  on 
the  disease  and  the  condition  of  the  particular  patient. 
The  radiation  intensity  is  usually  regarded  as  a  less 
important  variable.  For  most  diseases,  the  daily  expo¬ 
sure  varies  firom  15  to  60  min,  and  the  therapy  lasts 
for  8-15  days. 

Publications  on  the  clinical  use  of  MMW  number 
in  the  hundreds.  Many  of  them  have  claimed  that 
MMW  monotherapy  is  more  effective  (sometimes,  far 
more  effective)  than  conventional  methods,  such  as 
drug  therapy,  for  a  variety  of  diseases  and  disorders. 
In  some  cases,  MMW  has  helped  the  patients  who  had 
already  tried  all  other  known  therapies  without  success 
and  were  considered  incurable.  At  the  same  time, 
MMW  seldom  caused  any  adverse  effects  or  allergies. 
MMW  in  combination  with  drug  therapy  facilitated 
favorable  effects  and/or  reduced  adverse  side  effects 
of  drugs.  Some  authors  reported  that  MMW  might  be 
highly  effective  or  not  effective  at  all,  contingent  on 
the  patient’s  condition,  individual  sensitivity  to  MMW, 
and  parameters  of  irradiation.  A  few  authors  reported 
that  MMW  therapy  was  always  less  effective  than  con¬ 
ventional  techniques,  and  we  found  only  one  clinical 
study  saying  that  MMW  therapy  was  not  effective  at 
all  [Serebriakova  and  Dovganiuk,  1989], 


Diseases  reported  to  be  successfully  treated  with 
MMW  belong  to  rather  diversified  groups.  Hie  most 
common  applications  of  MMW  are  for  gastric  and  duo¬ 
denal  ulcers  (about  25%  of  studies);  cardiovascular  dis¬ 
eases,  including  angina  pectoris,  hypertension,  isch¬ 
emic  heart  disease,  infarction  (about  25%);  respiratory 
sicknesses,  including  tuberculosis,  sarcoidosis,  bron¬ 
chitis,  asthma  (about  15%);  and  skin  diseases,  includ¬ 
ing  wounds,  trophic  ulcers,  bums,  atopic  dermatitis 
(about  10%).  These  percentages  are  approximate,  be¬ 
cause  we  could  not  cover  all  clinical  studies  published 
and  because  many  authors  reported  treatment  of  several 
diseases  in  one  paper  (so  the  sum  would  be  over  100%). 
Isolated  studies  claimed  successful  MMW  treatment 
for  asthenia,  neuralgia,  diabetes  mellitus,  osteochon¬ 
drosis,  acute  viral  hepatitis,  glomerulonephritis,  alco¬ 
holism,  etc.  MMW  were  also  used  for  alleviation  of 
toxic  effects  of  chemotherapy  in  cancer  patients  and  in 
preventive  medicine  and  health  resort  therapy. 

In  most  cases,  physicians  use  speciaHz^  MMW 
generators,  which  are  produced  commercially  by  the 
medical  equipment  industry.  These  generators  operate 
at  average  radiation  intensities  of  10  mW/cm^  or  less  in 
CW  or  frequency-modulated  regimens  at  certain  fixed 
frequencies  or  within  a  wide  frequency  band.  Three 
models  have  been  reported  used  more  often  than  all 
others  together:  “Yav’-1-7,1”  (7.1-mm  wavelength, 
42.19  GHz)  (36%),  “Yav’-l-5,6”  (5.6  mm,  53.53  GHz) 
(31%),  and  “Electronica-KVCh”  (4.9  mm,  59-63 
GHz  band)  (10%).  Different  generators  were  often  used 
within  a  single  study  to  compare  their  therapeutic  effi¬ 
cacy;  and  more  often  than  not,  the  efficacy  was  differ¬ 
ent,  depending  on  the  disease  and  patients’  condition. 
Some  authors  used  in  vitro  tests  to  determine  which 
wavelength  is  more  suitable  for  a  particular  patient 
before  the  onset  of  the  therapy  [Novikova  et  al.,  1995]. 
However,  we  have  been  unable  to  identify  references 
to  the  original  studies  that  had  shown  why  the  frequen¬ 
cies  of  42.19,  53.53,  and  59-63  GHz  (and  not  others) 
should  be  used  for  therapy. 

In  about  30%  of  clinical  studies,  the  radiation 
is  applied  to  standard  acupuncture  points  or  so-called 
biologically  active  points.  This  procedure  is  often  com¬ 
bined  with  finding  the  individual  “resonance”  fre¬ 
quency  based  on  MMW-evoked  “sensations”  of  the 
patient  (a  method  called  “microwave  resonance  ther¬ 
apy”).  In  our  opinion,  this  procedure  should  be  re¬ 
garded  as  a  variety  of  acupuncture  techniques  along 
with  electropimcture,  acupressure,  etc.  Assuming  the 
therapeutic  efficacy  of  these  techniques,  it  is  no  sur¬ 
prise  that  MMW  can  be  effective  as  well:  irradiation 
at  about  10  mW/cm^  can  also  stimulate  acupimcture 
points  by  subtle  heating  or  thermal  “micromassage.” 
Clinical  effects  of  the  “MMW-puncture”  are  nonspe- 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


407 


cific,  meaning  that  they  are  similar  to  those  of  tradi¬ 
tional  puncture-based  techniques.  These  effects  are  de¬ 
termined  by  the  selection  of  acupuncture  points,  inten¬ 
sity  and  duration  of  their  stimulation,  rather  than  by 
using  MMW  or  other  means  for  the  stimulation.  There¬ 
fore,  studies  using  the  MMW-pimcture  seem  to  be  of 
greater  interest  for  the  acupuncture  practice  than  for 
die  bioelectromagnetic  science;  such  studies  will  be 
left  beyond  the  scope  of  the  present  review. 

Other  areas  of  MMW  exposure  include  sternum 
and  xiphoid  process,  skin  projection  of  the  diseased 
organ,  large  joints,  and  the  surface  of  wounds  and  ul¬ 
cers.  Once  again,  we  could  not  identify  the  studies 
that  originally  provided  the  rationale  and  experimental 
proof  for  the  useful  nature  of  MMW  exposure  of  these 
particular  body  areas.  Except  for  the  surface  lesions, 
the  radiation  is  unable  to  penetrate  to  diseased  organs. 
This  fact  is  understood  and  discussed  by  many  physi¬ 
cians,  but  no  proven  explanation  of  the  MMW  therapy 
has  been  given  yet. 

Many  clinical  studies  do  not  conform  to  conven¬ 
tional  quality  criteria  (double-blind  protocol,  placebo 
treatment,  adequate  statistics,  etc.).  However,  still  oth¬ 
ers  do  conform  and  a  lot  of  matching  results  have  been 
provided  by  independent  groups  of  investigators.  Some 
cUnical  data  on  the  MMW  efficacy  are  quite  impres¬ 
sive,  and  a  few  examples  are  given  below  (see  a  spe¬ 
cialized  review  by  Rojavin  and  Ziskin  [1998]  for  addi¬ 
tional  detail). 

Examples  of  MMW  therapy.  Korpan  and  Saradeth 
[1995]  performed  a  double-blind  controlled  trial  of 
MMW  therapy  for  postoperative  septic  wounds.  The 
study  group  consisted  of  141  patients,  31-83  yr  old, 
with  purulent  wounds  after  an  abdominal  surgery.  The 
wounds  were  infected  mostly  with  5.  aureus  and  Bacte- 
roidesfragilis.  MMW  therapy  with  1  mW/cm^,  37  GHz 
CW  radiation  was  used  in  71  patients.  Wound  surface 
and  adjacent  soft  tissue  were  exposed  for  30  min/day 
for  7  days.  The  remaining  70  patients  received  placebo 
therapy  from  a  similar  but  defective  MMW  generator 
(neither  patients  nor  physicians  knew  it  was  defective). 
Radical  surgical  cleaning  of  the  wounds  was  performed 
regularly  in  both  groups.  The  MMW-treated  patients 
showed  1.8  times  more  rapid  wound  clearance  (5.6  ± 
0.6  vs.  10.2  ±  0.5  days  in  control  subjects),  1.7  times 
earlier  onset  of  wound  granulation  (4.9  ±  0.2  vs.  8.7 
±  0.4  days),  and  1.8  times  earlier  onset  of  epitheliza- 
tion  (7.0  ±  0.4  vs.  12.8  ±  0.6  days).  The  average  daily 
decrease  of  wound  surface  area  in  the  treated  patients 
was  twice  that  of  the  control  subjects  (7.1%  vs.  3.2%). 
The  authors  concluded  that  low  intensity  MMW  seems 
to  be  an  effective  postoperative  wound  treatment. 

Poslavsky  et  al.  [1989]  used  MMW  as  a  monoth¬ 


erapy  in  317  patients  with  duodenal  and  gastric  ulcers. 
The  ulcer  diameter  ranged  from  0.3  to  3.5  cm,  and 
the  disease  duration  was  from  several  months  to  more 
than  10  years.  The  epigastric  area  was  exposed  at 
10  mW/cm^,  5.6-mm  wavelength  for  30  min  daily, 
excluding  weekends,  until  complete  ulcer  cicatrization. 
A  comparable  control  group  of  50  patients  received 
conventional  drug  therapy.  The  ulcers  cicatrized  in 
95.3%  of  MMW-treated  patients,  with  mean  healing 
duration  of  19.8  ±  0.45  days.  The  respective  control 
group  values  were  substantially  worse,  namely  78% 
and  33.6  ±  1.12  days.  The  ulcer  relapse  rate  was  sig¬ 
nificantly  lower  after  the  MMW  therapy. 

Megdiatov  et  al.  [1995]  evaluated  the  efficacy  of 
MMW  therapy  (42.2  GHz,  10  mW/cm^)  in  52  patients 
with  neuralgia.  The  radiation  was  applied  to  areas 
where  branches  of  the  affected  trigeminal  nerve  ap¬ 
proach  the  skin  (10  exposures  or  sham  exposures, 
15  min  each,  concurrently  with  medicinal  therapy). 
Evident  clinical  improvement  (decrease  of  the  inci¬ 
dence  and  severity  of  pain  attacks)  was  achieved  in  19 
of  27  patients  treated  with  MMW,  and  only  in  4  of  25 
patients  receiving  placebo  exposures. 

Liusov  et  al.  [1995]  studied  MMW  therapy  ef¬ 
fects  in  100  patients  with  unstable  angina  pectoris  (this 
is  an  intermediate  condition  between  stable  angina  pec¬ 
toris  and  infarction,  and  is  characterized  by  a  high  risk 
of  myocardial  necrosis).  The  patients  were  divided  into 
four  groups.  Group  1  was  treated  by  MMW  only  (10 
exposures  of  the  right  shoulder  joint  for  30  min/day, 
7.1  mm);  these  patients  ceased  taking  any  vasodilators 
and  antianginal  medicines.  In  group  2,  the  same  MMW 
therapy  was  combined  with  drugs  (beta-adrenergic  an¬ 
tagonists,  calcium  blockers,  organic  nitrates,  etc.). 
Group  3  received  the  same  drug  therapy  and  placebo 
exposures,  and  group  4  received  the  drug  therapy  only. 
The  therapy  in  groups  1  and  2  substantially  decreased 
the  rate  and  severity  of  angina  attacks,  making  it  possi¬ 
ble  to  reduce  the  amount  of  nitroglycerin  taken.  It  also 
decreased  blood  levels  of  malonic  dialdehyde  and  die- 
nic  conjugates,  normalized  T-helper  and  T-suppresser 
ratios,  reduced  the  diameter  of  venules,  and  increased 
the  diameter  of  arterioles.  No  significant  improvement 
of  the  lipid  peroxidation  system,  inunune  status,  or 
microcirculation  was  achieved  in  groups  3  and  4. 

Karlov  and  coauthors  [1991]  used  MMW  in  a 
combined  therapy  for  cerebral  circulatory  disorders. 
The  79  patients  in  the  study  were  mostly  50-80  yr  old 
and  suffered  from  hypertensive  disease  and/or  athero¬ 
sclerosis;  61  patients  were  hospitalized  for  acute  isch¬ 
emic  cerebred  infarction,  13  for  a  transient  disorder  of 
the  cerebral  circulation,  and  5  for  circulatory  encepha¬ 
lopathy.  Patients  were  divided  into  two  comparable 
groups.  Both  groups  received  the  same  drug  therapy 


408 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


(hypotensive,  anticoagulant,  cardiotonic,  and  other 
remedies),  whereas  the  first  one  was  also  treated  with 
MMW  (10  days,  30  min/day,  4.9-nim  wavelength). 
Patients  of  the  second  group  were  sham-exposed  under 
a  double-blind  protocol.  A  favorable  therapeutic  effect 
was  reported  in  70%  of  the  patients  in  group  1  and  in 
40%  in  group  2.  MMW  procedures  helped  decrease 
blood  pressure,  normalize  the  blood  glucose  level,  and 
eliminate  serum  fibrinogen  B. 

The  efficacy  of  the  MMW  therapy  is  often  illus¬ 
trated  by  individual  clinical  cases.  Naumcheva  [1994] 
described  the  history  of  a  54-yr-old  male  patient,  who 
had  two  myocardial  infarctions  within  a  2-yr  interval. 
He  experienced  severe  attacks  of  angina  both  on  exer¬ 
tion  and  at  rest  and  took  up  to  80  nitroglycerin  tablets 
a  day  (0.4  mg).  Repeated  courses  of  in-  and  outpatient 
treatment  with  beta-adrenoblockers,  nitrates,  plasma¬ 
pheresis,  etc,  had  little  effect.  Finally,  he  was  hospital¬ 
ized  in  a  grave  condition  with  a  third  infarction.  Con¬ 
ventional  methods  were  ineffective,  so  MMW  therapy 
was  ordered  on  day  10  after  admission  (7.1-nmi  wave¬ 
length,  for  30  min/day  to  the  left  border  of  sternum), 
Cardialgia  decreased  after  two  exposures  and  nighttime 
pain  attacks  ceased  after  seven  procedures.  The  nitro¬ 
glycerin  intake  was  decreased  to  1-2  tablets/day  after 
12  exposures.  After  the  MMW  course,  the  patient  did 
not  have  angina  attacks  for  3-4  days,  was  able  to  walk 
up  to  5  km  a  day,  and  was  discharged  in  a  satisfactory 
condition.  Another  man,  age  62,  was  admitted  to  hospi¬ 
tal  with  a  severe  macrofocal  infarction,  collapse,  extra- 
systolia,  and  acute  insufficiency  and  aneurysm  of  the 
left  ventricle.  Three  days  of  intensive  treatment  still 
left  the  patient  in  this  critical  condition.  Even  the  first 
MMW  irradiation  of  sternum  (5.6-mm  wavelength, 
three  10-min  exposures  with  5-min  intervals)  had  a 
striking  effect:  it  arrested  angina  attacks  and  normal¬ 
ized  sleep,  and  indices  of  hemodynamics  stabilized 
within  5  days  of  the  MMW  therapy.  The  patient  was 
discharged  in  a  satisfactory  condition  and  later  under¬ 
went  two  additional  MMW  courses  as  a  preventive 
measure. 

Side  effects  of  MMW  therapy.  As  a  rule,  MMW  ther¬ 
apy  is  well  tolerated  by  patients,  and  this  is  regarded 
as  one  of  its  advantages  over  a  drug  tlierapy.  Aldiough 
most  investigators  reported  no  negative  reactions  to 
MMW,  others  observed  them  in  up  to  26%  of  patients 
[Golovacheva,  1995].  The  possibility  of  induction  of 
adverse  health  effects  by  a  local,  low-intensity  MMW 
irradiation  is  of  potential  significance  for  setting  health 
and  safety  standards  and  requires  special  attention. 

Kuz’menko  [1989]  summarized  experience  with 
MMW  use  in  200  patients  with  cerebrovascular  dis¬ 
eases,  such  as  cerebral  circulation  insufficiency,  discir- 


culatory  encephalopathy,  and  cerebral  insult  conse¬ 
quences.  Irradiation  of  the  sinocarotid  zone  at  various 
frequencies  between  58  and  62  GHz,  0.3-1  mW/cm^, 
was  performed  for  20  min/day  or  less,  for  4  to  10 
days.  MMW  therapy  facilitated  recovery  in  56-77% 
of  patients  with  different  pathologies.  However,  it  also 
caused  adverse  side  effects,  including  elevation  of  the 
blood  pressure  (nine  cases),  induction  of  a  diencephalic 
crisis  or  paroxysm  during  irradiation  (seven  cases),  an¬ 
gina  attacks  (three  cases),  fever  (five  cases),  and  en¬ 
hancement  of  menstrual  bleeding  (six  cases).  In  hyper¬ 
tension  patients,  MMW  usually  decreased  blood  pres¬ 
sure  by  10-15  mm  Hg,  but  occasionally  increased  it 
by  20-30  mm  Hg.  The  author  concluded  that  MMW 
can  be  successfully  used  in  cerebrovascular  therapy, 
but  possible  complications  must  be  taken  into  account. 

Afanas’eva  and  Golovacheva  [1997]  used  MMW 
therapy  in  124  patients  with  stage  n  essential  hyperten¬ 
sion  (5.6-  or  7.1-mm  wavelength,  CW,  10  mW/cm^,  10 
procedures  for  30  min  each).  Unfavorable  autonomous 
nervous  system  reactions  (whole-body  shivering, 
sweating,  heart  pains  along  with  sldn  paling  or  redden¬ 
ing)  were  observed  in  18  patients  (15.5%).  In  two 
cases,  these  reactions  developed  into  hypertensive  cri¬ 
ses,  which  had  to  be  arrested  by  drug  injections.  In  33 
patients  (26.6%),  MMW-induced  fluctuations  of  the 
arterial  blood  pressure  and  enhanced  headaches.  A  tem¬ 
porary  improvement  after  four  to  five  exposures  was 
followed  by  an  increase  in  both  systolic  (by  25  ± 
7.0  mm  Hg)  and  diastolic  (by  10.0  ±  2.0  mm  Hg) 
blood  pressure,  which  required  medicinal  correction. 
General  adverse  reactions  after  the  entire  MMW  course 
(six  patients;  4.8%)  included  sleeplessness  or  sleep 
with  distressful  dreams,  weakness,  emotional  instabil¬ 
ity,  and  irritability.  These  manifestations  were  not  pro¬ 
found  and  disappeared  without  further  treatment.  The 
authors  emphasized  that  these  adverse  reactions  were 
not  encountered  in  patients  who  received  placebo  expo¬ 
sures. 

Gun’ko  and  Kozshina  [1993]  tried  MMW  therapy 
in  528  patients  with  various  diseases  (ulcerative  dis¬ 
ease,  ischemic  heart  disease,  essential  hypertension, 
bronchitis,  pneumonia,  and  others).  Exposures  at  5.6- 
or  7.1-mm  wavelength  lasted  from  15  to  60  min/day, 
from  5  to  18  days.  Three  patients  being  treated  for 
rheumatic  polyarthritis,  psoriasis,  and  duodenal  ulcer 
(without  any  concurrent  drug  therapy)  developed  urti¬ 
caria  (hives)  on  the  fifth  to  seventh  day  of  exposures. 
An  itchy  rash  appeared  first  in  the  abdominal  and  tho¬ 
racic  areas,  and  soon  spread  everywhere.  Nevertheless, 
the  treatment  of  the  main  disease  in  all  these  cases  was 
successful.  The  rash  disappeared  2-10  days  after  the 
completion  of  the  MMW  therapy  but  reappeared  during 


Bioeffects  of  Miffimeter  Waves 


409 


the  repeated  MMW  courses.  The  authors  called  for 
more  studies  of  MMW  effects  on  the  immune  system. 

DISCUSSION 

In  this  review,  we  have  found  that  recent  research 
in  the  MMW  area  covers  a  variety  of  subjects.  Pro^ 
found  MMW  effects  were  established  at  all  biological 
levels,  from  cell-free  systems  through  cells,  organs, 
and  tissues,  to  animal  and  human  organisms.  Although 
trying  to  avoid  a  general  discussion  of  thermal  versus 
nonthermal  mechanisms  in  this  review,  we  nonetheless 
must  note  that  many  of  the  reported  effects  were  princi¬ 
pally  different  from  those  caused  by  heating,  and  their 
dose  and  frequency  dependencies  often  suggested  non¬ 
thermal  mechanisms.  Regardless  of  the  primary  mecha¬ 
nism,  the  possibility  of  significant  bioeffects  of  a  short¬ 
term  MMW  irradiation  at  intensities  at  or  below  current 
safety  standards  deserves  consideration  and  further 
study. 

The  major  question  about  FSU  publications  in  the 
MMW  area  is  their  reliability.  A  number  of  studies 
cited  here  were  performed  at  the  highest  scientific 
level.  Other  studies,  perhaps  the  majority  of  those  cited, 
were  flawed,  but  may  still  bear  valuable  information 
and  should  not  be  discarded  without  proper  analysis. 
For  example,  free-field  dosimetry  in  the  MMW  band 
is  a  serious  technical  problem.  To  our  knowledge,  no 
commercially  available  probes  are  rated  for  near-field 
measurements  in  the  MMW  band  even  in  the  U.S. 
Therefore,  it  is  not  surprising  that  many  investigators, 
particularly  clinicians,  have  had  to  rely  on  manufac¬ 
turer-specified  field  intensities,  such  ais  10  mW/cm^  for 
“Yav’-l”  therapeutic  generator.  One  may  doubt  that 
the  field  actually  was  5,  10,  or  15  mW/cm^,  but  under 
no  circumstances  could  it  exceed  a  spatial  average  of, 
say,  50  mW/cm^,  which  is  beyond  the  generator’s  capa¬ 
bilities.  Thus,  whereas  the  precise  exposure  parameters 
may  not  be  known,  a  range  of  possible  exposure  inten¬ 
sities  may  be  estimated.  With  an  understanding  of  this 
fact,  the  experimental  data  may  still  be  important  and 
usable. 

Another  widespread  shortcoming  of  clinical  stud¬ 
ies  occurs  when  MMW  therapy  is  compared  with  drug 
therapy,  without  using  a  sham-exposed  control  group. 
MMW  therapy  was  often  reported  to  be  more  effective 
than  drugs.  Tliis  result  could  be  a  placebo  effect;  but 
if  so,  one  would  have  to  conclude  that  placebo  was 
more  effective  than  modem  dmg  therapy.  This  possi¬ 
bility  could  certainly  be  tme  for  certain  patients  and 
certain  disorders,  but  does  not  seem  feasible  for  large 
populations  and  a  wide  scale  of  diseases. 

A  further  source  of  skepticism  about  findings 
made  by  FSU  scientists  is  that  they  have  not  been 


replicated  in  the  West.  Replication  is  much  needed 
indeed,  but  it  can  hardly  be  anticipated  without  ade¬ 
quate  attempts.  To  our  knowledge,  only  three  labora¬ 
tories  throughout  the  U.S.  (less  than  10  scientists  total) 
are  currently  doing  any  research  on  MMW  bioeffects, 
which  is  by  no  means  sufficient  to  match  the  amount 
and  variety  of  the  FSU  research.  Besides,  many  cited 
studies  are  very  recent  (1995 -“1997),  so  replication  has 
yet  to  be  expected. 

With  all  the  diversity  of  the  MMW  research  and 
differences  in  studied  subjects  and  end  points,  some 
particulars  seem  to  be  common  for  various  situations 
and  MMW  effects.  Considering  these  particulars  may 
be  critical  for  replication  studies: 

(1)  Individuals  or  groups  in  a  population,  which 
would  usually  be  regarded  as  uniform,  may  react  to 
MMW  in  rather  different  or  even  opposite  ways.  For 
example,  Temur’iants  et  al.  [1993,  1994]  divided  the 
vivarium  population  of  rats  by  their  open-field  activity 
before  performing  exposures.  Not  only  the  animal’s 
reactions  to  MMW,  but  also  their  reactions  to  immobi¬ 
lization  stress,  were  very  different  in  animals  with  low, 
medium,  and  high  activity  levels.  Pooling  all  the  data 
together,  as  well  as  neglecting  the  intrinsic  differences 
in  the  population,  would  have  inevitably  masked 
MMW  effects.  . 

(2)  There  seem  to  exist  unknown  and  uncon¬ 
trolled  fectors  that  determine  the  MMW  sensitivity  of 
a  specimen  or  a  population.  Irradiation  could  increase 
antibiotic  resistivity  in  one  experiment  and  decrease  it 
in  the  next  one  [Bulgakova  et  al.,  1996].  It  increased 
the  beating  rate  in  one  isolated  heart  and  decreased  it 
in  the  other  [Chemyakov  et  al.,  1989].  MMW  therapy 
usually  decreased  blood  pressure,  but  eventually  in¬ 
creased  it  greatly  [Kuz’menko,  1989].  As  long  as  these 
changes  exceeded  the  “noise”  level  and  were  not  pro¬ 
duced  by  a  sham  exposure,  they  can  be  regarded  as 
MMW  effects.  Again,  pooling  all  data  together,  regard¬ 
less  of  the  direction  of  changes,  could  easily  mask  an 
MMW  effect. 

(3)  Even  robust  MMW  effects  may  be  well  repro¬ 
ducible  for  a  limited  time  and  then  disappear.  The  ef¬ 
fects  of  complete  suppression  or  200-400%  enhance¬ 
ment  of  chloride  transmembrane  current  in  alga  cells 
were  far  beyond  any  spontaneous  variations  and  could 
hardly  be  confused  with  any  artifact  [Kataev  et  al., 
1993].  However,  both  effects  weakened  and  disap¬ 
peared  by  the  end  of  winter  without  any  apparent  rea¬ 
son.  MMW  effects  on  isolated  frog  nerve  also  disap¬ 
peared  in  spring  [Buracheis  and  MascoUimas,  1989], 
suggesting  that  MMW  sensitivity  may  be  somehow 
related  to  the  base  level  of  metabolism. 

4.  MMW  effects  could  often  be  revealed  only  in 
subjects  that  are  experiencing  some  deviation  from  the 


410 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


“normal”  state.  MMW  caused  little  or  no  reactions  in 
intact  animals,  but  significantly  alleviated  effects  of  im¬ 
mobilization,  ionizing  radiation,  etc.  Many  clinical  studies 
claim  that  MMW  therapy  is  effective  only  when  one  or 
another  kind  of  pathology  is  present,  whereas  in  a  healthy 
organism  MMW  will  not  produce  any  reactions.  How¬ 
ever,  this  thesis  has  not  been  adequately  proven. 

5.  Increased  sensitivity  and  even  hypersensitivity  of 
individual  specimens  to  MMW  may  be  real.  Depending 
on  the  exposure  characteristics,  especially  wavelength,  a 
low-intensity  MMW  radiation  was  perceived  by  30  to 
80%  of  healthy  examinees  [Lebedeva,  1993, 1995].  Some 
clinical  studies  reported  MMW  hypersensitivity,  which 
was  or  was  not  limited  to  a  certain  wavelength  [Golova¬ 
cheva,  1995].  In  a  study  by  Afanas’eva  and  Golovacheva 
[1997],  adverse  health  reactions  to  MMW  appeared  only 
in  women  (100%)  who  had  a  labile  course  of  angina 
pectoris  (100%),  most  of  whom  were  in  the  menopausal 
period  (66.7%).  The  authors  suggested  that  this  category 
of  people  is  particularly  sensitive  to  MMW. 

It  is  important  to  note  that,  even  with  the  variety 
of  bioeffects  reported,  no  studies  have  provided  evidence 
tiiat  a  low-intensity  MMW  radiation  represents  a  health 
hazard  for  human  beings.  Actually,  none  of  the  reviewed 
studies  with  low-intensity  MMW  even  pursued  the  evalu¬ 
ation  of  health  risks,  although  in  view  of  numerous  bioef¬ 
fects  and  growing  usage  of  MMW  technologies  this  re¬ 
search  objective  seems  very  reasonable.  Such  MMW  ef¬ 
fects  as  alterations  of  cell  growth  rate  and  UV  light 
sensitivity,  biochemical  and  antibiotic  resistivity  changes 
in  pathogenic  bacteria,  as  well  as  many  others,  are  of 
potential  significance  for  safety  standards.  MMW  therapy 
in  many  cases  uses  field  intensities  comparable  to  or 
lower  those  allowed  by  current  safety  standards,  but 
even  local  and  short-term  exposures  were  reported  to 
produce  marked  effects.  It  should  also  be  realized  that 
biological  effects  of  a  prolonged  or  chronic  MMW  expo¬ 
sure  of  the  whole  body  or  a  large  body  area  have  never 
been  investigated.  Safety  limits  for  these  types  of  expo¬ 
sure  are  based  solely  on  predictions  of  energy  deposition 
and  MMW  heating,  but  in  view  of  recent  studies  this 
approach  is  not  necessarily  adequate. 

The  significance  of  MMW  bioeffects  for  human 
health,  considering  both  safety  limitations  and  possible 
clinical  applications,  should  be  neither  over-  nor  underes¬ 
timated.  It  is,  however,  an  intriguing  and  potentially  im¬ 
portant  area  that  needs  to  be  further  explored.  If  this 
present  review  draws  attention  to  the  MMW  research 
and  stimulates  new  studies,  we  will  consider  its  goal 
accomplished. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  work  was  supported  in  part  by  the  U.S.  Army 
Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command  and  the  U.S. 


Air  Force  Armstrong  Laboratory  under  U.S.  Army  con¬ 
tract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  Bi- 
oServices.  The  views  expressed  in  this  article  are  those 
of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  reflecting 
the  official  policy  or  position  of  the  Department  of  the 
Army,  Department  of  the  Air  Force,  Department  of 
Defense,  or  the  United  States  Government. 


REFERENCES 

Afanas’eva  TN,  Golovacheva  TV  (1997):  Side  effects  of  the  EHF- 
therapy  for  essential  hypertension.  Zvenigorod,  Russia:  1 1th  Rus¬ 
sian  Symposium  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,” 
April,  1997  (Digest  of  papers).  Moscow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  26-28 
(in  Russian). 

Akoev  GN,  Avelev  VD,  Semen’kov  PG  (1992):  Perception  of  the  low- 
level  miUimeter-range  electromagnetic  radiation  by  electrorecep¬ 
tors  of  the  ray.  Dokl  Akad  Nauk  322:791-794  (in  Russian). 

Alekseev  SI,  Ziskin  MC  (1995):  Millimeter  microwave  effect  oh  ion 
transport  across  Upid  bilayer  membranes.  Bioelectromagnetics 
16:124-131, 

Alekseev  SI,  Ziskin  MC,  Kochetkova  NV,  Bolshakov  MA  (1997):  Milli¬ 
meter  waves  thermally  alter  the  firing  rate  of  the  Ljmmaea  pace¬ 
maker  neuron.  Bioelectromagnetics  18:89-98. 

Arzumanov  YuL,  Kolotygina  RF,  Khonichava  NM,  Tyerytskaya  IN, 
Abakumova  AA  (1994):  Animal  study  of  the  stress-protective 
effect  of  electromagnetic  radiation  of  the  extremely-high-£re- 
quency  range.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine  3:5- 
10  (in  Russian). 

Belyaev  lYa  (1992):  Some  biophysical  aspects  of  the  genetic  effect  of 
low-intensity  millimeter  waves.  Bioelectrochem  Bioenerg 
27:11-18. 

Belyakov  EV,  Kichaev  VA,  Poslavskii  MV,  Starshinina  VA,  Soboleva 
ES  (1989):  Use  of  blood  radiophysical  parameters  in  the  ex¬ 
tremely  high-frequency  range  for  diagnostic  purposes.  In  Devyat- 
kov  ND  (ed):  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.” 
Moscow:  Radioelectronica,  pp  83-88  (in  Russian). 

Belyaev  lYa,  Okladnova  OV,  Izmailov  DM,  Sheglov  VS,  Obukhova 
LK  (1990):  Differential  sensitivity  of  developmental  stages  to 
low-level  electromagnetic  radiation  of  extremely  ultrahigh  fre¬ 
quency.  Dokl  Akad  Nauk  SSSR  [Ser  B  Geol  Chim  Biol]  12:68- 
70  (in  Russian). 

Belyaev  lYa,  Alipov  YD,  Polunin  VA,  Shcheglov  VS  (1993a):  Evidence 
for  dependence  of  resonant  frequency  of  millimeter  wave  interac¬ 
tion  with  Escherichia  coli  K12  cells  on  haploid  genome  length. 
Electromagnetobiology  12:39-49. 

Belyaev  lYa,  Shcheglov  VS,  AUpov  YeD,  Radko  SP  (1993b):  Regulari¬ 
ties  of  separate  and  combined  effects  of  circularly  polarized  milli¬ 
meter  waves  on  E,  coli  cells  at  differmt  phases  of  culture  growth. 
Bioelectrochem  Bioenerg  31:49-63. 

Belyaev  lYa,  Alipov  YD,  Shcheglov  VS,  Polunin  VA,  Aizenberg  OA 
(1994):  Cooperative  response  of  Escherichia  coli  to  the  reso¬ 
nance  effect  of  millimeter  waves  at  super  low  intensity.  Electro¬ 
magnetobiology  13:53-66. 

Belyaev  lY,  Shcheglov  VS,  Alipov  YD,  Polunin  VA  (1996):  Resonance 
effect  of  millimeter  waves  in  the  power  range  from  lO'^'*  to  3  X 
10”^  W/cm^  on  Escherichia  coli  cells  at  different  concentrations. 
Bioelectromagnetics  17:312-321. 

Belyaev  lYa,  Shcheglov  VS,  Alipov  YD,  Ushakov  VL  (1997):  Reply 
to  comments  of  Osepchuk  and  Petersen.  Bioelectromagnetics 
18:529-530. 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


411 


Berezhinsldi  LI,  Gridina  NIa,  Dovbeshko  GI,  Irisitsa  MP,  Litvinov  GS 
(1993):  Visualization  of  the  effects  of  millimeter  radiation  on 
blood  plasma.  Biofizika  38:378-384  (in  Russian). 

Berzhanskaya  LYu,  Berzhansldi  VN,  Beloplotova  OYu  (1995):  Effect 
of  electromagnetic  fields  on  the  activity  of  bioluminescence  in 
bacteria.  Biofizika  40:974-977  (in  Russian). 

Betzky  OV  (1992):  Use  of  low-intensity  electromagnetic  millimeter 
waves  in  medicine.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine 
1:5-12  (in  Russian). 

Brill’  GE,  Panina  NP  (1994):  Effect  of  millimeter  waves  on  transplant- 
ability  and  growth  of  tumors.  Fizicheskaia  Meditzina  4:25  (in 
Russian). 

Brill’  GE,  Apina  OR,  Belyanina  a,  Panina  NP  (1993):  Effect  of  low- 
level  extremely  high-frequency  radiation  on  the  genetic  activity 
of  polytene  chromosomes  of  Chironomus  plumosus.  Fizicheskaia 
Meditzina  3:69-71  (in  Russian). 

Brovkovich  VM,  Kurilo  NB,  Barishpol’ts  VL  (1991):  Action  of  millime¬ 
ter-range  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  Ca  pump  of  sarcoplas¬ 
mic  reticulum.  Radiobiologiia  31:268-271  (in  Russian). 

Bulgakova  VG,  Grushina  VA,  Orlova  IT,  Petrykina  ZM,  Polin  AN,  Noks 
PP,  Kononenko  AA,  Rubin  AB  (1996):  Effect  of  millimeter-band 
radiation  of  nonthermal  intensity  on  the  sensitivity  of  Staphylo¬ 
coccus  to  various  antibiotics.  Biofizika  41:1289—1293  (in  Rus¬ 
sian). 

Burachas  G,  Mascoliunas  R  (1989):  Suppression  of  nerve  action  poten¬ 
tial  under  the  effect  of  millimeter  waves.  In  Devyatkov  ND  (ed): 
“Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.’’  Moscow:  Radi- 
oelectronica,  pp  168-175  (in  Russian). 

Chernov  ZS,  Faikin  W,  Bemashevskii  GA  (1989):  Experimental  study 
of  the  effect  of  nanosecond  EHF  pulses  on  malignancies.  In: 
Devyatkov  ND  (ed):  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biol¬ 
ogy.”  Moscow:  Radioelectronica,  pp  121-127  (in  Russian). 

Chemyakov  GM,  Korochkm  VL,  Babenko  AP,  Bigdai  EV  (1989):  Reac¬ 
tions  of  biological  systems  of  various  complexity  to  the  action 
of  low-level  EHF  radiation.  In  Devyatkov  ND  (ed):  “Millimeter 
Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.”  Moscow:  Radioelectronica, 
pp  141-167  (in  Russian). 

Dardalhon  M,  Averbeck  D,  Berteaud  AJ  (1979):  Determination  of  a 
thermal  equivalent  of  millimeter  microwaves  in  living  cells.  J 
Microw  Power  14:307-312. 

Dardalhon  M,  Averbeck  D,  Berteaud  AJ  (1981):  Studies  on  possible 
genetic  effects  of  microwaves  in  prokaryotic  and  euk^otic  cells. 
Radiat  Environ  Biophys  20:37-51. 

Dardanoni  L,  Torregrossa  MV,  Zanforlin  L  (1985):  Millimeter  wave 
effects  on  Candida  albicans  cells.  J  Bioelectr  4:171-176. 

Detlav  IE,  Shkirmante  BK,  Dombrovska  LE,  Pahegle  IV,  Slutskii  LI 
(1993):  Biochemical  parameters  of  developing  granulo-fibrous 
tissue  after  the  effect  of  an  extremely  high-frequency  electromag¬ 
netic  field.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine  2:43-50 
(in  Russian). 

Detlavs  I,  Dombrovska  L,  Klavinsh  I,  Turauska  A,  Shkirmante  BB, 
Slutskii  L  (1994):  Experimental  study  of  the  effect  of  electromag¬ 
netic  fields  in  the  early  stage  of  wound  healing.  Bioelectrochem 
Bioenerg  35:13-17. 

Detlavs  I,  Dombrovska  L,  Shkirmante  B,  Turauska  A,  Slutskii  L  (1995): 
Some  biological  effects  of  mm-wave  electromagnetic  fields  on 
the  granulation-fibrous  tissue  in  a  healing  wound.  Moscow,  Rus¬ 
sia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine 
and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  papers).  Moscow:  IRE 
RAN,  pp  117-119  (in  Russian). 

Detlavs  I,  Dombrovska  L,  Turauska  A,  Shkinnante  B,  Slutskii  L  (1996): 
Experimental  study  of  the  effects  of  radiofrequency  electromag¬ 
netic  fields  on  animals  with  soft  tissue  wounds.  Sci  Total  Environ 
180:35-42. 


Enin  LD,  Akoev  GN,  Potekhina  IL,  Oleiner  VD  (1992):  Effect  of  ex¬ 
tremely  high-frequency  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  function 
of  skin  sensory  endings.  Patol  Fiziol  Eksp  Ter  5-6:23-25  (in 
Russian). 

Fesenko  EE,  Gluvstein  AYa  (1995):  Changes  in  the  state  of  water 
induced  by  radiofrequency  electromagnetic  fields.  FEBS  Lett 
367:53-55. 

Fesenko  EE,  Geletyuk  VI,  Kazachenko  VN,  Chemeris  NK  (1995):  Pre¬ 
liminary  microwave  irradiation  of  water  solutions  changes  their 
channel  modifying  activity.  FEBS  Lett  366:49-52. 

Frei  MR,  Ryan  KL  (1997):  Circulatory  failure  resulting  from  sustained 
millimeter  wave  irradiation.  Brooks  AFB,  TX:  Infrared  Lasers 
and  Millimeter  Waves  Workshop  “The  Links  Between  Micro- 
waves  and  Laser  Optics,”  January,  1997. 

Frei  MR,  Ryan  KL,  Berger  RE,  Jauchem  JR  (1995):  Sustained  35-GHz 
radiofrequency  irradiation  induces  circulatory  failure.  Shock 
4:289-293. 

Frohlich  H  (1980):  The  biological  effects  of  microwaves  and  related 
questions.  Adv  Electronics  Electron  Phys  53:85—152, 

Frohlich  H  (ed)  (1988):  Biological  coherence  and  response  to  external 
stimuli.  Berlin:  Springer-Verlag,  p  265. 

Furia  L,  Hill  DW,  Gandhi  OP  (1986):  Effect  of  millimeter- wave  irradia¬ 
tion  on  growth  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  IEEE  Trans  Biomed 
Eng  33:993-999. 

Gandhi  OP  (1983):  Some  basic  properties  of  biological  tissues  for  poten¬ 
tial  biomedical  applications  of  millimeter-waves.  J  Microw 
Power  18:295-304. 

Gapeev  AB,  Chemeris  NK,  Fesenko  EE,  Khramov  RN  (1994):  Reso¬ 
nance  effects  of  a  low-intensity  modulated  EHF  field.  Alteration 
of  the  locomotor  activity  of  the  protozoa  Paramecium  caudatum. 
Biofizika  39:74-82  (in  Russian). 

Gapeev  AB,  Safronova  VG,  Chemeris  NK,  Fesenko  EE  (1996):  Modifi¬ 
cation  of  the  activity  of  murine  peritoneal  neutrophils  by  expo¬ 
sure  to  millimeter  waves  at  close  and  far  distances  from  the 
emitter.  Biofizika  41:205-219  (in  Russian). 

Geletyuk  VI,  Kazachenko  VN,  Chemeris  NK,  Fesenko  EE  (1995):  Dual 
effects  of  microwaves  on  single  Ca^'^-activated  K'^  channels  in 
cultured  kidney  cells  Vero.  P^EBS  Lett  359:85-88. 

Golant  MB  (1989):  Resonance  effect  of  coherent  millimeter-band  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  waves  on  living  organisms.  Biofizika  34:1004-1014 
(in  Russian). 

Golant  MB,  Kuznetsov  AP,  Boszhanova  TP  (1994):  Mechanisms  of 
synchronization  of  the  yeast  cell  culture  by  the  action  of  EHF 
radiation.  Biofizika  39:490-495  (in  Russian). 

Golovacheva  TV  (1995):  EHF  therapy  in  complex  treatment  of  cardio¬ 
vascular  diseases.  Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium 
“Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Di¬ 
gest  of  papers),  Moscow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  29-31  (in  Russian). 

Gos  P,  Eicher  B,  Kohli  J,  Heyer  W-D  (1997):  Extremely  high  frequency 
electromagnetic  fields  at  low  power  density  do  not  affect  the 
division  of  exponential  phase  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  cells. 
Bioelectromagnetics  1 8 : 142- 155. 

Grundler  W  (1983):  Biological  effects  of  RF  and  MW  energy  at  molecu¬ 
lar  and  cellular  level.  In  Rindi  A,  Grandolfo  M,  Michaelson 
SM  (eds):  “Biological  Effects  and  Dosimetry  of  Nonionizing 
Radiation.  Radiofrequency  and  Microwave  Energies.”  New 
York:  Plenum  Press,  pp  299-318. 

Grundler  W,  Kaiser  F  (1992):  Experimental  evidence  for  coherent  exci¬ 
tations  correlated  with  growth.  Nanobiology  1:163-176. 

Grundler  W,  Keilman  F,  Froehlich  H  (1977):  Resonant  growth  rate 
response  of  yeast  cells  irradiated  by  weak  microwaves.  Phys  Lett 
62A:463-466. 

Grundler  W,  Keilman  F,  Putterlik  V,  Stnibe  D  (1982):  Resonant-like 


412 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


dependence  of  yeast  growth  rate  on  microwave  frequencies.  Br 
J  Cancer  45:206-208. 

Grundler  W,  Jentzsch  U,  Keilmann  F,  Putterlik  V  (1988):  Resonant 
cellular  effects  of  low  intensity  microwave.  In  Frohlich  H  (ed): 
“Biological  Coherence  and  Response  to  External  Stimuli.”  Ber¬ 
lin:  Springer-Verlag,  pp  65-85. 

Gubkina  EA,  Kushnir  AE,  Bere2duk  SK,  Potapov  VA,  Lepekhin  EA 
(1996):  Effects  of  low-intensity  electromagnetic  radiation  of  ex¬ 
tremely  high-frequency  on  the  animal  organism  in  combination 
with  whole-body  low-dose  X-ray  irradiation.  Radiats  Biol  Radi- 
oecol  36:722-726  (in  Russian). 

Gun’ko  VT,  Kozshina  NM  (1993):  Some  complications  of  extremely 
high-frequency  therapy.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Medit- 
cine  2:102-104  (in  Russian). 

Kaiser  F  (1995):  Coherent  oscillations  -  their  role  in  the  interaction  of 
weak  ELM-fields  with  cellular  systems.  Neural  Network  World 
5:751-762. 

Karlov  VA,  Rodshtat  IV,  Kalashnikov  luD,  Kitaeva  LV,  Khokhlov 
luK  (1991):  Experience  with  using  extremely  high  frequency 
radiotherapy  of  the  millimeter  wave  range  in  cerebrovascular 
disorders.  Sov  Med  3:20-21  (in  Russian). 

Kataev  AA,  Alexandrov  AA,  Tikhonova  LL,  Berestovsky  GN  (1993): 
Frequency-dependent  effects  of  the  electromagnetic  millimeter 
waves  on  the  ion  currents  in  the  cell  membrane  of  Nitellopsis: 
Nonthermal  action.  Biofizika  38:446-462  (in  Russian). 

Kazbekov  EN,  Vyacheslavov  LG  (1987):  Effects  of  microwave  irradia¬ 
tion  on  some  membrane-related  processes  in  bacteria.  Gen  Phys¬ 
iol  Biophys  6:57-64. 

Khizhnyak  EP,  2Sskin  MC  (1996):  Ten:^)erature  osdllatians  in  liquid  media 
caused  by  continuous  (nonmodulated)  millimeter  wavelength  electro¬ 
magnetic  inadiation.  Bioelectromagnetics  17:223-229. 

Khramov  RN,  Sosunov  EA,  Koltun  SV,  Ilyasova  EN,  Lednev  VV 
(1991):  Millimeter- wave  effects  on  electric  activity  of  crayfish 
stretch  receptors.  Bioelectromagnetics  12:203  -214. 

Kolosova  LI,  Akoev  GN,  Avelev  VD,  Riabchikova  OV,  Babu  KS 
(1996a):  Effect  of  low-intensity  millimeter  wave  electromagnetic 
radiation  on  regeneration  of  the  sciatic  nerve  in  rats.  Bioelectro¬ 
magnetics  17:44-47. 

Kolosova  LI,  Akoev  GN,  Riabchikova  OV,  Avelev  VD  (1996b):  The 
effect  of  low-intensity  millimeter-range  electromagnetic  radia¬ 
tion  on  the  functional  recovery  of  the  damaged  sciatic  nerve  in 
rat.  Fiziol  Zh  Im  I M  Sechenova  82:85-90  (in  Russian). 

Korpan  NN,  Saradeth  T  (1995):  Clinical  effects  of  continuous  micro- 
wave  for  postoperative  septic  wound  treatment:  A  double-blind 
controlled  trial.  Am  J  Surg  170:271-276. 

Korpan  NN,  Resch  K-L,  Kokoschinegg  P  (1994):  Continuous  micro- 
wave  enhances  die  healing  process  of  septic  and  aseptic  wounds 
in  rabbits.  J  Surg  Res  57:667-671. 

Kotrovskaia  Tl  (1994):  Sraisory  reactions  evoked  by  weak  electromag¬ 
netic  stimuli  in  humans.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Medit- 
cine  3:32-38  (in  Russian). 

Kraner  F,  Santo  L,  Po^tsh  A,  Koschnitzke  C,  Behrens  H,  Genzel  L 
(1988):  The  influence  of  low  intensity  millimetre  waves  on  biologi¬ 
cal  systems.  In  Frohlich  H  (ed):  “Biological  Coherence  and  Re¬ 
sponse  to  External  Stimuli.”  Berlin:  Springer-Vedag,  pp  86-101. 

Kudryashova  VA,  Zavizion  VA,  Khurgin  YuV  (1995):  Effects  of  stabili¬ 
zation  and  destruction  of  water  structure  by  amino  acids.  Mos¬ 
cow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter  Waves  in 
Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  papers).  Mos¬ 
cow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  213-215  (in  Russian). 

Kuzmanova  M,  Ivanov  St  (1995):  Effect  of  millimeter  waves  and 
gamma-radiation  on  the  surface  electrical  charge  of  erythrocyte 
membranes.  In:  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,” 
Digest  of  papers  of  the  10th  Russian  Symposium  with  Interna¬ 


tional  Participation,  24-26  April,  Moscow,  Russia,  pp  111-112 
(in  Russian). 

Ktiz’menko  VM  (1989):  Indications  and  contraindications  to  the  use  of 
microwave  resonance  therapy  (MRT)  in  patients  with  cerebro¬ 
vascular  diseases.  Kiev,  Ukraine:  First  All-Union  Symposium 
with  International  Participation  “Fundamental  and  Applied  As¬ 
pects  of  the  Use  of  Millimeter  Electromagnetic  Radiation  in 
Medicine,”  May,  1989,  pp  272-273  (in  Russian). 

Lebedeva  NN  (1993):  Sensor  and  subsensor  reactions  of  a  healthy  man 
to  peripheral  effects  of  low-intrasity  millimeter  waves.  Mil¬ 
limetrovie  Volni  V  Biologii  i  Meditcine  2:5-23  (in  Russian). 

Lebedeva  NN  (1995):  Neurophysiological  mechanisms  of  biological 
effects  of  peripheral  action  of  low-intensity  nonionizing  electro¬ 
magnetic  fields  in  humans.  Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Sym¬ 
posium  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April, 
1995  (Digest  of  papers).  Moscow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  138-140  (in 
Russian). 

Lebedeva  NN,  Betskii  OV  (1995):  Application  of  low  intensity  millime¬ 
ter  waves  in  medicine.  Boston,  MA:  17th  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  June,  1995,  p  14. 

Levina  MZ,  Veselago  lA,  Belaya  D,  Gapochka  LD,  Mantrova  GM, 
Yakovleva  MN  (1989):  Influence  of  low-intensity  VHF  irradia¬ 
tion  on  growth  and  development  of  protozoa  cultures.  In  Deyat- 
kov  ND  (ed):  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.” 
Moscow:  Radioelectronica,  pp  189-195  (in  Russian). 

Litvinov  GS,  Gridina  NYa,  Dovbeshko  GI,  Berezhinsky  LI,  Lisitsa 
MP  (1994):  Millimeter  wave  effect  on  blood  plasma  solution. 
Electromagnetobiology  1 3: 1 67 - 174. 

Liusov  VA,  Volov  NA,  Lebedeva  AYu,  Kudinova  MA,  Schelkunova 
IG,  Fedulayev  YuN  (1995):  Some  mechanisms  of  the  effect  of 
miUimeter-range  radiation  on  pathogenesis  of  unstable  angina 
pectoris.  Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter 
Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  pa¬ 
pers).  Moscow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  26-27  (in  Russian). 

Logani  MK,  Ziskin  MC  (1996):  Continuous  millimeter-wave  radiation 
has  no  effect  on  lipid  peroxidation  in  liposomes.  Radiat  Res 
145:231-235. 

Megdiatov  RS,  Vasilenko  AM,  Arkhipov  W,  Kislov  VYa,  Kolesov 
W,  Smirnov  VF  (1995):  Use  of  a  “Sharm”  therapeutic-diagnos¬ 
tic  system  in  complex  therapy  of  trigeminal  nerve  neuralgia. 
Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter  Waves 
in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  papers).  Mos¬ 
cow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  83-84  (in  Russian). 

Mikhno  LE,  Novikov  SA  (1992):  The  mechanism  of  the  therapeutic 
action  of  millimeter  electromagnetic  waves  and  their  importance 
in  treating  cardiovascular  diseases  (a  review  of  the  literature). 
Vrach  Delo  10:14-18  (in  Russian). 

Mudrick  DG,  Golant  MB,  IzvoTskaia  VE,  Slutzkii  EM,  Oganezova  RA 
(1995):  Chemoluminescence  of  human  blood  leukocytes  after 
exposure  to  a  low-intensity  extremely-high  frequency  electro¬ 
magnetic  field.  Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Nfil- 
limeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest 
of  papers).  Moscow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  109- 1 1 1  (in  Russian). 

Naumcheva  NN  (1994):  Effect  of  millimeter  waves  on  ischemic  heart 
disease  patients.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine 
3:62-67  (in  Russian). 

Novikova  LN,  Kaminskaia  GO,  Efimova  LN  (1995):  Significance  of 
the  functional  state  of  blood  phagocytes  in  the  choice  of  optimal 
regime  of  EHF  therapy  of  patients  with  pulmonary  tuberculosis. 
Probl  Tuberk  6:17-20  (in  Russian). 

Osepchuk  JM,  Petersen,  RC  (1997a):  Critical  reviews  of  millimeter- 
wave  athermal  effect  studies  relative  to  microwave  engineering 
piincipies.  Brooks  AFB,  TX:  Infrared  Lasers  and  Millimeter 


Bioeffects  of  Millimeter  Waves 


413 


Waves  Workshop  “The  Links  Between  Microwaves  and  Laser 
Optics,”  January,  1997. 

Osepchuk  JM,  Petersen,  RC  (1997b):  Comments  on  “Resonance  Effect 
of  Millimeter  Waves  in  the  Power  Range  from  10“^^  to  3  X  10~^ 
W/cm2  on  Escherichia  coli  Cells  at  Different  Concentrations,” 
Belyaev  et  al.,  Bioelectromagnetics,  17:312-321  (1996).  Bioele¬ 
ctromagnetics  18:527-528. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Prol  HK,  Mathur  SP,  Akyel  Y,  Campbell  CBG  (1997a): 
Search  for  ftequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter-wave  radiation 
on  isolated  nerve  function.  Bioelectromagnetics  18:324-334. 

Paldiomov  AG,  Prol  HK,  Mathur  SP,  Akyel  Y,  CampbeU  CBG  (1997b): 
Frequraicy-specific  effects  of  millimeta*  wavelengfli  electromagnetic 
radiation  in  isolated  nerve.  Electromagnetohiology  16:43-57. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Prol  HK,  Mathur  SP,  Akyel  Y,  Campbell  CBG  (1997c): 
Role  of  field  intensity  in  the  Hological  effectiveness  of  millimete' 
waves  at  a  resonance  firequency.  Bioelectrochem  Bioenerg 
43:27-33. 

Pakhomova  ON,  Pakhomov  AG,  Akyel  Y  (1997):  Effect  of  millimeter 
waves  on  UV-induced  recombination  and  mutagenesis  in  yeast. 
Bioelectrochem  Bioenerg  43:227-232. 

Poslavsky  MV,  Korochkin  IM,  Zdanovich  OF  (1989):  Experience  with 
application  of  millimeter-range  radiation  for  treatment  and  pro¬ 
phylactics  of  stomach  and  duodenal  ulcer,  Vopr  Kurortol  Fizioter 
Lech  Fiz  Kult  4:31-36  (in  Russian), 

Postow  E,  SwicordML  (1986):  Modulated  fields  and  “window”  effects. 
In  Polk  C,  Postow  E  (eds):  “Handbook  of  Biological  Effects  of 
Electromagnetic  Fields.”  Boca  Raton,  FL:  CRC  Press,  Inc.  pp 
425-460. 

Potekhina  IL,  Akoyev  GN,  Yenin  LD,  Oleyner  VD  (1992):  Effects  of 
low-intensity  electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  millimeter  range 
on  the  cardio- vascular  system  of  the  white  rat.  Fiziol  Zh  78:35- 
41  (in  Russian), 

Ragimov  ChR,  Ter-Asaturov  GP,  Golant  MB,  Rogov  KA,  Balakireva 
LZ  (i991):  Stimulation  of  reparative  osteogenesis  by  electromag¬ 
netic  oscillations  in  the  millimeter  range  in  traumatic  defects  of 
the  lower  jaw  in  experimental  animals.  BiuH  Eksp  Biol  Med 
111:436-439  (in  Russian). 

Rebrova  TB  (1992):  Effect  of  millimeter-range  electromagnetic  radia¬ 
tion  on  the  vital  activity  of  microorganisms.  Millimetrovie  Volni 
V  Biologii  i  Meditcine  1:37-47  (in  Russian). 

Rodshtadt  IV  (1993):  Physiological  basis  for  some  immune  effects  of 
millimeter-range  radiation  action  on  skin.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v 
Biologii  i  Meditcine  2:24-35  (in  Russian), 

Rcgavin  MA,  Ziskin  MC  (1995):  Effect  of  millimete*  waves  on  survival  of 
UVC-exposed  Escherichia  coli.  Bioelectromagnetics  16:188-196. 

Rojavin  MA,  Ziskin  MC  (1998):  Medical  application  of  millimetre 
waves.  Q  J  Med  91:57-66. 

Roshchupkin  DI,  Kramarenko  GG,  Anosov  AK,  Golant  MB  (1994): 
Changes  in  the  aggregation  ability  of  rabbit  thymocytes  under  the 
combined  effect  of  UV-radiation  and  extremely  high  firequency 
radiation.  Biofizika  39:1046-1050  (in  Russian). 

Roshchupkin  DI,  Kramarenko  GG,  Anosov  AK  (1996):  Effect  of  ex¬ 
tremely  high  frequency  electromagnetic  radiation  and  ultraviolet 
radiation  on  aggregation  of  thymocytes  and  erythrocytes,  Biofiz¬ 
ika  41:866-869  (in  Russian). 

Ryakovskaya  ML,  Shtemler  VM  (1983):  Absorption  of  electromagnetic 
waves  of  millimeter  range  in  biological  preparations  with  a  plane- 
layer  structure.  In:  Devyatkov  ND  (ed):  “Effect  of  Nonthermal 
Action  of  Millimeter  Radiation  on  Biological  Subjects.”  Mos¬ 
cow:  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  pp  172-181  (in  Russian). 

Ryan  KL,  Frei  MR,  Berger  RE,  Jauchem  JR  (1996):  Does  nitric  oxide 
mediate  circulatory  failure  induced  by  35-GHz  microwave  heat¬ 
ing?  Shock  6:71-76. 

Ryan  KL,  Frei  MR,  Jauchem  JR  (1997):  Circulatory  failure  induced 


by  35  GHz  microwave  heating:  Effects  of  chronic  nitric  oxide 
synthesis  inhibition.  Shock  7:70-76. 

Sazonov  AYu,  Zamuraev  IN,  Lukashin  VG  (1995):  Effect  of  the  ex¬ 
tremely  high  frequency  electromagnetic  radiation  on  bush-like 
receptors  of  frog  bladder.  Fiziol  Zh  Im  I  M  Sechenova  81:46— 
49  (in  Russian). 

Serebriakova  SN,  Dovganiuk  AP  (1989):  The  treatment  of  patient  with 
peptic  ulcer  using  millimeter-range  waves.  Vopr  Kurortol  Fizi¬ 
oter  Lech  Fiz  Kult  4:37-38  (in  Russian). 

Shestopalova  NG,  Makarenko  BI,  Golovina  LN,  Timoshenko  YuP, 
Baeva  TI,  Vinokurova  LV,  Miroshnichenko  VS  (1995):  Modifi¬ 
cation  of  synchronizing  effect  of  millimeter  waves  on  first  mito¬ 
ses  by  different  temperature  regimens  of  germination.  Moscow, 
Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter  Waves  in  Medi¬ 
cine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  papers)  Moscow:  IRE 
RAN,  pp  236-237  (in  Russian). 

Shub  GM,  Luniova  lO,  Denisova  SG,  Ostrovskii  NV  (1995):  Effects  of 
millimeter  waves  on  bacteria  in  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  experiments. 
Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter  Waves 
in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  papers).  Mos¬ 
cow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  96-97  (in  Russian). 

Smirnov  AIu,  Zinovev  SV,  Bogoliubov  VM  (1991):  An  experimental 
study  of  the  action  of  weak-intensity  superhigh-frequency  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  radiation  in  the  millimeter  range  on  metastasis  of 
malignant  neoplasms.  Vopr  Kurmtol  Fizioter  Lech  Fiz  Kult 
4:23-27  (in  Russian). 

Tambiev  AH,  Kirikova  NN  (1992):  Perspectives  of  the  application  of 
millimeter-range  electromagnetic  radiation  in  photobiotechnol¬ 
ogy.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine  1:48-54  (in 
Russian). 

Tambiev  AKh,  Kirikova  NN,  Lapshin  OM,  Betzkii  OV,  Novskova  TA, 
Nechaev  VM,  Petrov  lYu  (1989):  The  combined  effect  of  expo¬ 
sure  to  EMF  of  millimeter  and  centimeter  wavelength  ranges  on 
productivity  of  microalgae.  In  Devyatkov  ND  (ed):  “Millimeter 
Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.”  Moscow:  Radioelectronica, 
pp  183-188  (in  Russian). 

Temur’iants  NA,  Chuyan  EN  (1992):  Effect  of  nonthermal  microwaves 
on  hypokinetic  stress  development  in  rats  with  different  individ¬ 
ual  features.  Millimetrovie  Vohu  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine  1:22- 
32  (in  Russian), 

Temur’iants  NA,  Chuyan  EN,  Tumaniants  EN,  Tishna  OO,  Victorov 
NV  (1993):  Dependence  of  anti-stress  effects  of  millimeter-range 
electromagnetic  fields  on  localization  of  the  exposed  area  in 
rats  with  different  typological  features.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v 
Biologii  i  Meditcine  2:51-59  (in  Russian). 

Temur’iants  NA,  Chuyan  EN,  Khomiakova  OV,  Tishkma  OO  (1994): 
Dependence  of  the  stress-protective  effect  of  extremely-high- 
frequency  electromagnetic  radiation  on  parameters  of  irradiation. 
Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine  3: 1 1  - 15  (in  Russian). 

Tsutsaeva  AA,  Makarenko  BI,  Beznosenko  BI,  Gomosov  VI,  Simonova 
NYa,  Kovalenko  LA,  Shatilova  LE,  Tupchienko  GS,  hfikitash 
AV,  Kudokotseva  OV,  Rozniak  AI,  Lisenko  NA,  Shurda  GG 
(1995):  Radioprotective  effect  of  microwave  action.  Millimeter 
Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,  Digest  of  papers  of  the  10th 
Russian  Symposium  with  International  Participation,  24-26 
April,  Moscow,  Russia,  pp  123-124  (in  Russian). 

Zavizion  VA,  Kudriashova  VA,  Khxirgin  Yul  (1994):  Effect  of  alpha- 
amino  adds  on  the  interaction  of  millimeter-wave  radiation  with 
water.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine  3:46-52  (in 
Russian). 

Zemskov  VS,  Korpan  NN,  Khokhlich  lal,  Pavlenko  VA,  Nazarenko  LS, 
Koval’chuk  AI,  Stefanishin  lal  (1988):  Effect  of  miUimeter-band 
low  intensity  electromagnetic  radiation  on  the  course  of  wound 
healing.  Klin  Khir  1:31-33  (in  Russian). 


ELSEVIER 


Physiology  &  Behavior,  Vol.  65,  No.  2,  pp.  263-270,  1998 
©  1998  Elsevier  Science  Inc.  All  rights  reserved. 

Printed  in  the  U.S.A. 
0031-9384/98  $19.00  +  .00 

PII  80031-9384(98)00165-6 


Ultra- Wideband  Electromagnetic  Pulses 
and  Morphine-induced  Changes  in  Nociception 

and  Activity  in  Mice 


RONALD  L.  SEAMAN,*  MICHELLE  L.  BELT,  JOANNE  M.  DOYLE  AND  SATNAM  P.  MATHUR 

McKesson  BioServices  and  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment, 

Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235  USA 

Received  17  November  1997;  Accepted  15  May  1998 

SEAMAN,  R.  L.,  M.  L.  BELT,  J.  M.  DOYLE  AND  S.  P.  MATHUR.  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses  and  morphine-induced 
changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in  mice.  PHYSIOL  BEHAV  65(2)  263-270,  1998. — Mice  were  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  (UWB) 
electromagnetic  pulses  averaging  99-105  kV/m  peak  amplitude,  0.97-1.03  ns  duration,  and  155-174  ps  rise  time,  after  intraperitoneal 
administration  of  saline  or  morphine  sulfate.  They  were  then  tested  for  thermal  nociception  on  a  50°C  surface  and  for  spontaneous 
locomotor  activity  and  its  time  profile  over  5  min.  Analysis  of  results  showed  no  effect  of  UWB  exposure  on  nociception  and  activity 
measures  in  CF-1  mice  after  15-,  30-,  or  45-min  exposure  to  pulses  at  600/s  or  after  30-imn  exposure  to  UWB  pulses  at  60/s.  Similarly, 
no  effect  was  seen  in  C57BL/6  mice  after  30-min  exposure  to  pulses  at  60/s  or  600/s.  Although  trends  in  morphine-modified  measures 
seen  with  UWB  pulse  repetition  frequency  could  be  expected  because  of  increased  levels  of  low-frequency  energy,  no  significant 
change  was  seen  in  normal  or  morphine-modified  nociception  or  activity  after  UWB  exposure.  This  indicated  lack  of  effect  of  the  UWB 
pulses  used  in  these  experiments  on  nervous  system  components,  including  endogenous  opioids,  involved  in  these  behaviors.  ©  1998 
Elsevier  Science  Inc. 

Ultra-wideband  pulses  Electromagnetic  fields  Nociception  Analgesia  Hyperactivity  Hypoactivity 
Morphine 


CONCERN  has  grown  for  the  health  and  safety  of  individuals, 
including  military  personnel,  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  (UWB) 
radiation  as  it  is  being  considered  for  more  and  more  applications. 
This  form  of  non-ionizing  electromagnetic  radiation  is  most  com¬ 
monly  described  in  terms  of  electric  field  pulses.  Practical  UWB 
pulses  typicaUy  have  amplitudes  of  10-1(X)  kilovolts/meter  (kV/m), 
durations  on  the  order  of  a  few  nanoseconds  (ns),  and  rise  times  of 
100-200  picoseconds  (ps).  The  pulses  can  be  produced  at  repeti¬ 
tion  frequencies  into  the  megahertz  (MHz)  range.  Each  pulse  has 
a  broad  frequency  spectrum  that  can  extend  from  DC,  or  0  Hz,  to 
several  gigahertz  (GHz) — static  to  microwave-frequency  fields. 
These  characteristics  are  useful  in  radar-like  imaging  and  jamming 
applications  (1),  and  the  technology  to  produce  more  powerful 
UWB  sources  is  developing  rapidly  (4).  The  few  studies  of  UWB 
biologic  effects  report  no  effect  in  animal  cardiovascular  and 
behavioral  endpoints  during  and  after  exposure  lasting  2  min  or 
less  (13,14,35,43).  Because  of  concern  for  health  and  safety  issues 
related  to  UWB  pulses,  experiments  with  other  endpoints  and 
longer  UWB  exposures  are  desired  to  provide  further  information 
on  UWB  biologic  effects. 

Effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  on  opioid  and  related  systems 
have  been  observed  in  a  number  of  laboratories.  These  fields  are 


too  small  to  elevate  tissue  temperature  to  a  degree  that  might  cause 
observed  effects.  Although  effects  have  been  seen  for  different 
types  of  fields  and  a  variety  of  endpoints  (9,21,23),  most  studies 
have  been  on  changes  in  nociception  after  exposure  to  low-fre¬ 
quency  magnetic  fields.  In  CF-1  mice,  a  0.5  Hz  rotating  magnetic 
field  reduces  analgesia  (antinociception)  induced  by  morphine  (16) 
and  stress  (18).  Morphine-induced  analgesia  in  these  mice  is  also 
reduced  by  60-Hz  magnetic  fields  (31)  and  electromagnetic  fields 
used  in  magnetic  resonance  imaging  (MRI)  (32,33).  In  CD-I  mice, 
a  static  magnetic  field  reduces  stress-induced  analgesia  (6).  In 
Wistar  rats,  a  pulsed  magnetic  field  increases  the  response  thresh¬ 
old  to  electrical  shock  (8).  Observations  of  similar  effects  in  an 
invertebrate  model  indicate  action  on  basic  nervous  system  com¬ 
ponents.  Analgesic  behavior  induced  in  a  land  snail  by  opiate 
agonists  is  reduced  with  a  0.5-Hz  rotating  magnetic  field  (19),  60 
Hz  magnetic  fields  (42),  and  magnetic  resonance  imaging  fields 
(32)  but  is  increased  with  a  pulsed  magnetic  field  (39).  The  60-Hz 
fields  also  cause  an  analgesia-like  antinociception  in  the  snail  (20), 
as  does  a  specific  pulsed  magnetic  field  (39,40). 

Other  studies  show  that  effects  of  magnetic  fields  in  rodents  are 
not  limited  to  those  on  nociception.  A  0.5-Hz  rotating  magnetic 
field  attenuates  increased  spontaneous  locomotor  activity  in  C57BL 


^  Requests  for  reprints  should  be  addressed  to  Ronald  L.  Seaman,  McKesson  BioServices,  P.O.  Box  35460,  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235-5460.  E-mail: 
ronald.seaman@aloer.brooks.af.mil 


264 


mice  induced  by  morphine  (16)  and  stress  (18).  Learning  of  a 
water-maze  task  is  improved  after  exposure  to  a  60-Hz  magnetic 
field  in  meadow  voles  (15)  and  deer  mice  (22).  However,  learning 
by  rats  is  decreased  in  a  12- arm  radial  maze  after  exposure  to  a 
60-Hz  magnetic  field  (24)  and  in  a  4-arm  maze  between  repeated 
exposures  to  a  pulsed  magnetic  field  (41). 

Collectively,  the  studies  on  nociception,  activity,  and  learning 
indicate  action  on  the  nervous  system  by  magnetic  fields  of  various 
frequencies  and  modulations.  Involvement  of  opioid  receptors  in 
these  studies  has  been  confirmed  by  use  of  opioid  agonists  and 
antagonists  (17,18,21,22,38,39).  Opioid  receptors  are  also  in¬ 
volved  in  changes  in  brain  chemistry  caused  by  2.45-GHz  micro- 
waves  (2-s  pulses,  500  pulses  per  s,  average  1  mW/cm^,  0.6  W/kg) 
(23,25,26),  indicating  that  effects  are  not  solely  related  to  low- 
frequency  magnetic  fields.  This  same  microwave  exposure  also 
causes  retarded  learning  by  rats  in  a  12-arm  radial  maze  and 
involves  cholinergic  and  opioid  systems  (23,27).  Analgesia  in 
mice,  due  in  part  to  opioids,  has  also  been  observed  after  exposure 
to  higher  levels  of  continuous- wave  2.45 -GHz  microwaves  (CW, 
20  mW/cm^,  46  W/kg),  which  produced  an  average  1.6°C  increase 
in  body  temperature  (28). 

Although  repetitive,  extremely  short  UWB  pulses  are  quite 
different  from  the  sinusoidal  and  pulsed  magnetic  fields  used  in 
previous  work;  frequencies  used  in  the  earlier  work  are  represented 
in  the  broad  frequency  spectra  of  the  electric  and  magnetic  fields 
of  UWB  pulses.  This  representation  indicates  that  UWB  pulses 
may  also  be  able  to  modify  nociception,  activity,  and  other  behav¬ 
iors.  However,  the  unique  characteristics  of  UWB  pulses  do  not 
allow  direct  use  of  results  from  earlier  studies.  As  shown  by  the 
previous  work,  tests  of  nociception  and  spontaneous  locomotor 
activity  provide  sensitive  and  robust  assays  for  effects  of  electro¬ 
magnetic  fields.  Results  of  the  tests  are  very  likely  to  be  indicative 
of  effects  on  other  systems  and  other  behaviors  involving  opioid 
receptors,  which  are  widespread  in  the  animal  kingdom  [e.g., 
(11,21,36)].  Knowledge  of  UWB  biologic  effects,  or  lack  of  them, 
is  important  for  protection  of  military  personnel  and  other  persons 
and  for  development  of  appropriate  safety  standards.  The  experi¬ 
ments  described  here  used  controlled  UWB  exposures  of  two 
strains  of  mice  to  test  for  effects  on  endogenous  nociception  and 
spontaneous  locomotor  activity  and  on  morphine-induced  changes 
in  the  two  behaviors  to  provide  knowledge  on  the  biologic  effects 
of  UWB  pulses. 

GENERAL  METHODS  AND  MATERIALS 

Animals 

Male  CF-l/Plus  white  mice  (Charles  River  Labs,  Portage,  MI, 
USA)  and  male  C57BL/6-VAF/Plus  black  mice  (Charles  River 
Labs,  Portage,  MI,  and  Raleigh,  NC,  USA)  were  used  in  separate 
experiments.  After  a  10-day  quarantine  period,  mice  were  housed 
in  polycarbonate  shoe  box  cages  with  ad  lib.  Purina  rodent  chow 
and  tap  water.  The  controlled  environment  of  the  animal  room 
included  temperature  of  22  ±  1°C,  relative  humidity  of  50  ±  5%, 
air  flow  of  10-15  exchanges  per  hour,  and  a  12/12  light/dark  cycle. 
The  light  period  started  at  either  0500  or  0600  hours,  with  only  one 
lights-on  time  for  a  particular  group  of  animals.  All  exposures  and 
tests  were  done  7-10  h  after  lights  on. 

Nociception  and  Activity  Tests 

Nociception  was  tested  by  placing  the  animal  on  a  metallic 
surface  heated  by  circulating  water,  to  49.5-50.5°C  across  all  exper¬ 
iments.  The  animal  was  within  an  upright,  open  cylinder  made  of 
clear  plastic  with  inside  diameter  of  14.5  cm.  In  early  experiments, 
latency  to  licking  a  front  paw  and  latency  to  licking  a  back  paw  in 


UWB,  MORPHINE,  NOCICEPTION,  AND  ACTIVITY 


response  to  the  heated  surface  were  measured  by  an  observer  using  a 
stopwatch.  To  have  a  more  reliable  early  measure  of  nociception, 
front-paw  latency  was  replaced  in  later  experiments  by  latency  to  the 
first  response  to  the  heated  surface.  The  first  response  consisted  of 
lifting,  shaking,  or  licking  a  paw  or  jumping.  Tlie  animal  was  re¬ 
moved  from  the  hot  plate  after  licking  a  back  paw.  If  a  back  paw  was 
not  licked  after  160  s,  the  animal  was  removed  and  this  time  was 
assigned  to  the  latency.  If  a  front-paw  lick  or  other  first  response  did 
not  occur  before  back-paw  licking,  the  back-paw  latency  was  also 
assigned  to  the  earlier  response. 

Spontaneous  locomotor  activity  was  tested  by  placing  the  an¬ 
imal  in  a  3 8. 5 -cm  square  arena  with  24-cm  walls  for  5  min  with 
room  lights  off.  Animal  movement  interrupted  light  beams  cross¬ 
ing  the  arena,  with  five  beams  in  each  horizontal  direction.  A 
computer  registered  and  counted  beam  interruptions.  A  count  for 
each  minute  of  the  test  was  recorded. 

The  order  of  testing  was  different  in  different  experiments.  The 
primary  measure  of  interest  was  tested  first:  nociception  for  CF-1 
mice  and  activity  for  C57BL/6  mice.  An  animal  was  returned  to  its 
home  cage  after  completion  of  testing. 

UWB  Exposure 

Exposure  to  UWB  pulses  was  accomplished  with  a  custom- 
built  giga  transverse  electromagnetic  (GTEM)  cell  originally  con¬ 
structed  by  Sandia  National  Laboratories  (Albuquerque,  NM, 
USA).  The  cell,  a  tapered  two-conductor  transmission  line  with  a 
square  cross  section,  was  positioned  so  that  one  ground  plane  wall 
was  horizontal.  A  modified  RG-220  coaxial  cable  connecting  the 
center  conductor  of  the  GTEM  cell  to  a  source  of  high  voltage 
included  a  spark  gap.  Ionization  of  pressurized  nitrogen  gas  in  the 
spark  gap  resulted  in  high  voltage  pulses  that  led  to  UWB  pulses 
propagating  in  the  GTEM  cell,  with  the  electric  field  vector  di¬ 
rected  from  the  center  conductor  to  the  ground  conductor.  Two 
four-inch  speakers  outside  the  GTEM  cell  provided  broadband 
noise  for  auditory  masking  of  UWB  system  operation.  The  74-75 
dBA  noise  consisted  of  56  ±  7  dB  SPL  (mean  ±  SD)  from  50  Hz 
to  20  kHz  (third  octave  analysis  using  Briiel  &  Kjaer  sound  level 
meter  Type  2230  and  1/3  octave  filter  set  Type  1625). 

The  UWB  pulses  in  the  GTEM  cell  were  monitored  during 
animal  exposures  using  signals  from  an  EG&G  ACD(A)  D-dot 
probe  mounted  in  the  wall  of  the  cell.  The  signals  were  sampled 
with  0.01 -ns  resolution  by  a  Tektronix  SCD  5000  Transient  Digi¬ 
tizer.  Each  digitized  waveform,  representing  the  average  of  200 
individual  pulses,  was  stored  and  later  processed  using  a  correction 
algorithm  (3)  to  give  pulse  electric  field  versus  time.  UWB  pulses 
were  triggered  by  an  external  pulse  generator  at  either  60/s  (60 
pulses  per  s)  or  600/s.  Specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  was  esti¬ 
mated  to  be  3.7  mW/kg  for  UWB  pulses  at  60/s  and  37  mW/kg 
for  UWB  pulses  at  600/s  [Note:  Estimates  of  whole-body  SAR 
were  made  by  W.  D.  Hurt  (Radiofrequency  Radiation  Division, 
Air  Force  Research  laboratory.  Brooks  AIB)  using  the  power 
spectrum  of  the  corrected  UV^  pulse  electric  field  and  the  fre¬ 
quency-dependent  normalized  SAR  (in  W/kg  per  mW/cm^)  for  a 
prolate  spheroidal  model  of  a  medium-sized  mouse  (Dumey, 
C.  H.;  Massoudi,  H.;  Iskander,  M.  F.  Radiofrequency  radiation 
dosimetry  handbook.  Technical  Report  USAFSAM-TR-85-73. 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base:  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine; 
1986).  The  integral  of  the  product  of  these  two  functions  in  the 
frequency  domain  was  mulitiplied  by  the  ratio  of  pulse  duration  to 
repetition  period  (duty  cycle)  to  obtain  an  SAR  value.  The  average 
of  results  for  k-  and  H-polarizations  of  the  animal  was  used  to 
account  for  the  movement  of  the  animal  in  the  UWB  field.].  For 
sham  exposure,  all  conditions  and  procedures  were  the  same 
except  that  no  pulses  were  triggered  (0/s). 


SEAMAN  ET  AL, 


265 


Three  parameters  were  used  to  characterize  UWB  pulse  electric 
field:  peak  amplitude,  rise  time,  and  duration.  These  parameters, 
particularly  peak  amplitude,  were  adjusted  by  changing  nitrogen 
gas  pressure  to  achieve  consistency  across  experiments.  Peak 
amplitude  was  a  nominal  100  kV/m.  Rise  time  was  typically  less 
than  200  ps.  Half-amplitude  duration  was  a  nominal  1  ns.  Mean  ± 
SD  of  each  parameter  is  given  for  reported  experiments. 

A  holder  made  from  clear  plastic  was  placed  in  the  GTEM  cell 
on  the  horizontal  ground  plane  for  animal  exposure  to  UWB 
pulses.  It  consisted  of  an  upright  cylinder  with  0.32-cm  walls  and 
12.1 -cm  internal  diameter,  a  floor  of  four  concentric  loops  of 
0.63-cm  plastic  rod,  and  a  plastic  cover.  The  animal  was  thus  in  a 
circular  chamber  with  a  12.1 -cm  diameter  and  a  vertical  space  of 
4.6  cm  between  floor  and  cover.  The  floor  supported  the  animal  3.8 
cm  above  the  ground  plane,  a  distance  sufficient  to  prevent  contact 
of  the  animal’s  tail  with  the  ground  plane.  Holes  in  the  cylinder 
below  the  floor  and  in  the  cover  allowed  air  to  flow  at  the  animal 
location.  An  animal  exhibited  normal  spontaneous  behavior  while 
in  the  well- ventilated  holder. 

Common  Procedures 

Animals  were  first  injected  intraperitoneally  (i.p.)  with  0.9% 
saline  or  morphine  sulfate  in  saline  (1  mg/mL  of  the  salt).  An 
animal  to  be  exposed  was  then  placed  in  a  holder  and  positioned  in 
the  GTEM  cell.  At  the  end  of  exposure,  the  animal  was  taken  from 
the  GTEM  cell  and  the  holder  and  tested  for  nociception  and 
spontaneous  locomotor  activity.  A  cage  control  animal  was  re¬ 
turned  to  its  home  cage  after  injection  and  was  later  removed  for 
testing  after  a  period  matching  the  exposure  duration  in  the  re¬ 
spective  experiment.  A  cage  control  animal  was  thus  not  exposed 
to  UWB  pulses  nor  did  it  experience  the  holder  or  the  GTEM  cell. 
The  noise  level  in  the  GTEM  cell  at  the  location  of  the  animal 
holder  was  checked  daily  with  a  Realistic  33-2055  sound  level 
meter  and  adjusted  if  necessary  to  74-75  dBA.  Low-frequency 
magnetic  fields  were  also  measured  daily  with  a  Dexsil  Magnum 
310  three-axis  digital  gaussmeter  at  three  locations:  at  the  home 
cage  in  the  laboratory,  near  the  GTEM  cell,  and  immediately 
above  the  heated  surface  device.  Measured  magnetic  fields  were 
0.08-1.72  mG,  0.04-2.80  mG,  0.04-0.88  mG  at  the  respective 
locations,  with  similar  results  using  the  60  Hz  and  40-310  Hz 
filters  of  the  meter. 

Analysis  of  Results 

Two-way  ANOVA  was  performed  separately  on  front-paw  or 
first-response  latency,  back-paw  latency,  and  total  activity  count 
with  morphine  and  UWB  as  factors.  ANOVA  was  also  performed 
on  the  time  profile  of  activity  count  with  repeated  measures  on 
time.  This  was  a  three-way  test  with  morphine,  UWB,  and  time  as 
factors  in  experiments  with  saline  controls  and  a  two-way  test  with 
UWB  and  time  as  factors  in  experiments  without  saline.  Signifi¬ 
cant  effects  in  ANOVAs  were  further  investigated  using  pair-wise 
comparisons  with  Newman-Keuls  testing.  The  difference  between 
cage  and  sham  conditions  for  each  measure  was  tested  with  a 
Student’s  f-test  with  Bonferroni  correction.  When  only  two  con¬ 
ditions  were  to  be  tested,  a  Student’s  Mest  was  used.  Statistical 
tests  were  performed  using  GB-STAT  software  (Dynamic  Micro¬ 
systems,  Silver  Spring,  MD,  USA).  The  significance  level  was 
0.05  in  all  tests. 

EXPERIMENTS  WITH  WHITE  MICE 

In  the  initial  experiment  with  white  mice  only  nociception  was 
measured.  The  experiment  was  patterned  after  experiments  show¬ 
ing  effects  of  magnetic  fields  on  stress-  and  morphine-induced 


UWB  Condition 

FIG.  1.  Latencies  (mean  +  SEM)  to  front-paw  licking  and  back-paw 
licking  on  the  heated  surface  for  CF-1  mice  injected  with  saline  (open  bars) 
or  7.5  mg/kg  morphine  sulfate  (shaded  bars)  and  exposed  to  UWB  pulses 
at  0/s  (sham),  60/s,  or  600/s  for  30  min.  Measures  are  from  the  same 
animals  with  n  =  20  for  each  of  the  six  groups. 


analgesia  (16,17,18,31)  by  choices  of  strain  of  mouse,  nociception 
test,  and  30-min  exposure.  A  lower  dose  of  morphine  (7.5  vs.  10 
mg/kg)  was  used  in  an  attempt  to  minimize  the  number  of  animals 
reaching  the  maximum  allowed  time  on  the  heated  surface.  Two 
UWB  pulse  repetition  frequencies  were  used:  60/s  and  600/s.  The 
lower  frequency  was  chosen  to  maximize  energy  at  60  Hz,  an 
effective  frequency  in  previous  magnetic-field  studies.  The  higher 
frequency  was  the  greatest  repetition  frequency  available  for  the 
UW^  pulses  during  a  30-min  exposure,  providing  a  maximum 
UWB  “dose”  in  terms  of  number  of  pulses  delivered. 

METHODS 

Male  CF-1  mice  housed  three  to  five  per  cage  weighed  32-50 
g  and  were  10-12  weeks  of  age  when  used.  Animals  were  assigned 
in  sequence  to  one  of  eight  morphine/UWB  conditions,  with  all 
conditions  being  delivered  randomly  in  a  block  before  their  next 
delivery.  The  three  UWB  conditions  consisted  of  UWB  pulses  at 
0/s  (sham),  60/s,  and  600/s  with  exposure  duration  of  30  min.  A 
cage  control  condition  was  also  included  (see  common  procedures 
above).  The  morphine  conditions  were  0  mg/kg  (saline)  and  7.5 
mg/kg  morphine  sulfate.  Front  paw-licking  and  back  paw-licking 
latencies  were  measured  on  the  50°C  surface  in  twenty  animals  for 
each  morphine/UWB  condition,  resulting  in  twenty  blocks  of  the 
conditions,  with  each  animal  used  only  once.  Measured  UWB 
pulse  parameters  were  105.0  ±  5.5  kV/m  peak  amplitude,  0.97  ± 
0.02  ns  duration,  and  165.0  ±  6.3  ps  rise  time  for  60/s.  Corre¬ 
sponding  values  were  100.1  ±  6.1  kV/m,  0.97  ±  0.02  ns,  and 
167.9  ±  10.5  ps  for  600/s. 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION 

Latencies  to  licking  front  paw  and  back  paw  for  the  white  mice 
are  shown  in  Fig.  1.  For  each  measure,  mean  latency  for  saline  was 
nearly  the  same  across  UWB  conditions,  10.8-12.3  s  for  front-paw 
licking  and  17.5-20.5  s  for  back-paw  licking.  Morphine  clearly 
induced  analgesia,  increasing  each  latency  by  several-fold  over  the 
respective  saline-control  value  for  each  UWB  condition.  Respec¬ 
tive  sham  and  cage  mean  latencies  were  not  different  for  saline  for 
either  latency  or  for  morphine  for  back-paw  latency.  Mean  sham 
latency  was  longer  than  mean  cage  latency  for  front-paw  latency 
for  morphine,  indicating  some  effect  of  being  placed  in  the  animal 
holder  and/or  the  GTEM  cell.  Mean  front-paw  latency  was  58.9- 


266 


UWB,  MORPHINE,  NOCICEPTION,  AND  ACTIVITY 


60.3  s  for  morphine  across  UWB  conditions.  ANOVA  (2  X  3) 
indicated  no  significant  effect  of  morphine-UWB  interaction  or 
UWB  [jp(2,  114)<1]  but  a  significant  main  effect  of  morphine 
[F(l,  114)  =  47.94,  p  <  0.0001].  Mean  back-paw  latency  was 
91 .9-126.8  s  for  morphine.  Despite  the  increase  in  mean  back-paw 
latency  with  higher  UWB  pulse  repetition  frequency,  morphine- 
UWB  interaction  was  not  significant  [F(2,  1 14)  =  2.49,  p  —  0.087], 
as  was  the  UWB  main  effect  [F(2,  114)  =  2.02,  p  —  0.137].  But, 
as  for  front-paw  latency,  a  significant  main  effect  of  morphine  was 
indicated  [F(l,  114)  =  178.72, p  <  0.0001].  Respective  Newman- 
Keuls  comparisons  revealed  a  strong  effect  of  morphine  to  in¬ 
crease  each  latency  for  each  UWB  condition.  Results  of  this  initial 
experiment  with  white  mice  showed  the  expected  effect  of  mor¬ 
phine  to  increase  response  latencies  but  no  effect  of  30-min  expo¬ 
sure  to  UWB  pulses  at  60/s  or  600/s  on  either  latency. 

Additional  Experiments 

Three  additional  experiments  were  performed  with  white  mice. 
These  experiments  were  similar  to  the  initial  one  but  differed  in  the 
duration  of  exposure  to  UWB  pulses  and  the  addition  of  sponta¬ 
neous  locomotor  activity  measurement  after  latency  measurements 
on  the  50°C  surface.  Animal  size  and  age  as  well  as  UWB  pulse 
parameters  were  quite  similar  to  those  in  the  initial  experiment. 

In  two  experiments,  animals  were  injected  with  morphine  and 
exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  either  0/s  (sham)  or  600/s.  The  30-min 
UWB  exposure  in  the  first  experiment  had  no  significant  effect  on 
first-response  latency  [t(38)  =  0.0084,  p  =  0.993]  or  back-paw 
latency  [r(38)  =  1.15,p  =  0.257].  For  activity,  no  significant  effect 
of  U\^  [F(l,  38)  =  2.36,  p  =  0.132]  or  UWB -time  interaction 
[F(4,  152)  <  1]  was  found.  A  decline  of  activity  counts  with 
minute  of  test  for  both  UWB  conditions  was  reflected  in  a  signif¬ 
icant  main  effect  of  time  [F(4,  152)  =  11.56,  p  <  0.0001].  Similar 
results  were  obtained  using  a  45-min  exposure  in  the  second 
experiment,  except  that  a  slower  decline  in  activity  with  minute  of 
test  after  UWB  exposure  than  after  sham  exposure  was  reflected  in 
a  significant  UWB-time  interaction  [F(4,  152)  =  3.53,  p  = 
0.0087]. 

In  another  experiment,  animals  were  injected  with  morphine  or 
saline  and  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  either  0/s  (sham)  or  600/s  for 
15  min.  Morphine-induced  analgesia  was  reflected  in  significant 
main  effects  of  morphine  on  first-response  latency  [F(l,  76)  = 
29.05,/?  <  0.0001]  and  back-paw  latency  [F(l,  76)  =  109.05,  p  < 
0.0001].  However,  the  main  effects  of  UWB  and  morphine-UWB 
interaction  were  not  significant  [F(l,  76)<1  or  F(l,  76)  =  1.82, 
p  =  0.181].  Morphine  had  a  significant  effect  to  decrease  activity 
[F(l,  76)  =  9.27,  p  <  0.0032].  But  UWB  and  morphine-UWB 
interaction,  as  well  as  UWB  and  morphine  interactions  with  time, 
did  not  significantly  influence  activity  [F(1,76)<1  or  F(4,304)<1]. 
A  decline  of  activity  with  minute  of  test,  common  to  all  conditions, 
was  reflected  in  a  significant  main  effect  of  time  [F(4,  304)  = 
22.51,  p  <  0.0001]. 

The  results  of  the  three  additional  experiments  were  consistent 
with  the  results  of  the  initial  experiment  with  white  mice.  For 
exposure  durations  of  15,  30,  and  45  min,  UWB  did  not  have  a 
significant  effect  on  post-exposure  measures  of  response  latencies 
on  the  heated  surface  or  spontaneous  locomotor  activity.  A  signif¬ 
icant  effect  of  time  on  activity  reflected  the  decline  in  counts 
during  the  5-min  activity  test  after  each  exposure  duration.  A 
significant  effect  of  morphine  was  seen  for  each  latency  and  on 
activity  after  1 5-min  exposure. 

EXPERIMENT  WITH  BLACK  MICE 

In  another  early  experiment,  activity  was  measured  in  black 
mice.  The  experiment  was  patterned  after  experiments  showing 


UWB  Condition 

FIG.  2.  Latencies  (mean  +  SEM)  to  first  response  and  back-paw  licking  on 
the  heated  surface  for  C57BL/6  mice  injected  with  saline  (open  bars)  or  10 
mg/kg  morphine  sulfate  (shaded  bars)  and  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  0/s 
(sham),  60/s,  or  600/s  for  30  min.  Measures  are  from  the  same  animals  with 
n  =  20  for  each  of  the  six  groups  for  first  response.  For  back  paw, «  =  20  for 
saline-600/s  and  morphine-O/s  groups  and  «  =  19  for  the  other  four  groups. 


effects  of  magnetic  fields  on  stress-  and  morphine-induced  hyper¬ 
activity  (16,18)  by  choices  of  mouse  strain,  30-min  exposure,  and 
morphine  dose.  A  testing  period  of  activity  longer  than  the  previ¬ 
ously  used  1  min  was  used  because  morphine-induced  increases 
could  not  be  detected  during  1-min  tests  in  preliminary  experi¬ 
ments.  The  two  UWB  pulse  repetition  frequencies  used,  60/s  and 
600/s,  were  chosen  for  the  same  reasons  as  for  the  initial  experi¬ 
ment  with  white  mice.  Nociception  testing  was  included  to  gather 
information  on  additional  endpoints. 

Methods 

Male  C57BL/6  mice  housed  one  to  three  per  cage  weighed 
22-30  g  and  were  8-17  weeks  of  age  when  used.  An  animal  was 
housed  singly  if  aggressive  home-cage  behavior  was  detected.  As 
in  the  initial  experiment  with  white  mice,  animals  were  assigned  in 
sequence  to  one  of  eight  morphine/UWB  conditions,  with  all 
conditions  delivered  randomly  in  a  block  before  their  next  deliv¬ 
ery.  The  three  UWB  conditions  consisted  of  UWB  pulses  at  0/s 
(sham),  60/s,  and  600/s,  with  exposure  duration  of  30  min.  A  cage 
condition  was  also  included  (see  common  procedures  above).  The 
morphine  conditions  were  0  mg/kg  (saline)  and  10  mg/kg  mor¬ 
phine  sulfate.  Twenty  animals  were  tested  for  each  morphine/ 
UWB  condition,  resulting  in  20  blocks  of  the  conditions,  with  each 
animal  used  only  once.  Activity  in  the  arena  was  measured  and 
then  first-response  and  back  paw-licking  latencies  were  measured 
on  the  50°C  surface.  Due  to  technical  problems,  only  19  data  were 
available  for  back-paw  latency  for  saline-O/s,  saline-60/s,  mor- 
phine-60/s,  and  morphine-600/s  conditions  and  for  activity  by 
minute  of  test  for  saline-60/s  and  saline-600/s  conditions.  Mea¬ 
sured  UWB  pulse  parameters  were  104.6  ±  3,7  kV/m  peak  am¬ 
plitude,  1.03  ±  0.03  ns  duration,  and  165.8  ±  4.1  ps  rise  time  for 
60/s.  Corresponding  values  were  99.0  ±  2.2  kV/m,  1.03  ±  0.03  ns, 
and  164.9  ±  5.4  ps  for  600/s. 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION 

Latencies  to  first  response  and  back-paw  licking  for  the  black 
mice  are  shown  in  Fig.  2.  For  each  measure,  mean  latencies  for 
saline  were  similar  across  UWB  conditions,  7. 7-9.0  s  for  first 
response  and  16.6-17.4  s  for  back-paw  licking.  Analgesia  was 
indicated  by  increases  in  each  latency  with  morphine,  first- 


SEAMAN  ET  AL. 


267 


UWB  Condition 

FIG.  3.  Total  activity  count  (mean  +  SEM)  for  C57BL/6  mice  injected 
with  saline  (open  bars)  or  10  mg/kg  morphine  sulfate  (shaded  bars)  and 
exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  0/s  (sham),  60/s,  or  600/s  for  30  min.  Measures 
are  from  the  same  animals  as  in  Fig.  2  with  n  =  20  for  each  of  the  six 
groups. 


response  approximately  doubling  and  back-paw  licking  increasing 
three-  to  fourfold.  Respective  sham  and  cage  latencies  were  not 
different  for  saline  or  morphine  for  either  latency.  First-response 
mean  latencies  were  16.3-17.9  s  for  morphine  across  UWB  con¬ 
ditions.  ANOVA  (2  X  3)  indicated  no  significant  effect  of  mor- 
phine-UWB  interaction  or  UWB  [F(2,  114)  <  1]  but  a  significant 
main  effect  of  morphine  [F(l,  114)  =  58.95,  p  <  0,0001].  For 
back-paw  latency,  mean  latencies  were  91.9-126.8  s  for  morphine, 
decreasing  with  greater  UWB-pulse  repefition  frequency.  How¬ 
ever,  ANOVA  indicated  no  significant  effect  of  morphine-UWB 
interaction  or  UWB  [^(2,  110)  <  1],  As  for  first-response  latency, 
a  significant  main  effect  of  morphine  was  indicated  [F(l,  110)  = 
96.02,  p  <  0.0001].  Respective  Newman-Keuls  comparisons 
showed  a  significant,  strong  effect  of  morphine  to  increase  each 
latency  measure  for  each  UWB  condition. 

Total  activity  count  is  shown  in  Fig.  3.  Mean  activity  count  was 
similar  across  UWB  conditions:  368-372  for  saline  and  649-695 
for  morphine.  Respective  cage  and  sham  mean  activity  counts 
were  not  different.  ANOVA  (2  X  3)  indicated  no  significant  effect 


of  morphine-UWB  interaction  or  UWB  [F(2,  114)  <  1],  but,  as  for 
latencies,  a  significant  main  effect  was  indicated  for  morphine 
[F(l,  114)  =  227.39,  p  <  0,0001].  Newman-Keuls  comparisons 
showed  the  same  results  as  for  latencies — a  strong,  significant 
effect  of  morphine  to  increase  the  mean  count  for  each  UWB 
condition. 

Activity  count  by  minute  of  test  is  shown  in  Fig.  4.  Mean 
activity  declined  with  time  for  saline  conditions  but  increased  and 
reached  a  plateau  for  morphine  conditions.  The  respective  change 
was  similar  for  all  UWB  conditions.  Respective  cage  and  sham 
mean  activity  counts  were  not  different  for  each  minute  of  test. 
ANOVA  (2X3X5,  repeated  measures)  indicated  significant 
effects  of  morphine-time  interaction  [F(4, 456)  =  71.35,  p  <  0.0001], 
morphine  [F(l,  114)  =  230.58,  p  <  0.0001],  and  time  [F(4,  456) 
=  11.01,  p  <  0.0001].  The  significant  interaction  reflected  the 
difference  in  activity  time  profile  between  morphine  conditions 
evident  in  Fig.  4.  No  significant  effect  was  indicated  for  morphine- 
UWB  interaction  or  UWB  [F(2, 114)  <  1];  UWB -time  interaction 
[F(8, 456)  -  1.65,  p  =  0.109];  or  morphine-UWB -time  interaction 
[F(8,  456)  =  1.59,  p  =  0.125].  Respective  Newman-Keuls  com¬ 
parisons  showed  that  mean  counts  during  each  minute  of  test  were 
significantly  different  between  saline  and  morphine  conditions  for 
each  UWB  condition. 

Results  of  this  experiment  with  black  mice  showed  the  ex¬ 
pected  effects  of  morphine  to  cause  analgesia  and  hyperactivity. 
However,  analysis  indicated  a  lack  of  effect  of  UWB  pulses  at  60/s 
and  600/s  for  30  min  on  nociception  as  well  as  on  spontaneous 
locomotor  activity.  The  nociception  results  were  consistent  with  a 
preliminary  experiment  in  which  no  effect  of  30-min  UWB  expo¬ 
sure  was  seen  on  latencies  to  front-paw  and  back-paw  licking. 

GENERAL  DISCUSSION 

The  effect  of  morphine  was  clearly  seen  in  each  experiment  and 
was  reflected  in  respective  significant  main  effects.  Morphine 
increased  both  latency  measures  on  the  heated  surface  for  both 
CF-1  and  C57BL/6  mice  (Figs.  1  and  2)  as  expected  from  the 
known  analgesic  action  of  morphine  in  these  strains  (5,10,16,17). 
Under  the  same  test  conditions  and  with  similar  morphine  doses, 
latency  increases  were  more  pronounced  for  CF-1  mice  than  for 
C57BL/6  mice.  Overall,  the  effects  of  morphine  on  nociception 
were  quite  similar  to  those  seen  in  previous  work. 

Morphine  effects  on  activity  measures  were  also  similar  to 


FIG.  4,  Activity  count  (mean  ±  SEM)  by  minute  of  test  for  C57BL/6  mice  injected  with  saline 
or  10  mg/kg  morphine  sulfate  and  exposed  to  UWB  pulses  at  0/s  (sham),  60/s,  or  600/s  for  30 
min.  Data  correspond  to  total  activities  in  Fig.  3  but  with  n  =  19  for  saline-60/s  and  saline-600/s 
groups. 


268 


UWB,  MORPHINE,  NOCICEPTION,  AND  ACTIVITY 


those  seen  in  previous  work.  The  increased  spontaneous  locomotor 
activity  in  C57BL/6  mice  with  morphine  (Fig.  3)  was  consistent 
with  previous  findings  for  this  and  other  strains  in  tests  of  various 
durations  (7,16,18,29,44).  The  corresponding  change  in  the  activ¬ 
ity  time  profile  (Fig.  4)  was  similar  to  increases  in  C57BL/6J  mice 
30  min  after  morphine  injection  (2,5,30).  The  decreases  in  the 
activity  measure  for  CF-1  mice  seen  30  min  after  7.5  mg/kg 
morphine  was  opposite  to  the  increases  seen  in  this  strain  for 
similar  and  higher  morphine  doses  in  longer  tests  (29,44).  How¬ 
ever,  the  decrease  was  consistent  with  initial  periods  of  hypoac- 
tivity  after  morphine  injection  seen  in  various  mouse  strains 
(7,34,37).  The  hypoactivity  could  explain  the  small  net  changes  in 
CF-1  activity  after  morphine  sulfate  injection  in  4-h  and  90-min 
tests  (29,44).  The  measurements  in  this  study  at  15-45  min  postin¬ 
jection  could  have  well  occurred  during  such  an  initial  or  early 
period  of  hypoactivity.  The  decline  in  activity  with  time  for  CF-1 
mice  supported  this  pattern  of  activity.  The  consistency  of  mor¬ 
phine  effects  on  nociception  and  spontaneous  locomotor  activity 
with  respect  to  previous  work  assured  reliable  bases  for  testing 
possible  modification  by  UWB  pulses. 

No  significant  effect  of  UWB  exposure  was  found  on  nocicep¬ 
tion  in  these  experiments.  This  was  the  case  for  function  without 
morphine  and  for  morphine-induced  changes  in  nociception.  How¬ 
ever,  some  trends  in  nociception  occurred  with  UWB  exposure. 
Mean  latency  to  back-paw  licking  in  CF-1  mice  tended  to  increase 
with  UWB  exposure.  The  increase  was  larger  for  higher  UWB 
pulse  repetition  frequency  for  30-min  exposure  (Fig.  1).  The  trend 
of  increased  latency  was  opposite  to  the  effect  of  static  and 
low-frequency  magnetic  fields  and  MRI  fields  to  decrease  analge¬ 
sia  (6,16,18,31-33).  However,  the  trend  was  in  the  same  direction 
as  the  effect  of  pulsed  magnetic  fields  to  induce  analgesia  and 
increase  opiate-mediated  analgesia  (8,39,40).  On  the  other  hand, 
mean  back-paw  latency  in  C57BL/6  mice  with  morphine  tended  to 
decrease  with  repetition  frequency  (Fig.  2),  consistent  with  the 
findings  for  decreased  analgesia  after  exposure  to  magnetic  fields 
that  were  not  pulsed. 

Similarly,  no  significant  effect  of  UWB  exposure  was  found  on 
spontaneous  locomotor  activity.  As  for  nociception,  this  was  the 
case  for  normal  activity  and  for  morphine-induced  changes  in 
activity.  However,  some  trends  in  activity  also  occurred  with 
UWB  exposure.  The  CF-1  mice  tended  to  be  more  active  after  all 
durations  of  UWB  exposure  to  pulses  at  600/s.  For  15-min  UWB 
exposure,  the  effect  was  to  counteract  a  decrease  in  activity  due  to 
morphine.  For  45-min  exposure,  the  effect  was  to  change  the  shape 
of  the  activity  time  profile,  reflected  in  a  significant  interaction 
between  UWB  exposure  and  minute  of  test.  In  C57BL/6  mice,  the 
trend  was  for  the  morphine-increased  activity  to  decrease  weakly 
with  UWB  exposure  (Figs,  3  and  4),  opposite  to  the  trend  in  CF-1 
mice  but  in  the  same  direction  as  the  change  caused  by  low- 
frequency  magnetic  fields  (16). 

The  lack  of  significant  effect  of  UWB  pulses  is  consistent  with 
results  of  UWB  studies  with  behavioral  and  cardiovascular  end¬ 
points  and  2-min  or  shorter  exposures.  Performance  on  an  equi¬ 
librium  platform  was  not  changed  in  monkeys  after  2-min  expo¬ 
sure  to  250  kV/m,  5-10  ns  pulses  at  60/s  (35).  No  change  in  a 
functional  observational  battery  was  seen  in  rats  after  exposure 
with  the  same  parameters  (43).  Tests  included  home  cage  and  open 
field  behaviors  as  well  as  motor  activity  and  grip  strength.  Heart 
rate  and  hlood  pressure  were  not  changed  in  anesthetized  rats  by 
exposure  to  single  and  2-min  trains  of  0.5-s  bursts  of  19-21  kV/m, 
6-ns  pulses  at  1000/s  (13)  or  by  2-min  exposure  to  87-104  kV/m, 
1-ns  pulses  at  50/s,  500/s,  and  1000/s  (14).  However,  awake  rats 
exposed  for  6  min  to  1  ns  pulses  at  93  kV/m  at  500/s  or  85  kV/m 
at  1000/s  exhibited  hypotension  without  a  change  in  heart  rate  for 


up  to  4  weeks  after  exposure  (S.  T.  Lu,  personal  communication 
1998). 

In  this  study,  delivered  UWB  pulses  were  similar  in  amplitude, 
duration,  and  rise  time  across  experiments,  even  between  the  60/s 
and  600/s  repetition  frequencies.  The  similarity  assured  that  ani¬ 
mals  received  exposures  to  UWB  pulses  that  differed  only  in 
repetition  frequency  and  exposure  duration.  Although  no  method 
currently  exists  to  measure  UWB  fields  inside  the  animal  holder  or 
the  animal,  we  are  certain  that  a  broad  range  of  frequencies  was 
represented.  Computed  frequency  spectra  of  measured  UWB  pulse 
electric  field  showed  that  more  than  an  estimated  95%  of  pulse 
energy  was  carried  by  frequencies  between  0  and  0.2  GHz  (200 
MHz).  Because  of  the  unipolar  nature  of  the  UWB  pulses  a 
substantial  amount  of  this  energy  was  at  or  near  0  Hz,  which 
includes  frequencies  used  in  previous  studies  on  effects  of  mag¬ 
netic  fields  on  nociception  and  activity.  The  estimated  SARs  of  3.7 
mW/kg  for  pulses  at  60/s  and  37  mW/kg  for  pulses  at  600/s  were 
too  small  to  cause  detectable  temperature  rise.  The  SAR  values 
were  much  smaller  than  0.4  W/kg,  the  maximum  allowable  whole- 
body  SAR  used  in  radiofrequency/microwave  exposure  standards 
(12). 

The  animals  in  this  study  experienced  two  types  of  magnetic 
fields,  those  of  the  UWB  pulses  and  those  in  the  laboratory 
environment.  Using  a  nominal  UWB  pulse  amplitude  of  100  kV/m 
and  a  wave  impedance  of  377  ohms  in  the  GTEM  cell,  we 
estimated  the  propagating  peak  magnetic  field  of  an  individual 
pulse  to  be  3.3  G  (0.33  mT).  Due  to  the  small  fraction  of  time  the 
pulses  occupied,  the  time-averaged  field  was  many  times  smaller, 
approximately  6  •  10~^  and  6  *  10“”^  of  the  peak  field  for  UWB 
pulses  at  60/s  and  600/s,  respectively.  The  measured  low-fre¬ 
quency  magnetic  fields  in  the  laboratory  of  0.04-2.80  mG  (4  • 
10“^-2.8  •  lO"'^  mT)  were  similar  for  all  animals.  In  previous 
studies  showing  effects,  static  and  low-frequency  magnetic  fields 
of  0.5-90  G  (0.05-9,0  mT)  for  mice  and  snails  (6,16,17,18,19,31) 
were  larger  than  the  measured  laboratory  fields.  Microwave  pulsed 
peak  magnetic  fields  (25,26,27)  estimated  as  3.55  G  (0.355  mT) 
for  rats  and  pulsed  magnetic  fields  with  peaks  of  0.01-0.05  G 
(0.001-0.005  mT)  for  rats  (8,41)  and  100  jjiT  (0.1  mT)  for  snails 

(39.40)  were  also  larger.  Thus,  the  magnitude  of  effective  mag¬ 
netic  fields  in  previous  studies  was  similar  to  the  magnitude  of  the 
peak  magnetic  field  of  individual  UWB  pulses,  but  they  were 
larger  than  the  time-averaged  field  of  the  pulses  and  the  back¬ 
ground  laboratory  low-frequency  fields  experienced  by  the  animals 
in  this  study.  The  UWB  pulse  energy  was  also  different  from  that 
of  the  static  and  low-frequency  fields  because  it  was  distributed 
across  a  wideband  of  frequencies  and  was  delivered  in  1  ns  or  so, 
a  small  fraction  of  the  pulse  repetition  period.  The  lack  of  signif¬ 
icant  UWB  effect  can  be  ascribed  to  the  time-averaged  energy  at 
effective  frequencies  being  much  lower  than  that  used  in  previous 
studies  finding  effects  of  magnetic  fields.  Because  of  their  rela¬ 
tively  small  contribution  to  UWB  pulse  energy  and  their  relative 
ineffectiveness  in  altering  function  (33),  radio-frequency,  and  mi¬ 
crowave  components  would  be  expected  not  to  contribute  directly 
to  an  effect  of  UWB  pulses. 

The  trend  of  morphine  back-paw  latency  of  CF-1  mice  to 
increase  after  UWB  exposure,  indicating  enhanced  antinocicep¬ 
tion,  may  be  related  to  the  antinociception  in  rats  and  snails 

(8.39.40)  and  the  altered  learning  in  rats  (41)  caused  by  pulsed 
magnetic  fields.  This  may  indicate  an  importance  of  the  pulsatile 
nature  of  the  energy  delivered  during  exposure  to  electromagnetic 
fields.  The  time  sequence  of  magnetic-field  pulses  can  also  be  a 
factor  (40). 

In  summary,  the  UWB  pulses  used  here  did  not  have  a  signif¬ 
icant  effect  on  the  nociception  and  activity  endpoints  tested.  The 
tests  of  thermal  nociception  and  spontaneous  locomotor  activity 


SEAMAN  ET  AL. 


269 


had  been  selected  because  of  their  use  in  previous  work  with 
low-frequency  magnetic  fields.  Because  opioid  receptors  are  in¬ 
volved  in  the  effects  seen  previously,  the  UWB  pulses  seemed  not 
able  to  affect  the  receptors,  or  other  neural  components,  as  in 
previous  work.  The  lack  of  significant  effect  could  have  been  due 
to  insufficient  energy  at  known  effective  frequencies.  Trends  in  the 
results  with  morphine  seen  with  higher  UWB  pulse  repetition 
frequency  may  indicate  an  effect  that  increases  with  increased 
energy  at  effective  frequencies. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This  work  is  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and 
Materiel  Command  under  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to 
McKesson  BioServices.  We  are  grateful  to  M.  Kavaliers  for  advice  in  the 
early  stages  of  the  project  and  to  Y.  Akyel,  B.  Stuck,  A.  Thomas,  and  F. 


Prato  for  comments  on  draft  manuscripts.  We  are  also  grateful  to  M.  Belt, 
D.  Cox,  and  J.  Lee  for  continuous,  reliable  operation  of  the  UWB  exposure 
system,  P.  Henry  for  technical  assistance  in  early  experiments,  and  T.-S.  Lu 
for  discussions  on  estimating  SAR.  We  also  thank  D.  Cox  for  design  and 
construction  of  the  heated  surface  device  and  the  animal  holders. 

The  views,  opinions,  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those 
of  the  author(s)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of 
the  Army  position,  policy,  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by  other 
documentation.  In  conducting  research  using  animals,  the  investigator(s) 
adhered  to  the  “Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals,” 
prepared  by  the  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals  of  the 
Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal  Resources,  National  Research  Council 
(National  Institutes  of  Health  Publication  No.  86-23,  Revised  1985).  The 
U.S.  Air  Force  Armstrong  Laboratory  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base  is  fully 
accredited  by  the  Association  for  Assessment  and  Accreditation  of  Labo¬ 
ratory  Animal  Care,  International  (AAALAC). 


REFERENCES 


1.  Agee,  F.  J.;  Scholfield,  D.  W.;  Prather  W.;  Burger,  J.  W.  Powerful 
ultra- wide  band  RF  emitters:  Status  and  challenges.  SPIE  Proc.  Series 
2557:98-109;  1995. 

2.  Alkana,  R.  L.;  Davies,  D.  L.;  Morland,  J.;  Parker,  E.  S.;  Bejanian,  M. 
Low-level  hyperbaric  exposure  antagonizes  locomotor  effects  of  eth¬ 
anol  and  n-propanol  but  not  moiphine  in  C57BL  mice.  Alcohol.  Clin. 
Exp.  Res.  19:693-700;  1995. 

3.  Bao,  J.  Z.  Picosecond  domain  electromagnetic  pulse  measurements  in 
an  exposure  facility:  An  error  compensation  routine  using  deconvolu¬ 
tion  techniques.  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  68:2221-2227;  1997. 

4.  Baum,  C.  E.;  Carin,  L.;  Stone,  A.  P.,  eds.  Ultra-wideband,  short-pulse 
electromagnetics  3.  New  York:  Plenum;  1997. 

5.  Belknap,  J.  K.;  Noordewier,  B.;  Lame,  M.  Genetic  dissociation  of 
multiple  morphine  effects  among  C57BL/6J,  DBA/2J  and  C3H/HeJ 
inbred  mouse  strains.  Physiol.  Behav.  46:69-74;  1989. 

6.  Betancur,  C.;  Dell’Omo,  G.;  Alieva,  E.  Magnetic  field  effects  on 
stress-induced  analgesia  in  mice:  Modulation  by  light.  Neurosci.  Lett. 
182:147-150;  1994. 

7.  Cowan,  A.  Effects  of  opioids  on  the  spontaneous  behavior  of  animals. 
In:  Herz,  A.;  Akil,  H.;  Simon,  E.  J.,  eds.  Handbook  of  experimental 
pharmacology,  104/11:  Opioids  II.  Berlin:  Springer-Verlag;  1993:393- 
428. 

8.  Fleming,  J.  L.;  Persinger,  M.  A.;  Koren,  S.  A.  Magnetic  pulses  elevate 
nociceptive  thresholds:  Comparisons  with  opiate  receptor  compounds 
in  normal  and  seizure-induced  brain-damaged  rats.  Electro-  Magneto- 
biol.  13:67-75;  1994. 

9.  Frey,  A.  H.  An  integration  of  the  data  on  mechanisms  with  particular 
reference  to  cancer.  In:  Frey,  A.  H.,  ed.  On  the  nature  of  electromag¬ 
netic  field  interactions  with  biologic  systems.  Austin:  Landes;  1994: 
9-28. 

10.  Gebhart,  G.  F.;  Mitchell,  C.  L.  Strain  differences  in  the  analgesic 
response  to  morphine  as  measured  on  the  hot  plate.  Arch.  Int.  Phar- 
macodyn.  201:128-140;  1973. 

11.  Harrison,  L.  M.;  Kastin,  A.  J.;  Weber,  J.  T.;  Banks,  W.  A.;  Hurley, 
D.  L.;  Zadina,  J.  E.  The  opiate  system  in  invertebrates.  Peptides 
15:1309-1329;  1994. 

12.  IEEE  IEEE  C95.  1-1991:  IEEE  standard  for  safety  levels  with  respect 
to  human  exposure  to  radio  frequency  electromagnetic  fields,  3  kHz  to 
300  GHz.  New  York:  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers; 
1992. 

13.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Frei,  M.  R.;  Ryan,  K.  L.;  Merritt,  J.  H.;  Murphy,  M.  R. 
Lack  of  effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  in  ketamine-anesthe¬ 
tized  rats  briefly  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses. 
IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng.  (in  press,  1998). 

14.  Jauchem,  J.  R.;  Seaman,  R.  L.;  Lehnert,  H.  M.;  Mathur,  S.  P.;  Ryan, 
K.  L.;  Frei,  M.  R.  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses:  Lack  of 
effects  on  heart  rate  and  blood  pressure  during  two-minute  exposures 
of  rats.  Bioelectromagnetics  19:330-333,  1998. 

15.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Eckel,  L.  A.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Brief  exposure  to  60  Hz 
magnetic  fields  improves  sexually  dimorphic  spatial  learning  perfor¬ 


mance  in  the  meadow  vole,  Microtus  pennsylvanicus.  J.  Comp. 
Physiol.  A  173:241-248;  1993. 

16.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Exposure  to  rotating  magnetic  fields 
alters  morphine-induced  behavioral  responses  in  two  strains  of  mice. 
Neuropharmacology  24:337-340;  1985. 

17.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Magnetic  fields  differentially  inhibit 
mu,  delta,  kappa  and  sigma  opiate-induced  analgesia  in  mice.  Peptides 
7:449-453;  1986. 

18.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Stress-induced  opioid  analgesia  and 
activity  in  mice:  Inhibitory  influences  of  exposure  to  magnetic  fields. 
Psychopharmacology  89:440-443;  1986. 

19.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Magnetic  fields  inhibit  opioid-medi¬ 
ated  “analgesic”  behaviours  of  the  terrestrial  snail,  Cepaea  nemoralis. 
J.  Comp.  Physiol.  A  162:551-558;  1988. 

20.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Repeated  naloxone  treatments  and 
exposures  to  weak  60-Hz  magnetic  fields  have  “analgesic”  effects  in 
snails.  Brain  Res.  620:159-162;  1993. 

21.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Prato,  F.  S.;  Carson,  J.  J.  L.  Opioid 
systems  and  the  biological  effects  of  magnetic  fields.  In:  Frey,  A.  H., 
ed.  On  the  nature  of  electromagnetic  field  interactions  with  biological 
systems.  Austin:  Landes;  1994:181-194. 

22.  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Prato,  F.  S.;  Innes,  D.  G.  L.;  Galea, 
L.  A.  M.;  Kinsella,  D.  M.;  Perrot-Sinal,  T.  S.  Spatial  learning  in  deer 
mice:  Sex  differences  and  the  effects  of  endogenous  opioids  and  60  Hz 
magnetic  fields.  J.  Comp.  Physiol.  A  179:715-724;  1996. 

23.  Lai,  H.  Neurological  effects  of  radiofrequency  electromagnetic  radia¬ 
tion.  In:  Lin,  J.  C.,  ed.  Advances  in  electromagnetic  fields  in  living 
systems,  vol.  1.  New  York:  Plenum;  1994:27-80. 

24.  Lai,  H.  Spatial  learning  deficit  in  the  rat  after  exposure  to  a  60  Hz 
magnetic  field.  Bioelectromagnetics  17:494-496;  1996. 

25.  Lai,  H.;  Carino,  M.  A.;  Horita,  A.;  Guy,  A.  W.  Opioid  receptor 
subtypes  that  mediate  a  microwave-induced  decrease  in  central  cho¬ 
linergic  activity  in  the  rat.  Bioelectromagnetics  13:237-246;  1992. 

26.  Lai,  H.;  Horita,  A.;  Chou,  C.  K.;  Guy,  A.  W.  Psychoactive-drug 
response  is  affected  by  acute  low-level  microwave  irradiation.  Bioel¬ 
ectromagnetics  4:205-214;  1983. 

27.  Lai,  H.;  Horita,  A.;  Guy,  A.  W.  Microwave  irradiation  affects  radial-arm 
maze  performance  in  the  rat.  Bioelectromagnetics  15:95-104;  1994. 

28.  Maillefer,  R.  H.;  Quock,  R.  M.  Naltrexone-sensitive  analgesia  follow¬ 
ing  exposure  of  mice  to  2450-MHz  radiofrequency  radiation.  Physiol. 
Behav.  52:511-514;  1992. 

29.  Marrazzi,  M.  A.;  Mullings-Britton,  J.;  Stack,  L.;  Powers,  R.  J.; 
Lawhom,  J.;  Graham,  V.;  Eccles,  T.;  Gunter,  S.  Atypical  endogenous 
opioid  systems  in  mice  in  relation  to  an  auto-addiction  opioid  model  of 
anorexia  nervosa.  Life  Sci.  47:1427-1435;  1990. 

30.  Morland,  J.;  Jones,  B.  L.;  Palomares,  M.  L.;  Alkana,  R.  L.  Morphine- 
6-glucuronide:  A  potent  stimulator  of  locomotor  activity  in  mice.  Life 
Sci.  55:PL163-168;  1994. 

31.  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Kavaliers,  M.  Morphine-induced  analgesia  and 
exposure  to  low-intensity  60-Hz  magnetic  fields:  Inhibition  of  noctur- 


270 


UWB,  MORPHINE,  NOCICEPTION,  AND  ACTIVITY 


nal  analgesia  in  mice  is  a  function  of  magnetic  field  intensity.  Brain 
Res.  418:356-360;  1987. 

32.  Prato,  F.  S.;  Kavaliers,  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Carson,  J.  J.  L.;  Drost, 
D,  J.;  Frappier,  J.  R.  H.  Extremely  low  frequency  magnetic  field 
exposure  from  MRI/MRS  procedures.  Ann.  NY  Acad.  Sci.  649:44-58; 
1992. 

33.  Prato,  F.  S.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Kavaliers,  M.;  Sestini,  E.;  Teskey, 
G.  C.  Attenuation  of  morphine-induced  analgesia  in  mice  by  exposure 
to  magnetic  resonance  imaging:  Separate  effects  of  the  static,  radio¬ 
frequency  and  time-varying  magnetic  fields.  Magn.  Reson.  Imaging 
5:9-14;  1987. 

34.  Saito,  H.  Inhibitory  and  stimulatory  effects  of  morphine  on  locomotor 
activity  in  mice:  Biochemical  and  behavioral  studies.  Pharmacol.  Bio- 
chem.  Behav.  35:231-235;  1990. 

35.  Sherry,  C.  J.;  Blick,  D.  W.;  Walters,  T.  J.;  Brown,  G.  C.;  Murphy, 
M.  R.  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after  exposure 
to  ultrawideband  electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave  fre¬ 
quency  range.  Radiat.  Res.  143:93-97;  1995. 

36.  Stevens,  C.  W.;  Rothe,  K.  S,  Supraspinal  administration  of  opioids 
with  selectivity  for  ju,-,  8-,  and  K-opioid  receptors  produces  analgesia 
in  amphibians.  Eur.  J.  Pharmacol.  331:15-21;  1997. 

37.  Szekely,  J.  L;  Miglecz,  E.;  Ronai,  A.  Z.  Biphasic  effects  of  a  potent 
enkephalin  analogue  (D-Met^,Pro^)-enkephalinaniide  and  morphine  on 
locomotor  activity  in  mice.  Psychopharmacology  71:299-301;  1980. 

38.  Teskey,  G.  C.;  Prato,  F.  S.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Kavaliers,  M.  Exposure 


to  time  varying  magnetic  fields  associated  with  magnetic  resonance 
imaging  reduces  fentanyl-induced  analgesia  in  mice.  Bioelectromag¬ 
netics  9:167-174;  1988. 

39.  Thomas,  A.  W.;  Kavaliers,  M.;  Prato,  F.  S.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Pulsed 
magnetic  field  induced  “analgesia”  in  the  land  snail,  Cepaea  nemora- 
lis,  and  the  effects  of  /ll,  8,  and  k  opioid  receptor  agonists/antagonists. 
Peptides  18:703-709;  1997. 

40.  Thomas,  A.  W.;  Kavaliers,  M.;  Prato,  F.  S.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.  Antino¬ 
ciceptive  effects  of  a  pulsed  magnetic  field  in  the  land  snail,  Cepaea 
nemoralis.  Neurosci,  Lett.  222:107-110;  1997. 

41.  Thomas,  A.  W.;  Persinger,  M.  A.  Daily  posttraining  exposure  to  pulsed 
magnetic  fields  that  evoke  moiphine-like  analgesia  affects  consequent 
motivation  but  not  proficiency  in  maze  learning  in  rats.  Electro- 
Magnetobiol.  16:33-41;  1997. 

42.  Tysdale,  D.  M.;  Lipa,  S.  M.;  Ossenkopp,  K.  P.;  Kavaliers,  M.  Inhib¬ 
itory  effects  of  60-Hz  magnetic  fields  on  opiate-induced  “analgesia”  in 
the  land  snail,  Cepaea  nemoralis,  under  natural  conditions.  Physiol. 
Beliav.  49:53-56;  1991. 

43.  Walters,  T.  J.;  Mason,  P.  A.;  Sherry,  C.  J.;  Steffen,  C.;  Merritt,  J.  H. 
No  detectable  bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high  peak  power 
ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats.  Aviat.  Space  Envi¬ 
ron.  Med.  66:562-567;  1995. 

44.  Wenger,  G.  R.  The  role  of  control  activity  levels  in  the  reported  strain 
differences  to  the  behavioral  effects  of  drugs  in  mice.  Pharmacol. 
Biochem.  Behav.  32:241-247;  1989. 


Bioelectromagnetics  18:324-334  (1997) 


Search  for  Frequency-Specific  Effects  of 
Millimeter-Wave  Radiation  on  Isolated 
Nerve  Function 


A.G.  Pakhomov,^  H.K.  Prol,^  S.P.  Mathur,^  Y.  Akyel,^  and  C.B.G.  CampbelP 

^Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch,  U.  S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment  of  the  Walter 
Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 
^McKesson  BioServices,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  Texas 

Effects  of  a  short-term  exposure  to  millimeter  waves  (CW,  40-52  GHz,  0.24-3.0  mW/cm^)  on  the 
compound  action  potential  (CAP)  conduction  were  studied  in  an  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve  preparation. 
CAPS  were  evoked  by  either  a  low-rate  or  a  high-rate  electrical  stimulation  of  the  nerve  (4  and  20 
paired  pulses/s,  respectively).  The  low-rate  stimulation  did  not  alter  the  functional  state  of  the  nerve, 
and  the  amplitude,  latency,  and  peak  latency  of  CAPs  could  stay  virtually  stable  for  hours.  Microwave 
irradiation  for  10-60  min  at  0.24-1.5  mW/cm^,  either  at  various  constant  frequencies  or  with  a 
stepwise  frequency  change  (0.1  or  0.01  GHz/min),  did  not  cause  any  detectable  changes  in  CAP 
conduction  or  nerve  refractoriness.  The  effect  observed  under  irradiation  at  a  higher  field  intensity 
of  2-3  mW/cm^  was  a  subtle  and  transient  reduction  of  CAP  latency  and  peak  latency  along  with  a 
rise  of  the  test  CAP  amplitude.  These  changes  could  be  evoked  by  any  tested  frequency  of  the  radiation; 
they  reversed  shortly  after  cessation  of  exposure  and  were  both  qualitatively  and  quantitatively  similar 
to  the  effect  of  conventional  heating  of  0.3 -0.4  °C.  The  high-rate  electrical  stimulation  caused  gradual 
and  reversible  decrease  of  the  amplitude  of  conditioning  and  test  CAPs  and  increased  their  latencies 
and  peak  latencies.  These  changes  were  essentially  the  same  with  and  without  irradiation  (2.0- 2.7 
or  0.24-0.28  mW/cm^),  except  for  attenuation  of  the  decrease  of  the  test  CAP  amplitude.  This  effect 
was  observed  at  both  field  intensities,  but  was  statistically  significant  only  for  certain  frequencies  of 
the  radiation.  Within  the  studied  limits,  this  effect  appeared  to  be  dependent  on  the  frequency  rather 
than  on  the  intensity  of  the  radiation,  but  this  observation  requires  additional  experimental  confirma¬ 
tion.  Bioelectromagnetics  18:324-334,  1997.  ©  1997  Wiiey-Liss,  Inc. 

Key  words:  nerve  conduction;  compound  action  potential;  frequency-specific  bioeffects 


v7 


INTRODUCTION 

One  of  the  most  intriguing  problems  in  modem 
electromagnetobiology  is  the  existence  and  physiologi¬ 
cal  significance  of  frequency-specific,  resonance-type 
biological  effects  of  millimeter  waves  [MMW,  see  for 
example  Gmndler  et  al.,  1977;  Keilmann,  1985;  Gmn- 
dler  and  Kaiser,  1992;  Kataev  et  al.,  1993;  Belyaev  et 
al.,  1992, 1994],  Many  investigators  are  rather  skeptical 
about  such  effects  and  regard  them  as  experimental 
artifacts  [Gandhi  et  al.,  1980;  Bush  et  al.,  1981;  Furia 
et  al.,  1986].  At  the  same  time,  in  the  former  Soviet 
Union  the  effects  of  low-level  MMW  have  not  only 
been  demonstrated  in  a  multitude  of  studies,  but  have 
been  used  for  years  in  clinical  practice.  Diseases  re¬ 
ported  to  be  successfully  treated  by  MMW  range  from 
peptic  ulcers  to  cardiomyopathy,  stenocardia,  hyperten¬ 
sion,  wound  infections,  etc.  Experience  claimed  with 
more  than  100  000  clinical  cases  [Sit’ko  et  al.,  1992; 


Betzky,  1992]  should  be  considered  and  may  provide 
evidence  for  the  reality  of  specific  or  nonthermal  bio¬ 
logical  effects  of  MMW  electromagnetic  radiation. 

Of  particular  interest  are  recent  experimental  data 
for  MMW  effects  on  excitable  tissue  and  cell  mem¬ 
brane  function.  Burachas  and  Mascoliunas  [1989]  have 
demonstrated  a  pronounced  MMW-induced  suppres¬ 
sion  of  compound  action  potentials  (CAPs)  in  isolated 
frog  sciatic  nerves.  After  10-20  min  of  irradiation  at 
77.7  GHz,  10  mW/cm^,  CAP  amplitude  decreased  ex- 


Contract  Grant  sponsor:  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel 
Command;  Contract  Grant  number:  DAMD17-94-C-4069. 
*Correspondence  to:  Dr.  A.  Pakhomov,  USA-MCMR,  U.  S.  Army  Med¬ 
ical  Research  Detachment,  8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks 
Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  TX  78235-5324.  E-mail:  akyel@rfr. 
brooks.af.mil 

Received  for  review  13  February  1996;  revision  received  18  November 
1996 


©  1997  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 


Millimeter  Waves  Effect  on  Isolated  Nerve  Conduction 


325 


ponentially  and  fell  10-fold  within  the  next  40-90  min. 
The  CAP  decrease  due  to  the  second  and  the  subse¬ 
quent  exposures  became  increasingly  steeper,  taking 
only  10-15  min.  In  addition  to  this  “slow”  response, 
switching  the  field  on  increased  CAP  amplitude  instan¬ 
taneously  by  5-7%,  and  switching  the  field  off  caused 
the  opposite  short-term  reaction. 

Chernyakov  et  al.  [1989]  carried  out  a  complex 
study  of  effects  induced  by  MMW  in  various  excitable 
structures.  Exposure  of  an  isolated  frog  tailor’s  muscle 
(m.  sartorius)  at  0.1-0.15  mW/cm^  in  the  range  of  53- 
78  GHz  decelerated  the  natural  loss  of  transmembrane 
potential  in  myocytes  and  reduced  the  overshoot  volt¬ 
age,  diminishing  CAP  amplitude  by  7-25%  and  con¬ 
duction  velocity  by  10-20%.  Exposure  of  isolated  frog 
sciatic  nerves  for  20-40  min  altered  the  late  CAP  com¬ 
ponents  or  caused  an  abrupt  “rearrangement”  of 
CAPs:  position,  magnitude,  and  even  polarity  of  CAP 
peaks  (the  initial  CAP  was  polyphasic)  suddenly 
changed  in  an  unforeseeable  manner.  Sinoatrial  area 
pacemakers  changed  their  firing  rate  after  just  a  few 
seconds  of  irradiation  at  1  mW/cm^,  when  microwave 
heating  of  the  preparation  did  not  exceed  0.005  °C. 

Sazonov  and  Rizshkova  [1995]  reported  that  ex¬ 
posure  at  42.19  ±  0.15  GHz  facilitates  isolated  frog 
nerve  recovery  after  a  1-kHz  electrical  stimulation 
train.  The  time  needed  for  CAP  restoration  in  exposed 
preparations  decreased  to  60-80%  of  the  control  group 
values. 

Kataev  et  al.  [1993]  used  voltage-clamp  tech¬ 
niques  to  study  MMW  effects  on  membrane  currents 
in  the  alga  Nitellopsis  obtusa  (Characea).  Irradiation 
for  30-60  min  at  41,  50,  and  71  GHz  (5  mW/cm") 
suppressed  the  chloride  current  to  zero  with  no  recov¬ 
ery  for  10-14  hr.  The  greater  part  of  other  tested  fre¬ 
quencies  in  the  range  38-78  GHz  enhanced  the  chlo¬ 
ride  current,  in  some  cases  up  to  200-400%  (49,  70, 
76  GHz).  This  activation  was  reversible,  and  recovery 
to  the  initial  value  took  30-40  min  after  the  treatment. 
Neither  activating  nor  inhibitory  effects  could  be  repro¬ 
duced  or  explained  by  MMW  heating. 

In  contrast  to  the  above  findings,  Kazarinov  et  al. 
[1984]  observed  only  thermal  changes  in  the  isolated 
frog  skin  potential  under  exposure  to  35-  to  41.6  GHz 
radiation.  Khramov  et  al.  [1991]  demonstrated  that  all 
types  of  alterations  in  electrical  activity  of  slow-adapt¬ 
ing  neurons  of  crayfish  stretch  receptor  caused  by  34- 
78  GHz  MMW  resulted  from  microwave  heating. 
Motzkin  and  Feinstein  [1989]  did  not  find  any  effects 
of  5  mW/cm^  51.72  or  51.81  GHz  radiation  on  minia¬ 
ture  end  plate  potentials  in  rat  neuromuscular  junctions. 

The  purpose  of  the  present  study  was  to  verify 
the  existence  of  specific  effects  of  MMW  on  excitable 
tissues  under  precisely  controlled  experimental  condi¬ 


tions.  High  MMW  sensitivity  of  CAP  conduction  in 
isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve,  as  reported  by  other  authors, 
motivated  us  to  choose  this  preparation  for  our  investi¬ 
gation.  We  used  an  approach  which  is  standard  for 
analysis  of  functional  changes  in  excitable  prepara¬ 
tions,  which  is  an  electrical  stimulation  by  paired  pulses 
at  either  a  low  or  a  high  pulse  repetition  rate.  These 
techniques  allow  one  to  reveal  changes  in  CAP  conduc¬ 
tion,  nerve  refractory  properties,  and  to  evaluate  its 
ability  to  sustain  a  high-rate  stimulation. 


MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 

Nerve  Preparation  and  Data  Acquisition 

All  experiments  were  performed  on  isolated  nerve 
preparation  (n.  ischiadicus  +  n.  peroneus)  of  the  frog 
Rana  berlandieri.  Active  adult  frogs  (males)  were  kept 
in  vivarium  conditions  (22-25  "^C,  30-70%  relative 
humidity,  12-hr  light/1 2-hr  dark  diurnal  light  cycle) 
for  at  least  1  week  before  experiments.  After  animal 
immobilization  by  pithing  the  brain  and  the  spinal  cord, 
sciatic  nerves  from  both  legs  were  isolated  in  a  conven¬ 
tional  manner,  ligated  and  submerged  into  chilled 
Ringer’s  solution  containing:  NaCl  -  102.6;  KCl  ~ 
1.0;  NaHCO^  -  0.7;  CaC/2  -  0.9  (mmol/1);  pH  7.4- 
7.6.  Then  the  two  nerves  were  transferred  into  individ¬ 
ual  exposure  and  control  chambers  made  of  polyvinyl¬ 
chloride.  These  chambers  had  identical  design  and  di¬ 
mensions  (145  mm  length,  40  mm  width,  58  mm 
height)  with  a  13  mm  wide,  10  mm  deep  slot  at  the 
top.  The  nerve  preparation  was  laid  in  this  slot,  open 
to  MMW  irradiation  from  the  top. 

The  research  described  in  this  report  was  con¬ 
ducted  in  compliance  with  the  Animal  Welfare  Act 
and  other  federal  statutes  and  regulations  relating  to 
animals  and  experiments  involving  animals  and  ad¬ 
heres  to  the  principles  stated  in  the  Guide  for  the  Care 
and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals,  NIH  publication 
85-23. 

The  depth  of  MMW  penetration  into  water  ranges 
from  0.1  to  0.5  mm  [Ryakovskaya  and  Shtemler,  1983], 
and  it  is  even  less  in  saline.  Therefore,  we  exposed 
nerves  under  a  thin  layer  of  mineral  oil  (0.3 -0.5  mm), 
which  is  almost  transparent  to  MMW  and  effectively 
prevents  nerve  drying.  Artifact-free  nerve  stimulation 
and  CAP  recording  were  accomplished  via  two  pairs 
of  saline  bridge  electrodes  that  contacted  the  opposite 
ends  of  the  nerve  and  also  limited  the  MMW-reachable 
area.  These  electrodes  were  made  of  12  mm  long  pieces 
of  silicone  tubing  (2.5  mm  inner  diameter,  1.5  mm  wall 
thickness).  They  were  permanently  mounted  on  the 
bottom  of  the  slot  and  filled  with  Ringer’s  solution. 
Thus,  CAPs  propagated  from  stimulating  to  recording 


326 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


electrodes  through  a  30-mm  middle  portion  of  the 
nerve  covered  with  oil  and  exposed  to  MMW.  The 
saline  electrodes  were  designed  so  as  to  provide  exactly 
the  same  positioning  of  every  nerve  preparation,  about 
7  mm  above  the  bottom  of  the  slot.  To  eliminate  bipha- 
sic  CAP  signals,  the  nerve  was  crushed  between  two 
recording  electrodes  connected  to  the  amplifier. 

CAPS  were  evoked  by  paired  square  pulses  from 
a  Grass  Instruments  Stimulator  S8800  and  recorded  on 
a  Tektronics  2430  digital  oscilloscope.  Usually,  we 
used  a  supramaximal  nerve  stimulation  (0.2-ms  pulse 
width,  2-3  V  amplitude).  The  relative  refractory  period 
lasted  for  9.5-12  ms,  and  the  interpulse  interval  was 
chosen  to  be  9  ms.  Stimulating  pulses  were  continually 
delivered  at  a  rate  of  either  4  pairs/s  (low-rate  stimula¬ 
tion,  LRS)  or  20  pairs/s  (high-rate  stimulation,  HRS). 
Automatic  averaging  of  16  consecutive  CAP  records 
was  used  in  most  of  the  experiments,  to  improve  the 
signal-to-noise  ratio  and  to  deemphasize  the  incidental 
CAP  variability.  The  amplitude,  latency,  and  peak  la¬ 
tency  of  conditioning  and  test  CAPs  (A,  L,  PL,  and  At, 
PLt,  see  Fig.  1)  were  measured  every  2  or  5  minutes 
throughout  the  experiment. 

Both  the  chambers  were  cooled  to  11-12  ®C  by 
constant  flow  of  chilled  water  from  a  thermostabilized 
water  bath.  This  attenuated  but  did  not  prevent  nerve 
heating  by  the  radiation  because  of  slow  heat  conduc¬ 
tion  through  mineral  oil.  Actual  temperature  in  the 
chambers  was  monitored  by  a  Luxtron  Instruments 
model  850  multichannel  fluoroptic  thermometer;  the 
fluoroptic  probe  was  situated  in  the  oil  1.5-2  mm  from 
the  middle  of  the  nerve.  This  probe  was  primarily  in¬ 
tended  to  measure  conventional  heating  of  the  nerve. 
To  quantify  MMW  heating  of  the  preparation,  we  used 
an  original  “biological”  technique,  which  will  be  de¬ 
scribed  in  detail  in  the  “Results”  section. 

Most  experimental  reports  about  microwave  bi¬ 
oeffects  are  based  on  a  comparison  of  the  data  with 
either  a  control,  or  a  sham-exposed  population.  A  paral¬ 
lel  control  can  be  performed  synchronously  with  the 
exposure,  but  has  to  be  in  a  different  physical  location; 
sham  exposures  can  be  performed  in  exactly  the  same 
physical  location  as  microwave  exposures,  but  only  at 
a  different  time.  Though  neither  of  the  two  approaches 
can  entirely  exclude  the  possible  impact  of  uncon¬ 
trolled  factors  other  than  irradiation,  use  of  both  sham 
and  parallel  controls  in  the  same  series  of  experiments 
can  make  a  strong  case  that  a  difference  (if  observed) 
was  in  fact  a  result  of  irradiation.  To  make  the  experi¬ 
mental  conditions  as  strict  as  possible,  this  “dupli¬ 
cative  control”  protocol  was  used  in  all  experiments 
with  HRS. 

Control  and  exposed  nerve  chambers  were  situ¬ 
ated  in  the  same  Faraday  cage,  but  the  control  chamber 


6  ^  50  ^  100  150  200  ^  250  min  300 


Fig.  1 .  Isolated  nerve  performance  with  a  low-rate  stimulation 
(4  paired  pulses/s)  and  repetitive  millimeter  wave  exposure.  Peri¬ 
ods  of  Irradiation  are  shown  by  dotted  areas.  The  Indicated 
radiation  frequencies  are  those  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  end 
of  each  exposure;  during  irradiation,  the  frequency  Is  Increased 
stepwise  at  either  0.01  or  0.1  GHz/mln;  the  incident  power  den¬ 
sity  for  all  the  exposures  Is  2.2-2.8  mW/cm^  (see  Table  1  for 
details).  The  Inset  at  the  top  shows  the  compound  action  poten¬ 
tials  (CAPs)  as  evoked  by  paired  pulses  (a,  c)  with  a  9-ms  interval 
and  defines  the  CAP  parameters:  A,  PL  and  L  are  the  amplitude, 
peak  latency,  and  latency  of  the  conditioning  CAP  (b),  At  and 
PL^  are  the  amplitude  and  peak  latency  of  the  test  CAP  [d). 


was  shielded  from  the  radiation.  Nerves  in  the  exposed 
chamber  could  be  either  MMW-irradiated  or  sham- 
irradiated.  To  provide  the  sham  exposure  conditions, 
we  tuned  the  waveguide  attenuators  to  maximum,  leav¬ 
ing  all  other  devices  and  the  microwave  generator 
turned  on.  The  incident  power  density  still  reaching 
the  preparation  during  sham  exposures  was  calculated 
to  be  about  10"^  mW/cm^.  The  parallel  control  nerves 
were  never  exposed,  but  underwent  all  the  same  stimu¬ 
lation  routines  simultaneously  with  exposed  and  sham- 
exposed  preparations.  Statistical  comparisons  were 
done  between  exposed  and  sham-exposed  data  sets  and 
then  between  their  respective  parallel  controls.  Any 
significant  difference  in  performance  of  exposed  and 
sham-exposed  preparations  should  only  be  taken  into 
account  if  it  was  not  accompanied  by  a  similar  differ¬ 
ence  between  their  parallel  controls. 

Irradiation  and  Dosimetry 

The  microwave  power  generator  (model  G4-141, 
made  in  Russia)  operated  in  a  CW  regime  in  the  fre- 


Millimeter  Waves  Effect  on  Isoiated  Nerve  Conduction 


327 


quency  range  37-53  GHz.  This  generator  uses  a  back¬ 
ward-wave  oscillator  and  has  the  half-power  bandwidth 
of  less  than  5  MHz.  The  waveguide  line  included  two 
attenuators,  a  10-dB  bidirectional  coupler,  a  slotted 
section  with  a  broadband  probe  for  standing  wave  mea¬ 
surements,  and  a  horn  antenna  at  its  end.  The  horn  was 
situated  52  mm  above  the  isolated  nerve  in  the  exposed 
chamber  so  that  the  nerve  was  aligned  with  the  E-field. 
Exact  radiation  frequency  and  net  input  power  to  the 
horn  were  monitored  via  the  coupler  by  an  M3-21 
wattmeter  and  Ch3-34/Ch5-16  frequency  meter  (Rus¬ 
sia)  or  by  an  EIP  model  548A  frequency  counter  (EIP 
Microwave  Inc.,  USA).  These  devices  were  used  to 
tune  the  MMW  generator  to  the  desired  output  power 
and  frequency  before  each  irradiation.  If  needed,  these 
parameters  could  be  adjusted  during  irradiation,  but 
usually  their  drift  was  not  considerable. 

As  a  result  of  the  intense  absorption  of  MMW  at 
the  surface  of  biological  tissues,  the  incident  power 
density  (IPD),  rather  than  the  specific  absorption  rate, 
should  be  used  for  characterization  of  exposure  condi¬ 
tions.  However,  no  IPD  meters  calibrated  for  the  37- 
53  GHz  range  could  be  found  on  the  market.  The  most 
appropriate  device  proved  to  be  a  broadband  electric 
field  probe  (Narda  Microwave  Corp.,  model  8623), 
which  is  calibrated  from  300  kHz  to  38  GHz  and  also 
at  94  GHz,  but  not  between  38  and  94  GHz.  It  was  the 
opinion  of  the  probe  manufacturer,  that  the  design  of 
the  probe  is  suitable  for  the  entire  range,  and  no  sub¬ 
stantial  variations  of  its  sensitivity  should  be  expected. 
To  verify  this,  we  calibrated  the  probe  against  IPD 
values  calculated  by  a  free-space  standard  field  method 
(see  Appendix  for  details).  Theoretical  IPD  per  unit  of 
the  net  input  power  to  the  horn  irradiator  was  calculated 
for  frequencies  from  37  to  78  GHz  and  for  various  far 
field  distances  from  the  horn.  Theoretical  and  measured 
IPD  differed  by  no  more  than  ±1.5  dB  throughout  the 
entire  frequency  range.  Most  of  this  difference  could 
be  attributed  to  the  combined  error  of  the  theoretical 
model  and  the  net  input  power  measurements,  so  the 
probe  was  concluded  to  be  sufficiently  accurate.  Close 
IPD  values  were  obtained  later  by  another  probe  rated 
up  to  45.5  GHz  (Narda  model  8721). 

Both  of  these  probes,  although  accurate,  were 
much  too  big  (53  mm  diameter)  for  near-field  dosime¬ 
try  or  field  mapping.  For  these  purposes  we  used  a 
miniature  flat  crystal  detector  (Narda  part  4824).  A 
custom-made  holder  for  the  detector  minimized  field 
distortion  and  enabled  precise  movements  in  any  direc¬ 
tion  over  the  irradiated  area.  The  detector  was  cali¬ 
brated  in  the  far  field  against  the  other  probe  (8623) 
individually  at  every  frequency  of  interest.  The  detec¬ 
tor’s  sensitivity  markedly  varied  within  the  frequency 
range,  but  always  remained  perfectly  linear,  at  least  in 


the  studied  interval  from  0.1  to  8  mW/cm^.  More  details 
on  the  performance  of  this  crystal  detector  and  field 
mapping  are  to  be  presented  in  a  separate  paper. 

IPD  values  measured  by  the  broadband  probe  and 
the  crystal  detector  were  normalized  per  unit  of  the  net 
input  power  to  the  horn,  and  plotted  against  the  distance 
from  the  horn.  These  plots  proved  to  be  rather  similar 
for  different  frequencies,  even  in  the  near  field.  For  the 
52-mm  distance  from  the  horn,  the  normalized  IPD 
measured  from  45  to  65  (|LiW/cm^)/mW,  which  did  not 
exceed  the  presumed  inaccuracy  of  the  meters.  There¬ 
fore,  these  variations  were  ignored;  the  mean  coeffi¬ 
cient  of  55  (|iW/cm^)/mW  was  used  to  calculate  IPD 
from  the  measured  net  input  power  values.  For  individ¬ 
ual  frequencies  from  the  38  to  53  GHz  range,  the  field 
non-uniformity  along  the  exposed  site  of  the  nerve  was 
found  to  be  no  more  than  ±2  dB. 

RESULTS 

Low-Rate  Stimulation  (LRS)  Experiments 

The  effectiveness  of  various  regimens  of  irradia¬ 
tion,  which  are  summarized  in  Table  1,  was  tested  in 
a  total  of  49  experiments.  Six  regimens  of  exposure 
were  focused  on  possible  immediate  frequency-specific 
effects  of  MMW;  the  radiation  frequency  during  an 
exposure  was  constantly  increased  by  steps  of  either 
0.01  or  0.1  GHz/min.  Most  of  the  preparations  were 
exposed  several  times  with  20-  to  60-min  intervals 
between  exposures.  LRS  continued  throughout  the  ex¬ 
periment  without  interruption,  and  CAPs  were  mea¬ 
sured  every  2  min  during  irradiation  and  every  5  min 
between  exposures.  Other  regimens  used  various  con¬ 
stant  frequencies  chosen  from  three  supposedly  effec¬ 
tive  frequency  bands.  As  measured  by  the  fluoroptic 
probe,  the  maximum  temperature  rise  under  irradiation 
at  2.2-2.8  mW/cm^  was  0.3 -0.5  °C,  and  at  lower  IPD 
it  was  negligible. 

LRS  by  itself  did  not  affect  the  functional  state 
of  the  nerve,  even  if  continued  for  hours.  The  nerve 
performance  and  parameters  of  conditioning  and  test 
CAPs  remained  essentially  stable  regardless  of  re¬ 
peated  MMW  exposures  (Fig.  1).  The  only  noticeable 
and  repeatable  reaction  to  the  irradiation  was  a  subtle 
and  transient  decrease  of  the  test  CAP  peak  latency 
(PLt)  and  increase  of  its  amplitude  (At).  Although  these 
changes  did  not  exceed  a  few  percent,  they  could  be 
statistically  significant  (P  <  .05)  in  comparison  with 
both  the  control  preparations  and  with  the  preexposure 
values  (Figure  2A  and  B). 

This  effect  occurred  only  at  the  highest  tested 
IPD,  apparently  without  any  dependence  on  the  radia¬ 
tion  frequency,  thus  suggesting  that  it  could  be  caused 


328 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


TABLE  1.  Millimeter-Wave  Irradiation  Experiments  with  the  Low-Rate  Stimulation  Protocol 


Frequency 
band  (GHz) 

Stepping  rate 
(GHz/min) 

Exposure 
time  (min) 

Intensity 

(mW/cm^) 

No.  of  exper./ 

No.  of  nerves 

Summary  of 
findings‘’ 

40.50-46.50“ 

0.1 

60 

2.2-2.6 

4/4 

(+) 

41.30-41.70“ 

0.01 

40 

2.2-2.5 

6/6 

(+) 

41.80-42.00“ 

0.01 

20 

2.3-2.5 

5/5 

(+) 

41.80-42.00“ 

0.01 

20 

0.23-0.25 

3/3 

(-) 

49.50-53.50“ 

0.1 

40 

2.4-3.0 

4/4 

(+-) 

51.70-51.80“ 

0.01 

10 

2.7-2.8 

6/6 

(+) 

41.15-41.30'’ 

— 

30 

0.26;  1.0;  2.6 

14/10 

(-);  (-);  (+) 

41.70-42.10'’ 

— 

30 

2.3;  2.6 

3/3 

(-);  (+-) 

51.60-51.70" 

— 

30 

0.28;  2.8 

4/3 

(-);  (+-) 

Total: 

49/24‘' 

^Radiation  frequency  was  increased  stepwise  to  cover  the  entire  band  during  the  exposure  period. 

’’Irradiation  was  performed  at  various  constant  frequencies  chosen  from  the  specified  band.  Only  one  frequency  was  used  per  experiment. 
‘'One  nerve  could  be  exposed  several  times  in  different  regimens,  so  that  the  total  (24)  is  less  than  the  arithmetic  sum  of  the  upper  rows. 
‘’(+)  refers  to  a  consistent  thermal  effect  (gradual  simultaneous  decrease  in  the  test  CAP  peak  latency  and  increase  in  its  amplitude,  such 
as  shown  in  Fig.  2);  (+-)  indicates  changes  analogous  to  this  thermal  effect,  but  lacking  statistical  significance;  (-)  shows  absence  of 
any  considerable  MMW  effects. 


%  -  exposed  -  control  (A) 

controls 


Fig.  2.  Millimeter  wave-induced  alterations  of  compound  action 
potential  (CAP)  conduction  compared  with  (A)  control  experi¬ 
ments  or  with  (B)  the  pre-exposure  values.  In  both  parts,  CAP 
parameters  are  shown  as  percentage  of  the  average  preexpo¬ 
sure  value.  Each  datapoint  is  the  mean  ±  SE  from  four  to  six 
independent  experiments.  Other  designations  are  the  same  as 
in  Fig.  1. 


merely  by  general  heating  of  the  preparation  by  micro- 
waves.  To  verify  it,  we  studied  the  effects  of  conven¬ 
tional  heating  on  nerve  performance  (Fig.  3).  As  can 
be  seen  from  this  graph,  the  pattern  of  the  conventional 
heating-induced  CAP  changes  (concurrent  decrease  of 
L,  PL,  P/t,  and  increase  of  At,  while  A  stays  almost 
stable)  is  the  same  as  observed  with  the  MMW  expo¬ 
sures  (Fig.  2). 

Alterations  of  CAP  indices  due  to  small  tempera¬ 
ture  changes  (1-2  °C)  could  be  approximated  well  by 
linear  functions  (Figure  4).  This  chart  makes  it  possible 
to  establish  quantitatively  whether  the  MMW-induced 
CAP  changes  could  be  regarded  as  produced  by  MMW 


Fig.  3.  Alterations  of  an  isolated  nerve  performance  by  conven¬ 
tional  heating.  The  lower  trace,  T,  is  the  preparation  tempera¬ 
ture;  other  designations  are  the  same  as  in  Figure  1 . 


Millimeter  Waves  Effect  on  Isoiated  Nerve  Conduction 


329 


^ - . - : - , - ^ - , - , - . - M - H - 1 - . - . - . - . - 1 

-0.5  0.0  0.5  Oq  1-0 


Fig.  4.  Comparison  of  nerve  performance  alterations  caused  by 
millimeter-wave  irradiation  and  conventional  heating.  The  ab¬ 
scissa  Is  the  temperature  change  (°C)  and  the  ordinate  is  the 
CAP  parameters,  in  percent,  to  their  values  at  the  initial  tempera¬ 
ture.  The  lines  At,  A,  L,  etc.,  are  obtained  by  differentiation  and 
linear  approximation  of  the  data  shown  in  Figure  3.  A  window 
at  the  top  summarizes  CAP  changes  observed  under  irradiations 
at  2.4“2.8  mW/cm^.  Dotted  horizontal  sectors  on  the  chart  show 
the  range  of  values  for  At  and  PLt  observed  under  MMW  irradia¬ 
tion;  vertical  dotted  columns  show  the  range  of  the  correspond¬ 
ing  values  of  temperature  elevation.  Other  designations  are  the 
same  as  in  Figure  1 .  See  text  for  more  explanation. 


heating.  At  the  initial  temperature  (zero  temperature 
change),  all  CAP  parameters  were  taken  as  100%  (they 
are  not  exactly  100%  on  the  graph,  because  approxima¬ 
tions  were  based  on  real  experimental  data  and  this 
introduced  a  small  error).  Experiments  with  MMW  es¬ 
tablished  that  exposure  at  2,4“2,8  mW/cm^  increases 
At  to  102.9  ±  0.5%  and  decreases  PLi  to  97.5  ±  0.3% 
(these  values  are  marked  by  two  horizontal  dotted  bars 
on  the  graph).  These  changes  can  be  explained  by  heat¬ 
ing  only  if  their  magnitudes  correspond  to  one  and  the 
same  temperature  rise.  One  can  see  from  the  graph  that 
the  corresponding  temperature  rise  is  indeed  the  same 
and  equals  0.3 -0.4  °C  (it  is  marked  by  vertical  dotted 
bars). 

The  same  analysis  was  performed  for  other  CAP 
parameters,  and  the  correspondence  of  changes  ob¬ 
served  under  MMW  exposure  and  under  conventional 
heating  was  essentially  perfect.  Thus,  all  MMW  effects 
found  in  the  LRS  series  could  be  attributed  to  micro- 
wave  heating  of  the  preparation.  In  turn,  the  level  of 
MMW  heating  of  the  nerve  could  be  measured  indi¬ 
rectly  from  the  MMW-induced  alterations  of  CAP.  We 
infer  heating  of  the  nerve  preparation  by  0.3 -0.4  °C 
at  an  IPD  of  2.4-2.8  mW/cml 

It  is  important  to  note  that  this  use  of  the  nerve 
itself  as  a  thermometer  did  not  reveal  any  substantial 


variations  of  temperature  rise  at  different  frequencies  of 
irradiation.  Within  the  accuracy  of  such  measurements, 
heating  depended  on  the  IPD  only.  This  fact  not  only 
confirms  the  correctness  of  our  IPD  measurements,  but 
also  shows  the  absence  of  any  “geometrical  reso¬ 
nances’  ’  which,  hypothetically,  could  lead  to  a  mark¬ 
edly  increased  MMW  absorption  and  heating  at  certain 
‘  ‘resonance’  ’  frequencies. 

Our  failure  to  find  any  frequency-specific  effects 
in  the  LRS  series  did  not  necessarily  mean  the  absence 
of  such  effects.  Possibly,  the  LRS  procedures  used 
were  not  sensitive  enough  to  reveal  the  effects.  In  ear¬ 
lier  studies  with  915  MHz  microwaves  [Pakhomov  et 
al.,  1992],  use  of  a  functional  test  with  a  high-rate 
stimulation  detected  nerve  state  changes  that  were  oth¬ 
erwise  undetectable.  Therefore,  this  sensitive  test  was 
used  next  to  study  the  effects  of  several  selected  MMW 
frequencies. 

High-Rate  Stimulation  (HRS)  Experiments 

The  principal  difference  between  LRS  and  HRS 
is  that  LRS  by  itself  does  not  alter  the  nerve  functional 
state,  while  HRS  does.  Under  HRS,  the  interval  be¬ 
tween  pairs  of  stimuli  is  not  long  enough  for  complete 
recovery  after  conduction  of  the  preceding  CAPs,  thus 
leading  to  nerve  fatigue  with  gradual  decrease  of 
CAPs’  amplitude  and  conduction  velocity  (Fig.  5). 

After  positioning  the  exposed  and  control  nerves 
in  the  chambers,  they  were  continually  stimulated  at 
4  pairs/s  until  a  reasonable  stabilization  of  CAPs  was 


PLt 

PL 

L 

A 

At 


min 


Fig.  5.  Pattern  of  changes  in  compound  action  potential  parame¬ 
ters  and  recovery  in  experiments  with  high-rate  stimulation  (20 
paired  pulses/s  from  the  14th  until  the  31st  min  of  experiment; 
otherwise  the  rate  is  4  paired  pulses/s).  Exposure  or  sham  expo¬ 
sure  (dotted  bar)  starts  at  12  min  and  continues  for  30  min.  See 
Figure  1  for  other  designations. 


330 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


obtained  (60  min  at  least).  Nerves  with  unstable  or 
multi-peak  potentials  were  usually  discarded.  Success¬ 
ful  nerve  preparations  underwent  from  three  to  seven 
experiments  lasting  for  50  min  each,  with  intervals 
sufficient  for  nerve  recovery.  MMW  or  sham  exposure 
began  on  the  12th  min  of  an  experiment  and  continued 
for  30  min;  HRS  was  turned  on  after  2  min  of  exposure 
and  continued  for  17  min.  CAPs  were  recorded  every 
5  min,  that  is  3  datapoints  before,  6  datapoints  during, 
and  2  datapoints  after  exposure  (Fig.  5).  LRS  was  ap¬ 
plied  throughout  a  series  of  experiments  with  no  inter¬ 
ruptions  other  than  HRS;  LRS  also  continued  between 
the  experiments,  when  no  data  were  collected. 

MMW  exposures  were  performed  at  a  power  den¬ 
sity  of  either  2.0-2.7  mW/cm^  (41.42,  42.04,  45.90 
GHz,  and  51.41  GHz),  or  0.24-0.28  mW/cm"  (41.22 
and  50.91  GHz),  as  summarized  in  Table  2.  The  accept¬ 
able  inaccuracy  of  adjustment  of  the  radiation  fre¬ 
quency  was  within  20  MHz  from  the  indicated  nominal 
values.  As  demonstrated  in  the  LRS  series,  and  con¬ 
firmed  by  the  Luxtron  thermometer  measurements, 
nerve  heating  at  2.0-2.7  mW/cm^  was  about  0.3- 
0.4  ®C,  and  at  0.2-0.3  mW/cm^  it  was  negligible.  Dif¬ 
ferent  exposure  regimens  and  sham  exposures  were 
randomized,  except  for  the  first  experiment  in  a  series, 
which  was  always  performed  without  irradiation.  The 
data  from  this  first  experiment  were  used  only  for  eval¬ 
uation  of  the  individual  nerve’s  ability  to  tolerate  HRS 
and  were  not  included  in  the  statistical  analysis.  The 
same  procedures,  excluding  irradiation,  were  simulta¬ 
neously  applied  to  the  parallel  control  preparations. 

Data  processing  was  organized  so  as  to  maxi¬ 
mally  deemphasize  individual  differences  between  the 
nerve  preparations  and  unforced  functional  changes 
during  a  series  of  experiments.  This  was  accomplished 
by  introduction  of  relative  indices  (RI)  of  the  HRS 
tolerance,  which  were  calculated  as  following: 


RI  =  CVJ^Vd/CVJ^Vd-100%, 


where  ""Vi  is  the  value  of  a  CAP  parameter  (amplitude, 
latency,  etc.)  before  the  HRS  start  in  the  first  experi¬ 
ment  in  a  series;  ""Vn  is  the  value  on  the  n  min  of  the 
first  experiment  (during  or  after  the  HRS);  and 
are  the  respective  values  in  a  succeeding  experiment 
when  HRS  was  accompanied  by  either  MMW  or  sham 
irradiation.  Calculation  of  relative  indices  from  original 
data  is  also  illustrated  in  Figure  6.  If  the  nerve  perfor¬ 
mance  during  an  experiment  with  MMW  irradiation  is 
the  same  as  in  the  first  experiment  in  a  series  (which 
was  always  performed  without  irradiation),  the  relative 
indices  will  stay  at  100%.  If  a  relative  index  differs 
from  100%,  this  difference  may  indicate  an  aftereffect 


■ 

£ 


C 

© 


^  S' 

C3  C 
O  (D 


B 

< 


^  1“ 

P  <L> 


Oh 

S 

< 


S 

on  © 

o 

g  ^ 
B  'o 

S 

g  Cl. 
^  + 


1/3  O 

B  ^ 
5  S 


in 

+1 


+1 

ON 


+  1 


ON 

(N 

+  I 

•St 

d 


ON 
CN 
+  1 


(N 

O 


i 

xi 

CO 


0.24-0.28  41.22,  50.91  11  +  11  105.8  ±  1.2  90.3  ±  1.6  95.8  ±  1.0  109.3  ±  4.4*  92.1  ±  2.9 

2.0-2.7 _ 41.42,  42.04,  45.90,  51.41 _ 22  +  22 _ 107.5  ±  1.7  93.0  ±  2.7  94.4  ±  0.8  109.8  ±  3.8*  92.0  ±  4.6 

The  30-min  time  point  corresponds  to  16  min  of  the  high-rate  stimulation  and  18  min  of  irradiation.  The  data  within  the  intensity  ranges  were  pooled  together  irrespective  of  the 
frequency  of  the  radiation. 

*P  <  0.02  compared  with  the  sham  exposure.  Differences  in  data  values  between  the  respective  parallel  control  groups  (not  included  in  the  table)  were  not  statistically  significant. 


Millimeter  Waves  Effect  on  Isolated  Nerve  Conduction 


331 


0  50 

t  I  !■  t  A  I  I  I  i  1  I 

I - r 

0 


0  50  0  50  0  50 

I  ■■■<■■  I  ■■  I  1,111  I.LLl-LJj  I  I  I  I  I  I  I  l.l.l.,l 

”T - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 — 

100  200  300 


N 


0  50 


I  I  i  I  I  »  t  I  t.l  I 

— 1 — r 
min 


Fig.  6.  Isolated  nerve  performance  in  a  series  of  high-rate  stimulation  (HRS)  experiments  with 
one  nerve  preparation  and  the  analysis  of  data.  Horizontal  axes;  elapsed  time  (below)  and  time 
scales  for  each  HRS  experiment.  Periods  of  the  HRS  (20  paired  puises/s)  are  shown  by  horizontal 
bars;  otherwise,  the  rate  was  4  paired  pulses/s.  Dotted  line  boxes  indicate  periods  of  microwave 
and  sham  exposure.  Vertical  axes:  amplitude  of  the  test  compound  action  potential  (/\t,  mV), 
and  its  relative  index  R/(A).  in  percent.  The  Rl  is  used  to  assess  quantitatively  the  individual 
nerve’s  HRS  tolerance  in  each  of  the  HRS  experiments.  For  example,  for  a  25-min  datapoint 
of  the  second  experiment  in  the  series,  the  relative  index  RI25  is  calculated  by  the  equation  at 
the  top  of  the  graph.  is  the  initial  A  value  in  the  first  experiment  in  a  series  (average  of  3 
datapoints  before  the  HRS);  ^^25  is  the  value  on  the  25th  min  of  the  experiment.  ®\/i  and  ^^25 
are  the  same  values  in  the  next  experiment  with  exposure.  Similarly,  Rl  is  calculated  for  every 
datapoint  in  all  subsequent  experiments  with  this  nerve  preparation.  Note  that  Rl  deviation  from 
100%  in  these  experiments  does  not  necessarily  indicate  an  effect  of  irradiation,  it  could  come 
up  as  an  aftereffect  of  the  previous  HRS  trains,  spontaneous  changes  in  the  nerve  state,  etc. 


of  the  previous  HRS,  an  effect  of  MMW,  chance  varia¬ 
tions,  or  an  impact  of  other  uncontrolled  factors.  To 
identify  the  effect  of  MMW,  if  any,  we  randomized 
the  sequence  of  exposures  and  sham  exposures  and 
averaged  the  data  from  the  experiments  with  different 
nerve  preparations.  The  statistical  significance  of  the 
MMW-induced  changes  was  estimated  in  comparison 
with  the  sham-treatment  data  by  a  two-tailed  Student’s 
t  test.  All  the  same  data  processing  applied  to  the  paral¬ 
lel  control  experiments. 

A  total  of  78  experiments  on  26  nerve  prepara¬ 


tions  were  carried  out.  For  the  initial  analysis,  the  data 
for  experiments  with  the  high  (2-2.7  mW/cm^)  and 
low  (0.24-0.28  mW/cm^)  incident  power  densities 
were  pooled  together,  regardless  of  the  frequency  of 
the  radiation.  This  analysis  established  that  the  changes 
in  CAP  conduction  reached  maximum  at  30  min  into 
the  experiment;  that  was  the  last  datapoint  during  the 
HRS  train.  The  average  relative  index  values  for  this 
datapoint  are  provided  in  the  Table  2.  Irradiation  at 
either  field  intensity  induced  no  statistically  significant 
changes  in  CAP  parameters  (P  >  .05),  except  for  the 


332 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


increase  in  the  relative  index  of  the  test  CAP  amplitude 
(At,  P  <  .02).  The  difference  in  this  parameter  between 
the  sham-exposed  group  and  both  the  exposed  groups 
was  the  same  (about  17%),  despite  the  10-fold  differ¬ 
ence  in  the  field  intensity.  It  is  important  to  note  that 
no  statistically  significant  differences  were  found  be¬ 
tween  the  respective  parallel  control  groups. 

On  the  whole,  the  results  indicated  that  MMW 
irradiation  could  attenuate  the  At  decrease  during  the 
HRS  train.  The  equivalence  of  magnitudes  of  this  effect 
in  the  two  MMW-exposed  groups  inferred  that  an  irra¬ 
diation  parameter  other  than  intensity  could  be  essential 
for  producing  this  effect.  Hence,  we  analyzed  the  data 
separately  for  each  frequency  of  the  radiation. 

The  mean  increase  of  the  At  relative  index  by  the 
end  of  the  HRS  train  ranged  from  about  6  to  22%  for 
different  radiation  frequencies  (as  compared  with  the 
sham  exposure  data).  Only  minimal  changes  of  6  to 
9%  (nonsignificant)  were  observed  under  exposure 
with  42.04  and  41.42  GHz  MMW  at  2.4-2.7  mWW, 
even  though  the  microwave  heating  was  0.3 -0.4  °C. 
Irradiation  at  the  same  incident  power,  but  at  a  different 
frequency  of  45.9  GHz,  caused  a  21%  increase  of  this 
index  (P  <  .05).  The  other  tested  frequencies  produced 
a  statistically  significant  effect  of  the  similar  magnitude 
(13-22%,  P  <  .05),  despite  reduction  of  the  incident 
power  density  to  2  mW/cm^  (51.41  GHz)  and  even  to 
0.24-0.28  mWW  (41.22  and  50.91  GHz,  see  Fig.  7). 

DISCUSSION 

Our  experiments  failed  to  confirm  observations  of 
severe  MMW-induced  alterations  of  CAP  conduction, 
such  as  reported  by  other  authors  [Burachas  and  Mas- 
coliunas,  1989;  Chemyakov  et  al.,  1989].  For  the  low- 
rate  electrical  stimulation  of  the  nerve,  MMW  irradia¬ 
tion  either  did  not  cause  any  effect  or,  at  high  enough 
power  levels,  produced  effects  that  were  exactly  the 
same  as  those  produced  by  the  equivalent  conventional 
heating.  One  should  note,  however,  that  irradiation  and 
other  experimental  conditions  used  in  these  two  studies 
were  substantially  different  from  those  in  our  work. 

Another  observed  MMW  effect,  namely  the  in¬ 
crease  of  the  At  relative  index  by  the  end  of  the  HRS 
train,  deserves  a  more  detailed  analysis.  This  effect 
testifies  to  an  attenuation  of  the  HRS -induced  At  sup¬ 
pression  or,  in  other  words,  to  an  ability  of  MMW  to 
facilitate  nerve  recovery  after  conduction  of  a  spike. 
This  result  fits  well  with  the  recent  findings  of  Sazonov 
and  Rizshkova  [1995]  that  MMW  exposure  of  the  iso¬ 
lated  frog  sciatic  nerve  significantly  decreases  the  time 
needed  for  CAP  restoration  after  a  high-rate  (1  kHz) 
electrical  stimulation  train.  According  to  our  present 
data,  this  effect  depends  on  the  frequency  of  the  radia- 


Fig.  7.  Effect  of  millimeter  waves  on  the  nerve  tolerance  to  high- 
rate  stimulation.  The  vertical  axes  show  the  relative  index  of  the 
test  CAP  amplitude  (mean  ±  SE,  five  to  seven  independent 
experiments  in  each  group).  See  text  and  Fig.  6  for  the  method 
of  the  relative  index  calculation.  Periods  of  high-rate  stimulation 
(20  paired  pulses/s)  and  irradiation  are  shown  by  a  box  and 
dotted  areas,  respectively.  Radiation  frequency  and  incident 
power  density  are  given  to  the  right  of  the  graphs.  Asterisks 
indicate  significant  difference  from  the  sham  exposure  data  (P 
<  .05). 


tion,  but  has  almost  the  same  magnitude  at  10-fold 
different  field  intensities.  These  results  suggest  that  the 
mechanism  of  the  MMW  action  was  different  from 
general  heating  of  the  preparation,  unless  one  assumes 
that  at  the  same  IPD  level  MMW  absorption  and  heat¬ 
ing  at  some  frequencies  could  be  more  than  tenfold 
greater  than  at  others.  This  assumption  does  not  seem 
feasible  and  also  contradicts  the  results  of  the  LRS 
experiments:  Reverse  calculation  of  the  preparation 
heating  from  the  nerve  function  changes  (‘"use  of  the 
nerve  as  a  thermometer”)  revealed  no  indications  of 
extremely  increased  or  decreased  MMW  absorption  at 
any  particular  frequencies. 

Instead  of  general  MMW  heating,  the  formation 
of  so-called  “hot  spots”  could  be  a  more  reasonable 
explanation  for  the  effect.  The  spatial  distribution  and 
intensity  of  the  local  field  maxima  are  very  much  de¬ 
pendent  on  the  frequency  of  the  radiation  [Khizhnyak 
and  Ziskin,  1994],  so  frequency-specific  bioeffects 
could  be  produced  by  different  patterns  of  “hot  spots.” 
One  should  also  take  into  account  the  possibility  of 
frequency-specific  nonthermal  interactions,  which  are 
often  claimed  to  be  characteristic  for  the  MMW  band 
[Chemyakov  et  al.,  1989;  Kataev  et  al.,  1993;  Rebrova, 
1992;  and  others]. 

At  this  point,  we  consider  it  more  important  to 


Millimeter  Waves  Effect  on  Isolated  Nerve  Conduction 


333 


make  sure  that  the  observed  frequency-specific  effect 
of  MMW  on  nerve  function  is  real,  rather  than  to  specu¬ 
late  about  underlying  physical  or  physiological  mecha¬ 
nisms.  Our  experimental  procedures  were  organized  so 
as  to  collect  more  physiological  data  and  test  more 
exposure  regimens  while  using  fewer  animals  and  try¬ 
ing  to  rule  out  the  possible  impact  of  any  factors  other 
than  microwaves.  However,  this  made  the  statistical 
interpretation  of  the  data  very  complicated.  The  experi¬ 
mental  procedures  had  several  features  that  influence 
the  statistical  confidence  that  can  be  placed  in  the  find¬ 
ings:  (1)  Several  treatment  groups  were  compared  with 
one  sham-exposed  group.  (2)  Both  MMW  and  sham 
exposure  experiments  were  supplemented  with  respec¬ 
tive  parallel  controls,  and  there  were  no  considerable 
differences  between  the  parallel  control  groups.  (3)  At 
was  not  the  only  parameter  measured,  and  we  did  not 
know  a  priori  which  parameter  will  reveal  an  effect. 
(4)  The  same  effect  occurred  not  just  in  an  isolated 
timepoint,  but  in  several  adjacent  and  functionally  re¬ 
lated  timepoints  of  the  experiment.  Conditions  1  and 
3  decrease  the  statistical  confidence  that  the  effect  was 
real,  whereas  conditions  2  and  4  increase  it. 

There  are  established  techniques  that  can  address 
some  of  these  conditions  separately  (such  as  the 
Dunnet’s  test  [1955]  to  compare  several  treatments 
with  one  control;  see  Winer  [1971]  for  review),  but  no 
known  method  can  quantitatively  assess  the  coopera¬ 
tive  impact  of  all  these  factors  together.  At  the  present 
time,  the  reality  of  this  MMW  effect  cannot  be  ad¬ 
dressed  by  statistical  analysis,  no  matter  whether  we 
use  the  t  test  or  more  sophisticated  procedures.  The 
confidence  levels  reported  in  this  paper  should  be  re¬ 
garded  as  an  estimation  only  and  are  not  necessarily 
correct.  Instead  of  statistical  manipulations,  a  solid 
proof  of  the  effect  can  only  be  made  by  its  reproduction 
in  independent  experiments. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  work  was  performed  while  A.G.  Pakhomov 
held  a  National  Research  Council- AMRMC  Research 
Associateship  and  was  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army 
Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command  under  con¬ 
tract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson 
BioServices,  The  views,  opinions  and  findings  con¬ 
tained  in  this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should 
not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  the  Army 
position,  policy  or  decision. 

REFERENCES 

Belyaev  lYa,  Alipov  YD,  Shcheglov  VS  (1992):  Chromosome  DNA  as 

a  target  of  resonance  interaction  between  Escherichia  coli  cells 


and  low -intensity  millimeter  waves.  Electro  Magnetobiol 
11:97-108. 

Belyaev  lYa,  Alipov  YD,  Shcheglov  VS,  Polunin  VA,  Aizenberg  OA 
(1994):  Cooperative  response  of  Escherichia  coli  to  the  resonance 
effect  of  millimeter  waves  at  super  low  intensity.  Electro  Magne¬ 
tobiol  13:53-66. 

Betzky  OV  (1992):  Use  of  low-intensity  electromagnetic  millimeter 
waves  in  medicine.  Millimetrovie  Volni  v  Biologii  i  Meditcine 
1:5-12  (in  Russian). 

Burachas  G,  Mascoliunas  R  (1989):  Suppression  of  nerve  action  poten¬ 
tial  under  the  effect  of  millimeter  waves.  In  Devyatkov  ND  (ed): 
“Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.”  Moscow:  Radi- 
oelectronica,  pp  168-175  (in  Russian). 

Bush  LG,  Hill  DW,  Riazi  A,  Stensaas  LJ,  Partlow  LM,  Gandhi  OP 
(1981):  Effects  of  millimeter- wave  radiation  on  monolayer  cell 
cultures.  III.  A  search  for  frequency -specific  athermal  biological 
effects  on  protein  synthesis.  Bioelectromagnetics  2:151-159. 

Chemyakov  GM,  Korochkin  VL,  Babenko  AP,  Bigdai  EV  (1989):  Reac¬ 
tions  of  biological  systems  of  various  complexity  to  the  action 
of  low-level  EHF  radiation.  In  Devyatkov  ND  (ed):  “Millimeter 
Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology.”  Moscow:  Radioelectronica, 
pp  141-167  (in  Russian). 

Dunnet  CW  (1955):  A  multiple  comparison  procedure  for  comparing 
several  treatments  with  a  control.  J.  Am  Stat  Assoc  50:1096- 
1121. 

Furia  L,  Hill  DW,  Gandhi  OP  (1986):  Effect  of  millimeter  wave  irradia¬ 
tion  on  growth  of  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  IEEE  Trans  Biomed 
Eng  33:993-999. 

Gandhi  OP,  Hagmann  MJ,  Hill  DW,  Partlow  LM,  Bush  L  (1980):  Milli¬ 
meter  wave  absorption  spectra  of  biological  samples.  Bioelectro¬ 
magnetics  1:285-298. 

Grundler  W,  Keilman  F,  Froehlich  H  (1977):  Resonant  growth  rate 
response  of  yeast  cells  irradiated  by  weak  microwaves.  Phys  Lett 
62A:463-466. 

Grundler  W,  Kaiser  F  (1992):  Experimental  evidence  for  coherent  exci¬ 
tations  correlated  with  growth.  Nanobiology  1:163-176. 

Kataev  A  A,  Alexandrov  A  A,  Tikhonova  LL,  Berestovsky  GN  (1993): 
Frequency-dependent  effects  of  the  electromagnetic  millimeter 
waves  on  the  ion  currents  in  the  cell  membrane  of  Nitellopsis: 
Nonthermal  action.  Biofizika  38:446-462. 

Kazarinov  KD,  Sharov  VS,  Putvinskii  AV,  Betskii  OV  (1984):  The 
effect  of  continuous  millimeter  low-intensity  radiation  on  the 
Na^  ion  transport  in  the  frog  skin.  Biofizika  29:480-482. 

Keilmann  F  (1985):  Resonant  biological  effects  of  microwaves.  Physik 
in  unserer  Zeit  16:33-39. 

Khizhnyak  EP,  Ziskin  MC  (1994):  Heating  patterns  in  biological  tissue 
phantoms  caused  by  millimeter  wave  electromagnetic  radiation. 
IEEE  Trans  Biomed  Eng  41:865-873. 

Khramov  RN,  Sosunov  EA,  Koltun  SV,  Ilyasova  EN,  Lednev  W 
(1991):  Millimeter- wave  effects  on  electric  activity  of  crayfish 
stretch  receptors.  Bioelectromagnetics  12:203-214. 

Larsen,  EG  (1978):  Techniques  for  producing  standard  EM  fields  from 
10  kHz  to  10  GHz  for  evaluating  radiation  monitors.  In  “Electro¬ 
magnetic  Fields  in  Biological  Systems,”  Proceedings  of  a  sym¬ 
posium,  International  Microwave  Power  Institute,  Ottawa,  Can¬ 
ada,  pp  96-112. 

Motzkin  S,  Feinstein,  J  (1989):  Simultaneous  intracellular  and  fluores¬ 
cence  monitoring  of  miniature  end  plate  potentials  in  rat  neuro¬ 
muscular  preparations  during  millimeter  wave  exposure.  Tucson, 
AZ:  11th  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society, 
June,  1989,  pp  6-7. 

Pakhomov  AG,  Dubovick  BV,  Kolupayev  VE,  Pronkevich  AN  (1992): 
Microwave-induced  changes  in  nerve  conduction:  effect  of  mod¬ 
ulation.  In:  “Proceedings  of  the  14th  Annual  International  Con- 


334 


Pakhomov  et  al. 


ference,  Part  1.”  Paris:  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biol¬ 
ogy  Society,  pp  293-294. 

Rebrova  TB  (1992):  Effect  of  millimeter-range  electromagnetic  radia¬ 
tion  on  the  vital  activity  of  microorganisms.  Millimetrovie  volni 
V  Biologii  i  Meditcine  1:37-47  (in  Russian). 

Ryakovskaya  ML,  and  Shtemler,  VM  (1983):  Absorption  of  electromag¬ 
netic  waves  of  millimeter  range  in  biological  preparations  with 
a  plane-layer  structure.  In:  Devyatkov  ND  (ed):  “Effect  of  Non- 
thermal  Action  of  Millimeter  Radiation  on  Biological  Subjects.” 
Moscow:  USSR  Academy  of  Sciences,  pp  172-181  (in  Russian). 

Sazonov  AYu,  Rizshkova  LV  (1995):  Effects  of  electromagnetic  radia¬ 
tion  of  millimeter  range  on  biological  subjects  of  various  compli¬ 
cacy.  Moscow,  Russia:  10th  Russian  Symposium  “Millimeter 
Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,”  April,  1995  (Digest  of  pa¬ 
pers).  Moscow:  IRE  RAN,  pp  112-114  (in  Russian). 

Sit’ko  SP,  Zhukovsky  VD,  Montgomery  GA  (1992):  Microwave  reso¬ 
nance  therapy  (MRT)  -  a  new  non-invasive  therapy  for  treatment 
of  neuro-musculosceletal  disorders.  Lake  Buena  Vista,  FL:  First 
World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and 
Medicine,  June,  1992,  pp  88-89. 

Winer  BJ  (1971):  “Statistical  Principles  in  Experimental  Design.”  New 
York:  McGraw-Hill  Book  Company. 


Appendix:  Calculation  of  On -Axis  Power 
Density  for  Horn  Antennas 

Methods  for  calibration  of  field  strength-measur¬ 
ing  probes/devices  include  free-space  standard  field 
methods,  guided  wave  methods,  and  transfer  probe 
methods.  For  calibrating  field  strength  measuring 
probes/devices  in  the  millimeter  wave  range,  guided 
wave  and  transfer  probe  methods  are  inappropriate. 
The  dimensions  of  transmission  lines  become  very 
small,  and  dipoles  in  the  transfer  probe  method  become 
increasingly  difficult  to  fabricate  due  to  the  small  wave¬ 
lengths  involved.  In  free-space  standard  field  methods, 
standard  gain  horns  are  commonly  used  to  establish 
highly  accurate  electromagnetic  field  intensities  in  the 
frequency  range  above  1  GHz.  We  have  used  horn 
antennas  in  the  frequency  range  37  to  53  GHz  and  53 
to  78  GHz  to  generate  standard  field  intensity  at  various 
distances  from  the  horn  antenna. 

The  on -axis  incident  power  density  (IPD)  at  an 
on -axis  field  point  in  free-space  is  computed  using 
the  equation 


S  =  PtGMtci^  (1) 

where  S  is  the  power  density  (W/m^),  Pt  is  the  net 
input  power  into  the  horn  (W),  G  is  the  absolute  numer¬ 
ical  power  gain  of  the  horn  antenna,  and  r  is  the  dis¬ 
tance  from  the  horn  antenna  aperture  to  the  on -axis 
field  point  (m). 

On -axis  gain  of  the  horn  antenna  is  calculated 
from  equations  given  by  Larsen  [1978]  as 

G(dB) 

=  10  log(AB)  +  10.08  -  RnCdB)  -  RnCdB)  (2) 

where  A  is  the  wavelength  normalized  width  of  the 
horn  aperture,  B  is  the  wavelength  normalized  height 
of  the  horn  aperture,  Rh  is  the  gain  reduction  factor 
due  to  the  H-plane  flare  of  the  horn,  and  Re  is  the 
gain  reduction  factor  due  to  the  E-plane  flare  of  the 
horn.  The  gain  reduction  factors  are  given  by 

RnCdB) 

=  (O.OlaXl  +  10.19a  -h  0.5 la^  -  0.097a^)  (3) 

ReCdB)  =  (0.1p')(2.31  +  0.053P)  (4) 

a  =  AXI/Lh  +  1/r)  (5) 

p  =  BXI/Le  +  1/r)  (6) 

where  Le  and  Lh  are  wavelength  normalized  values  of 
the  slant  lengths  and  r  is  the  wavelength  normalized 
distance  from  the  aperture  of  the  horn  to  the  on-axis 
field  point. 

For  given  horn  dimensions,  on-axis  gain  was 
calculated  at  each  frequency  of  interest  at  distances 
from  40  to  500  mm.  The  net  input  power  to  the  horn 
is  determined  from  forward  and  reflected  power  mea¬ 
surements  at  the  feed  to  the  horn  using  a  bidirectional 
coupler,  and  the  incident  power  density  S  is  then  calcu¬ 
lated  using  the  gain  computed  from  equations  (2) -(6). 
All  calculations  for  S  are  expressed  in  mW/cm^  per 
mW  of  net  input  power  to  the  horn. 


Bioelectromagnetics  19:128-130  (1998) 


Brief  Communication 

Ultra-Wide  Band  Electromagnetic 
Radiation  Does  Not  Affect  UV-Induced 
Recombination  and  Mutagenesis 
in  Yeast 

Olga  N.  Pakhomova,*  Michelle  L.  Belt,  Satnam  P.  Mathur,  Jonathan  C.  Lee, 

and  Yahya  Akyel 

McKesson  BioServices,  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch,  U,  S.  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment  of  the  Waiter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base, 

San  Antonio,  Texas 

Cell  samples  of  the  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  were  exposed  to  100  J/m^  of  254  nm  ultraviolet  (UV) 
radiation  followed  by  a  30  min  treatment  with  ultra- wide  band  (UWB)  electromagnetic  pulses.  The  UWB 
pulses  (101-104  kV/m,  1.0  ns  width,  165  ps  rise  time)  were  applied  at  the  repetition  rates  of  0  Hz  (sham), 
16  Hz,  or  6(X)  Hz.  The  effect  of  exposures  was  evaluated  from  the  colony-forming  ability  of  the  cells  on 
complete  and  selective  media  and  the  number  of  aberrant  colonies.  The  experiments  established  no  effect 
of  UWB  exposure  on  the  UV-induced  reciprocal  and  non-reciprocal  recombination,  mutagenesis,  or  cell 
survival.  Bioelectromagnetics  19:128-130,  1998.  ©  1998  Wiiey-Liss,  inc. 

Key  words:  UWB;  recombination;  mutagenesis;  yeast;  ultraviolet  light 


INTRODUCTION 

Ultra-wide  band  (UWB)  systems  have  recently 
been  developed  for  use  as  radars  and  as  a  means  to 
suppress  electronically  vulnerable  targets.  UWB  radia¬ 
tion  is  produced  as  short  high-voltage  pulses  with  an 
extremely  fast  rise,  providing  for  the  spectral  band¬ 
width  from  0  Hz  to  2  GHz.  The  unusual  properties  of 
UWB  radiation  have  raised  concerns  about  its  bioef¬ 
fects  and  possible  health  hazards  to  personnel. 

At  present  time,  only  a  few  studies  of  UWB  bioef¬ 
fects  have  been  carried  out,  and  they  were  focused 
on  behavioral  and  physiological  effects  in  laboratory 
animals  [Walters  et  al.,  1995;  Sherry  et  al.,  1995]. 
There  have  been  no  studies  of  cellular  or  genetic  UWB 
effects,  though  evaluation  of  genetic  risks  is  necessary 
for  any  potentially  hazardous  environmental  factors 
(radiations,  chemicals,  etc.).  In  addition,  a  number  of 
studies  have  suggested  that  cell  DNA  may  be  a  target 
for  various  types  of  electromagnetic  radiations  [Blank 
et  al.,  1997;  Lai  et  al.,  1997;  Belyaev  et  al.,  1996]. 

To  address  this  issue,  we  used  the  yeast  Saccharo¬ 
myces  cerevisiae  strain  D7  specifically  designed  for 
screening  of  mutagenic  and  recombinagenic  effects 


[Zimmermann  et  al.,  1975].  Our  recent  experiments 
with  this  cell  model  demonstrated  no  UWB  effect  on 
spontaneous  mutagenesis,  recombinagenesis,  or  col¬ 
ony-forming  ability  [Pakhomova  et  al.,  1997].  The  pur¬ 
pose  of  the  present  work  was  to  establish  whether 
UWB  exposure  alters  the  induction  of  heritable  chro¬ 
mosome  aberrations  by  ultraviolet  light  (UV),  a  stan¬ 
dard  mutagenic  factor. 

The  employed  yeast  strain  D7  carries  specific 
gene  markers  ade2-40lade2-l  19,  trp5-12ltrp5-27,  and 
ilvl-92/ilvl-92,  which  make  it  possible  to  detect  certain 
mutagenic  and  recombinagenic  events.  Mutation  in¬ 
duction  by  true  reverse  or  allele  non-specific  suppressor 
mutation  in  ilvl-192  is  followed  by  appearance  of  iso- 


Contract  grant  sponsor:  US  Army  Medical  Research  and  Material  Com¬ 
mand;  contract  grant  number:  DAMD17-94-C-4069  to  McKesson  Bio- 
Services. 

^Correspondence  to:  Dr.  O.  Pakhomova,  USA-MCMR,  US  Army  Medi¬ 
cal  Research  Detachment,  8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks 
Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  TX  78235-5324;  E-mail:  pakhomov® 
netxpress.com 

Received  for  review  19  May  1997;  final  review  received  21  August 
1997 


©  1998  Wiley-Liss,  Inc. 


No  Effect  of  Ultra-Wide  Band  Electromagnetic  Radiation 


129 


TABLE  1.  Yeast  Cell  Survival  and  the  Rates  of  Genetic  Aberrations  after  Sequential  UV  and  UWB  Exposures 


Survival 

Crossovers  per 

Segregants  per 

Convertants  per 

Revertants  per 

% 

10^  survivors 

10^  survivors 

10^  survivors 

10®  survivors 

Exposed 

(UV  +  0  Hz  UWB,  n  =  6)“ 
Control 

66.8  ±  3.7  (10179)'’ 

1.83  ±  0.27  (179) 

7.87  ±  0.79  (783) 

196  ±  12  (16213) 

290  ±  24  (3493) 

(UV  only,  n  =  6) 

Exposed 

(UV  +  16  Hz  UWB,  n  =  5) 

66.6  ±  4.9  (10019) 

1.78  ±  0.22  (176) 

7.82  ±  0.45  (776) 

200  ±  11  (16310) 

294  ±  22  (3652) 

64.6  ±  5.3  (8385) 

1.75  ±  0.23  (150) 

7.47  ±  0.74  (618) 

201  ±  17  (14362) 

285  ±  40  (2915) 

Control 

(UV  only,  n  =  5) 

Exposed 

(UV  +  600  Hz  UWB,  n  =  6) 

62.2  ±  6.5  (8166) 

1.71  ±  0.23  (136) 

7.61  ±  0.55  (602) 

211  ±  25  (14193) 

282  ±  38  (2947) 

62.3  ±  5.9  (9291) 

2.01  ±  0.32  (179) 

8.06  ±  0.72  (735) 

209  ±  14  (15406) 

275  ±  26  (3189) 

Control 

(UV  only,  n  =  6) 

62.0  ±  7.0  (9246) 

1.92  ±  0.33  (169) 

8.54  ±  0.67  (782) 

209  ±  20  (14936) 

299  ±  25  (3335) 

®Shown  are  the  repetition  rate  of  UWB  pulses,  Hz  (0  Hz  corresponds  to  sham  exposure),  and  the  number  of  independent  experiments  in 
each  series,  n. 

*’AII  the  data  values  are  given  as  an  average  (mean  ±  SE)  for  n  experiments.  Numbers  in  brackets  indicate  the  actual  number  of  colonies 
scored  in  all  experiments  with  a  particular  type  of  exposure. 


leucine  non-requiring  colonies  on  isoleucine-free  me¬ 
dia.  Mitotic  gene  conversion  is  monitored  by  appear¬ 
ance  of  tryptophan  non-requiring  colonies  on  selective 
media.  The  alleles  involved  are  trp5-12  and  trp5-27. 
Mitotic  crossing-over  is  detected  visually  as  pink  and 
red  twin  sectored  colonies  due  to  formation  of  homozy¬ 
gous  cells  ade2-40/ade2-40  (deep  redj  and  ade2-119l 
ade2-119  (pink)  from  the  originally  heteroallelic  condi¬ 
tion  (white).  Occurrences  such  as  aneuploidy,  point 
mutations,  etc.,  give  rise  to  more  types  of  colored  aber¬ 
rant  colonies,  which  are  regarded  below  as  segregants. 

Preliminary  experiments  established  that  the 
threshold  UV  dose  for  a  noticeable  decrease  of  cell 
survival  is  about  50  J/m^.  Production  of  mutations  and 
recombinations  increased  with  increasing  the  UV  dose 
up  to  about  150  JW  and  then  reached  a  plateau  or 
decreased.  Hence,  an  intermediate  dose  of  100  J/m^ 
was  chosen  for  the  main  set  of  the  experiments. 

UWB  pulses  were  produced  by  an  exposure  sys¬ 
tem  designed  at  Sandia  National  Laboratories.  UWB 
irradiation  lasted  for  30  min  at  a  pulse  repetition  rate  of 
0  (sham),  16,  or  600  Hz.  Within  30  min,  the  suspension 
remained  virtually  uniform,  showing  no  visible  signs 
of  sedimentation  of  cells.  Based  on  measurements  of 
the  electric  field  using  an  EG&G  D-dot  sensor  (model 
ACD-1  A),  the  parameters  of  UWB  pulses  at  the  repeti¬ 
tion  rate  of  16  Hz  were  as  following  (mean  ±  SE): 
103.7  ±  0.57  kV/m  peak  amplitude,  1.019  ±  0.004  ns 
pulse  width,  and  164.8  ±  0.6  ps  rise  time.  The  respec¬ 
tive  values  for  the  pulse  repetition  rate  of  600  Hz  were 
101.5  ±  0.3  kV/m,  1.014  ±  0.005  ns,  and  165.2  ±  0.9 
ps.  The  exposure  system’s  performance  and  dosimetry 
have  been  described  in  more  detail  by  Bao  et  al.  [1995]. 
Possible  heating  effect  of  the  UWB  exposure  was  eval¬ 


uated  with  a  Vitek  Electrothermia  Monitor  (model  101) 
using  a  non-perturbing  probe  (#2427).  Temperature 
changes  in  samples  exposed  for  30  min  at  600  Hz  did 
not  exceed  ambient  temperature  fluctuations. 

Prior  to  exposures,  yeast  cells  were  grown  for 
three  days  on  YPD  agar  (1%  yeast  extract,  2%  peptone, 
2%  dextrose,  2%  agar),  and  suspended  in  distilled  wa¬ 
ter  at  a  titer  of  5  X  10^  cells/ml.  Samples  of  2.5  ml  of 
this  suspension  in  a  Petri  dish  (36  mm  diameter)  were 
exposed  to  254  nm  UV  radiation  (Cole  Parmer  lamp 
model  VL-6.LC)  at  2.25  JW/s  up  to  the  total  dose  of 
100  J/m^.  To  prevent  possible  recovery  of  genetic  le¬ 
sions  by  photoreactivation,  these  and  subsequent 
manipulations  were  performed  in  dim  red  light.  Two 
1-ml  samples  of  the  UV-exposed  suspension  were 
transferred  into  identical  polystyrene  tubes.  One  tube 
was  subjected  to  UWB  or  sham  exposure,  and  the  other 
one  was  used  as  a  parallel  control.  The  time  interval 
between  the  completion  of  the  UV  exposure  and  the 
onset  of  the  UWB  exposure  did  not  exceed  2  min.  The 
sham  exposure  conditions  were  equivalent  to  the  actual 
UWB  exposure  with  zero  pulse  repetition  frequency: 
All  devices  were  turned  on,  but  no  trigger  pulses  were 
delivered  to  cause  the  high-voltage  discharge  across 
the  spark  gap.  To  enable  a  more  vigorous  experimental 
data  analysis,  sham  exposures  were  accompanied  with 
parallel  control  as  well.  All  the  three  types  of  exposure 
(16  Hz,  600  Hz,  and  sham)  were  performed  during  the 
same  day  and  using  the  same  original  cell  suspension. 
The  sequence  of  these  exposures  varied  randomly  from 
day  to  day  and  was  not  disclosed  until  the  completion 
of  the  study  to  achieve  double-blind  conditions. 

Immediately  after  the  UWB  or  sham  exposure, 
the  samples  were  appropriately  diluted  according  to 


130 


Pakhomova  et  al. 


the  expected  yield  of  viable  clones  and  plated  onto 
minimal  and  selective  media.  The  minimal  medium 
was  composed  of  0.67%  Difco  yeast  nitrogen  base 
without  amino  acids,  solidified  with  Difco  agar  (2%) 
and  supplemented  with  the  following  growth  factors: 
adenine  sulfate  (5  mg/1),  L-isoleucine  (60  mg/1),  and  L- 
tryptophan  (10  mg/1).  The  selective  media  excluded  L- 
isoleucine  or  L-tryptophan.  The  plates  were  incubated 
at  30  °C  in  the  dark  for  6  days.  Survivals,  mitotic 
crossovers,  and  segregants  were  scored  as  white  or 
colored  colonies  formed  on  the  minimal  medium  (10 
plates  per  sample).  Mutants  to  isoleucine  independence 
and  gene  convertants  to  tryptophan  independence  were 
scored  on  the  respective  selective  media  (5  plates  per 
sample).  The  parallel  controls  were  always  processed 
in  the  same  way  and  simultaneously  with  respective 
UWB-  and  sham-exposed  samples. 

The  experimental  results  are  provided  in  the  Ta¬ 
ble  1.  The  UV  exposure  decreased  cell  survival  to 
60-70%,  and  this  level  was  not  altered  by  the  UWB 
exposure.  The  frequencies  of  segregations,  mutations 
to  the  isoleucine  independence,  and  recombinagenic 
events  (mitotic  crossing-over  and  conversion  to  trypto¬ 
phan  independence)  were  remarkably  close  in  the 
UWB-exposed  and  parallel  control  samples,  as  well  as 
in  the  UWB-exposed  and  sham-treated  cells.  The  data 
showed  no  statistically  significant  effects  (Student’s  t- 
test  and  test)  or  even  trends  in  any  of  the  studied 
groups. 

Our  previous  study  has  shown  that  UWB  pulses 
per  se  do  not  provoke  any  mutagenic  or  recombina¬ 
genic  events  [Pakhomova  et  al.,  1997].  Current  re¬ 
search  has  supplemented  this  result,  proving  that  acute 
exposure  to  UWB  pulses  does  not  affect  UV-induced 
mutagenesis  and  recombinagenesis. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  work  was  supported  by  the  US  Army  Medi¬ 
cal  Research  and  Material  Command  under  contract 
DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioSer- 
vices.  The  views,  opinions  and  findings  contained  in 
this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not 
be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  the  Army 
position,  policy  or  decision. 


REFERENCES 

Bao  J-Z,  Lee  JC,  Lu  S-T,  Seaman  RL,  Akyel  Y  (1995):  Analysis  of  ultra- 
wide-band  pulses  in  GTEM  cell.  In  Brandt  HE  (ed):  “Intense 
Microwave  Pulses  III”.  Proceedings  of  SPIE  2557,  pp  237-248. 

Belyaev  lY,  Shcheglov  VS,  Alipov  YD,  Polunin  VA  (1996):  Resonance 
effect  of  millimeter  waves  in  the  power  range  from  10"’^  to  3  X 
10"^  W/cm^  on  Escherichia  coli  cells  at  different  concentrations. 
Bioelectromagnetics  17:312-321. 

Blank  M,  Goodman  R  (1997):  Do  electromagnetic  fields  interact  directly 
with  DNA?  Bioelectromagnetics  18:111-115. 

Lai  H,  Singh  NP  (1997):  Acute  exposure  to  a  60  Hz  magnetic  field 
increases  DNA  strand  breaks  in  rat  brain  cells.  Bioelectromagnet¬ 
ics  18:156-165. 

Pakhomova  ON,  Belt  ML,  Mathur  SP,  Lee  JC,  Akyel  Y  (1997):  Lack 
of  genetic  effects  of  ultrawide-band  electromagnetic  radiation  in 
yeast.  Electro  Magnetobiology  16:195-201. 

Sherry  CJ,  Blick  DW,  Walters  TJ,  Brown  GC,  Murphy  MR  (1995): 
Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  non-human  primates  after  exposure 
to  ultrawideband  electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave  fre¬ 
quency  range.  Radiat  Res  143:93-97. 

Walters  TJ,  Mason  PA,  Sherry  CJ,  Steffen  C,  Merrit  JH  (1995):  No 
detectable  bioeffects  following  acute  exposure  to  high  peak 
power  ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats.  Aviat 
Space  Environ  Med  66:562-567. 

Zimmermann  FK,  Kern  R,  Rasenberger  H  (1975):  A  yeast  strain  for 
simultaneous  detection  of  induced  mitotic  crossing  over,  mitotic 
gene  conversion  and  reverse  mutation.  Mutation  Res  28:381- 
388. 


Picosecond  domain  electromagnetic  pulse  measurements  in  an  exposure 
fdcility.  An  6rror  componsstion  routino  usinQ  doconvolution 
techniques 


Jian-Zhong  Bao 

McKesson  BioServices  and  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas  78235 
(Received  8  August  1996;  accepted  for  publication  22  Januaiy  1997) 


TOis  article  presents  a  two-step  deconvolution  routine  to  compensate  for  the  measurement 
distortions  of  transient  electrical  fields  in  the  picosecond  domain  in  an  electromagnetic  pulse 
exposure  facility.  Because  of  the  low-pass  nature  of  connection  cables  and  the  limited  bandwidth  of 
a  transient  digitizer  (Tektronix  SCD  5000),  the  measured  signal  is  a  distorted  output  of  D-dot 
(dD/dt,  where  D  is  the  electric  displacement)  sensors.  An  empirical  transfer  function  of  the 
cable-digitizer  system  was  evaluated  using  a  reference  impulse  generated  by  a  picosecond  pulse 
generator.  The  reference  impulse  was  injected  into  the  connection  cable  at  the  D-dot  sensor  end  and 
measured  with  the  SCD  5000  while  the  cable  was  kept  in  the  same  position  as  for  making  D-dot 
mea^rements  to  ensure  an  in-position  compensation.  Two  types  of  asymptotic  conical  dipole 
(ACD)  D-dot  sensors  were  utilized  as  the  electrical  field  sensing  devices:  an  axial  model  ACD-1(A) 
and  a  radial  model  ACD-1(R).  Due  to  its  right-angle  structures,  the  ACD-l(R)  gives  a  different 
output  from  that  of  ACD- 1(A)  to  the  same  pulse,  especially  to  the  fast  leading  edge.  The  right-angle 
tends  in  ACD-l(R)  cause  reflections  of  a  sensed  signal  in  the  sensor.  To  correct  the  eirors  due  to 
the  reflections,  the  impulse  response  of  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  was  proposed  as  a  summation 

parameters  were  determined  with  a  pulse  measurement  using  the 
U  u-  optimization  procedure  with  the  Leventerg-Marguardt  algorithm 

With  this  routine  the  measurement  accuracy  for  the  electrical  pulse  in  picosecond  domain  has  been 
improved  significantly.  [80034-6748(97)01 105-2] 


I.  INTRODUCTION 

It  is  still  a  challenge  to  make  an  accurate  transient  mea¬ 
surement  on  electromagnetic  pulses  in  the  picosecond  do¬ 
main  because  of  the  limitations  of  measurement 
components.'"^  This  article  presents  a  two-step  deconvolu¬ 
tion  routine  to  compensate  for  the  measurement  distortions 
in  a  short  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  exposure  facility  for 
studying  biological  effects.  As  depicted  in  Fig.  1,  this  facil¬ 
ity,  which  was  designed  and  built  at  the  Sandia  National 
Laboratories,  mainly  consists  of  a  pulse  generator  and  an 
exposure  cell.  The  generator  includes  a  charging  network 
and  a  RG220  coaxial  cable.  The  exposure  cell  is  a  tapered 
transverse  electromagnetic  (TEM)  cell  with  a  centered  sep¬ 
tum.  The  RG220  cable  connects  a  plasma  switch  to  the  TEM 
cell.  When  the  charging  circuit  is  triggered,  a  pulse  with  a 
magnitude  of  about  60  kV  is  generated  and  sent  down  to  the 
spark  gap.  When  the  voltage  across  the  gap  reaches  the 
breakdown  voltage  of  the  gas  in  it,  a  pulse  with  a  much  faster 
leading  edge  is  formed  in  the  RG220  and  delivered  to  the 
cell.  The  exposure  facility  was  installed  in  a  shielded  room, 
and  the  control  and  measurement  devices  were  located  out¬ 
side.  The  pulse  repetition  frequency  was  controlled  by  an 
external  trigger.  The  measurement  system  includes  a  Tek¬ 
tronix  SCD  5000  transient  digitizer  (4.5  GHz  bandwidth),  an 
UT141  semirigid  coaxial  cable,  and  two  asymptotic  conical 
dipole  (ACD)  D-dot  {dDIdt,  where  D  is  the  electric  dis¬ 
placement)  sensors:^’*  ACD- 1(A),  which  is  an  axial  model 
and  mounted  on  the  top  ground  wall  of  the  cell  for  real  time 
monitoring  during  exposures,  and  ACD-l(R),  which  is  a  ra¬ 
dial  model  and  used  to  map  the  field  on  the  bottom  ground 


wall  of  the  cell  where  the  biological  specimens  are  placed. 
The  SCD  5000  is  connected  to  a  D-dot  sensor  through  a 
connection  cable  and  triggered  with  a  signal  obtained  from 
the  RG220. 

Because  of  the  low-pass  nature  of  the  connection  cables, 
which  is  attributed  to  the  skin  depth  effect  and  dielectric 
dispersions,^  and  the  limited  bandwidth  of  the  SCD  5000,  the 
measured  signal  is  a  distorted  output  of  the  D-dot  sensors. 
An  empirical  transfer  function  of  the  cable-digitizer  system 
was  evaluated  using  a  reference  impulse  that  was  generated 
by  a  Pico  Second  Pulse  Lab  (PSPL)  4050B  step  generator 
with  a  5210  impulse  forming  network  (IFN)  and  character¬ 
ized  with  a  Tektronix  CSA  803  communication  signal  ana¬ 
lyzer  with  a  SD  30  sampling  head  (40  GHz  bandwidth).  The 
reference  impulse  was  injected  into  the  connection  cable  at 
the  D-dot  sensor  end  and  measured  with  the  SCD  5000  while 
the  cable  was  kept  in  the  same  position  as  for  making  a  field 
measurement  to  ensure  an  in-position  compensation. 

Due  to  its  right-angle  structures,  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot 
sensor  gives  a  different  output  from  that  of  the  ACD- 1(A)  to 
the  same  pulse,  especially  to  the  fast  leading  edge  although 
the  sensing  elements  for  both  sensors  are  the  same.  The 
right-angle  tends  in  the  ACD-l(R)  cause  reflections  of  a 
sensed  signal  in  the  sensor.  For  the  first  time,  the  impulse 
response  of  the  ACD- 1  (R)  was  formulated  as  a  summation  of 
a  S  function  in  order  to  correct  the  error  resulted  from  the 
reflections.  The  parameters  of  the  impulse  response  were  de¬ 
termined  with  a  symmetric  reference  measurement  using  the 
ACD- 1  (A)  D-dot  sensor  and  a  nonlinear  optimization  proce¬ 
dure  with  the  Levenberg-Marguardt  algorithm.'® 


Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.  68  (5),  May  1997 


2221 


High  Frequency  Absortrer 


FIG.  1.  Schematic  diagram  of  the  short  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  expo* 
sure  facility  and  the  picosecond  domain  pulse  acquisition  system. 


II.  ERROR  COMPENSATION:  DECONVOLUTION 


Deconvolution  techniques  are  effective  tools  for  data  re¬ 
construction  in  many  areas^*"^"^  and  were  applied  here  to 
compensate  the  distortions  in  electrical  pulse  measurements. 
By  assuming  that  the  measurement  system  is  linear  and  time 
invariant  (LTI),  we  can  have 

r+oo 

u{t)  =  v{t)^h{t)-\-n{t)—  J  v{T)h{t—  T)c/T+n(t),  (1) 

where  u{t)  is  the  measured  signal,  v{t)  is  the  true  signal 
before  any  degradations,  h{t)  is  the  system  impulse  re¬ 
sponse,  n(t)  is  the  additive  noise,  and  *  denotes  convolution, 
which  smears  fast  changing  features  in  i;(0-  Here  we  have 
an  inverse  problem:  finding  v{t)  from  M(t),  h{t),  and 
rt(0,  ie.,  deconvolution,  which  is  an  ill-posed  problem 
mathematically.^^  Small  changes  in  u{t)  can  be  mapped  into 
large  changes  in  i;(r).  This  is  such  a  serious  problem  that  an 
effective  noise-control  procedure  has  to  be  implemented  be¬ 
cause  none  of  the  measurements  are  noise  free.  Performing  a 
Fourier  transform  on  Eq.  (1),  we  get 


U{f)^V{f)H{f)  +  N{f),  (2) 

where  upper  case  letters  are  Fourier  transforms  of  the  corre¬ 
sponding  lower  case  letters,  respectively,  H{f  )  is  the  system 
transfer  function,  and  /  is  the  frequency.  Now  v{t)  can  be 
solved  by  performing  inverse  Fourier  transform: 


v(t)  =  F-'^ 


U{f)-N{f)\ 

H{f)  r 


(3) 


where  F~  *  stands  for  inverse  Fourier  transform.  If  we  had  an 
exact  knowledge  about  U(f),  N(f  ),  and  H(J )  in  the  en- 
tire  frequency  range,  and  if  the  measurement  system,  as  as¬ 
sumed,  were  LTI,  v(t)  could  be  recovered  exactly.  Unfortu¬ 
nately,  LTI  condition  may  not  be  rigorously  true  and  none  of 
the  above  information  can  be  obtained  perfectly  in  practice 
because  of  the  ever  presence  of  noise  and  error.  In  general, 
the  noise  spectra  N{f  )  cannot  be  separated  from  the  mea¬ 
sured  signal  spectra  U{f  )  unless  there  are  other  information 
or  assumptions  available.  So,  Eq.  (3)  can  only  be  applied 


Frequency  (GHz) 


FIG.  2.  (a)  A  typical  power  spectrum  of  output  voltage  of  the  ACD-l(A) 
D-dot  sensor,  (b)  a  typical  power  spectrum  of  the  noise  obtained  remote 
after  a  pulse  excitation,  and  (c)  their  corresponding  Wiener  filter. 


approximately  with  U{f  )— N{f  )^U{f  ).  However,  a 
Wiener  filter  minimizes  the  error  caused  by  N{f )  in  the 
least-squares  sense,  and  is  defined  as^^ 


\N(J  )P 

\WW' 


(4) 


If  we  presume  that  the  power  spectra  of  noise  \N(f  )p  with 
a  pulse  excitation  is  the  same  as  that  after  the  excitation,  we 
can  obtain  it  from  a  measurement  in  a  time  window  of  the 
same  size  that  is  remote  after  the  excitation.  Figure  2  shows 
the  power  spectra  of  a  typical  output  voltage  of  the 
ACD-l(A)  D-dot  sensor  under  a  pulse  excitation  and  a  typi¬ 
cal  noise  signal  obtained  remote  after  the  pulse  excitation, 
and  their  corresponding  Wiener  filter.  The  noise  spectrum 
exhibits  a  typical  1//  characteristics,  which  might  be  attrib¬ 
uted  to  the  fluctuations  in  the  SCD  5000,^^’^^ 

In  this  study,  the  wave  forms  obtained  with  the  SCD 
5000  were  digitized  with  1024  points  in  a  10  ns  window, 
which  implies  a  maximum  frequency  of  51.15  GHz.  The 
reference  impulse  was  sampled  with  1000  points  in  a  10  ns 
window  using  the  CSA  803  and  interpolated  into  1024  points 
in  the  same  window.  All  the  wave  forms  were  the  average  of 
200  to  remove  random  noises  and  increase  the  signal-to- 
noise  ratio.  All  the  raw  data  was  pretreated  before  applying 
the  fast  Fourier  transform  (FFT).  The  pretreatment  includes 
taking  off  base-line  offset,  converting  attenuator  factor,  zero 
padding  to  avoid  aliases  and  to  make  u  periodically  causal,^^ 
and  data  windowing  to  avoid  sharp  changes  at  the  edges. 


2222  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  Vol.  68,  No.  5,  May  1997 


Electromagnetic  pulses 


Since  the  signal  was  over  sampled,  a  low-pass  filter  was 
mandatory.  With  a  Wiener  and  a  low-pass  filter,  Eq.  (3)  can 
be  rewritten  as 


u(t)=F"' 


H(f)  r 


(5) 


where  L(f  )  is  a  low-pass  filter.  Its  cutoff  edge  was  a  half 
Hann  window'®  and  cutoff  frequency  was  chosen  as  12.5 
GHz  to  retain  all  the  frequency  contents  which  might  be 
obtained  by  the  Z)-dot  sensors.*®  The  imperfection  (e.g.,  non- 
linearities)  of  the  wave-form  recorders  (SCD  5000  and  CSA 
803)  was  not  considered  in  this  work.  The  most  critical  task 
in  deconvolution  is  the  evaluation  of  the  transfer  fimction, 
and  it  can  be  classified  as  the  empirical  or  semiempirical 
method.  The  following  two  sections  show  how  we  obtain  the 
transfer  function  empirically  (Sec.  HI)  and  semiempirically 
(Sec.  TV). 


III.  COMPENSATION  FOR  CONNECTION  CABLE 
AND  TRANSIENT  DIGITIZER 

A  PSPL  4050B  step  generator  with  a  5210  IFN  was 
utilized  to  generate  an  impulse  with  a  magnitude  of  2.8  V 
and  a  pulse  width  of  58  ps  as  the  reference.  Since  the  output 
impulses  from  the  IRNf  are  basically  identical  and  repetitive, 
they  can  be  characterized  by  a  CSA  803  with  a  SD  30  sam¬ 
pling  head.  A  different  position  configuration  of  connection 
cables  gives  a  different  impulse  response,  especially  to  the 
high-frequency  contents.  To  take  this  effect  into  account,  a 
characterized  picosecond  impulse  was  injected  into  the  con¬ 
necting  cable  between  the  D-dot  sensor  and  the  SCD  5000  at 
the  D-dot  sensor  end  while  keeping  the  cable’s  position  the 
same  as  for  a  real  field  measurement.  Figure  3  shows  the 
reference  impulse  characterized  by  the  CSA  803,  the  impulse 
measured  by  the  SCD  5000  through  the  connection  cable, 
and  the  respective  Fourier  transform.  There  is  a  significant 
difference  between  the  reference  and  the  measured  impulses 
in  both  time  and  frequency  domain.  The  magnitudes  of  the 
Fourier  spectra  indicate  that  the  reference  impulse  is  much 
stronger  than  measured  impulse  in  a  wide  frequency  range 
(dc,  20  GHz),  which  gives  us  the  physical  basis  that  we  can 
numerically  expand  the  bandwidth  of  the  measurement  hard¬ 
ware  to  a  wider  frequency  range^®  and  compensate  the  dis¬ 
tortions  due  to  the  connection  cable  and  the  SCD  5000.  The 
extent  of  the  bandwidth  expansion  is  largely  determined  by 
the  reference  impulse. 

Rearranging  Eq.  (1)  to  a  form  for  the  evaluation  of  a 
system  transfer  function,  we  have 

^out(  ^  )  +  «out(f  )  =  [-*:in(f )  +  n  in(  0  ]  *  *cd(  f  ) ,  (6) 

where  Xo„,(r) +no„,(r)  is  the  output  impulse  measured  by  the 
SCD  5000,  in  which  X(„„(r)  is  the  desired  signal  we  want  to 
obtain  and  nout(t)  is  the  additive  noise,  Xi„(r)-b  «;„(/)  is  the 
input  impulse  characterized  by  the  CSA  803,  in  which 
Xi„(r)  is  the  real  signal  and  ni„(t)  is  the  noise,  and  hcd(t)  is 
the  impulse  response  of  the  cable-digitizer  system  to  be  ob¬ 
tained  from  the  measurements.  By  taking  Fourier  transform 
on  Eq.  (6),  we  can  get  the  frequency  domain  form: 


FIG.  3.  Comparison  between  the  reference  impulse  characterized  using  a 
CSA  803  with  a  SD  30  sampling  head  and  the  measured  impulse  with  a 
SCD  5000  through  an  UT14I  connection  cable  (a)  in  time  domain  and  (b)  in 
frequency  domain. 


Xin(f)  +  JVin(f) 


l+^in(f)/Xu,(f)  ’ 


(7) 


where  the  upper  case  letters  stand  for  the  Fourier  transform 
of  the  corresponding  lower  case  letters,  respectively,  and 


tjfr\  ■^oulC/^  ) 

is  the  true  transfer  function.  The  fraction  term  behind 
Hif  )  in  Eq.  (7)  is  the  noise  contribution,  which  is  close  to 
one  at  the  frequencies  at  which  the  signal-to-noise  ratios  of 
both  input  and  output  impulses  are  very  large.  At  the  fre¬ 
quencies  where  X,^{f  )  is  close  to  zero,  )  should  be 

close  to  zero,  too.  When  the  frequencies  are  far  away  from 
the  measurement  band  of  the  recording  instrument,  no  matter 
how  large  Zi„(/  )  is,  )  is  just  noise.  Consequently,  at 
these  frequencies,  H^^{f  )  contains  only  noise.  Since  H{f ) 
can  only  be  obtained  approximately  in  practice,  an  exact  de- 
convolution  is  inherently  impossible.^ 

^cd(/  )  given  by  Eq.  (7)  was  utilized  in  Eq.  (5)  as  the 
transfer  function,  ),  to  compensate  the  effect  of  the  con¬ 
nection  cable  and  the  SCD  5000.  Since  the  spectra  of  refer¬ 
ence  and  measured  impulses  were  the  average  of  200,  the 
contributions  from  the  random  noise  were  substantially  can¬ 
celed.  It  can  be  observed  from  Fig.  3(b)  that  both  spectra 


Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  Vol.  68,  No.  5,  May  1997 


Electromagnetic  pulses  2223 


FIG.  4.  (a)  Comparison  between  output  voltage  of  ACD-l(A)  D-dot  sensor 
without  any  compensation  (dashed  lines)  and  that  after  the  cable-digitizer 
compensation  (solid  lines),  (b)  Comparison  between  the  corresponding  elec-' 
trical  fields.  The  measurement  was  done  at  a  pulse  repetition  frequency  of 
60  Hz.  The  comparison  of  pulse  parameters  are  listed  in  Table  I. 


have  a  sensible  magnitude  up  to  15  GHz  so  that  Eq.  (7)  is  a 
good  approximation  to  Eq.  (8)  in  the  frequency  range  that 
concerns  us. 

All  the  electrical  fields  in  this  article  were  calculated 
with  a  simple  summation, 


Eit„)  =  cJ,  b{t„),  (9) 

Jk  =  0 

where  Eit^)  is  the  transient  electrical  field,  is  the  mea¬ 
sured  or  compensated  transient  output  voltage  of  D-dot  sen¬ 
sors,  and  c  is  a  converting  coefficient  given  by  c 
=  Af/(6o^r^eq^)»  which  At  IS  the  sampling  time  interval 
of  SCD  5000,  €q  is  the  permittivity  of  vacuum,  is  the 
relative  permittivity  of  the  medium  in  which  the  sensor  is, 
Agq  is  the  equivalent  area  of  the  sensor,  and  R  is  the  load 
impedance. 

Figure  4(a)  shows  the  comparison  between  the  measured 
and  the  cable-digitizer  compensated  output  voltage  of  the 
ACD-l(A)  D-dot  sensor  at  a  pulse  repetition  frequency  of  60 
Hz.  The  sensor  was  mounted  on  the  top  ground  wall  of  the 
TEM  cell.  Figure  4(b)  presents  the  comparison  between  their 
corresponding  electrical  fields.  Clearly,  the  compensated 
electrical  field  gives  a  faster  rise  time  and  a  higher  magnitude 
than  that  directly  measured.  The  comparison  between  their 
pulse  parameters  is  listed  in  Table  I. 


TABLE  1.  Comparison  of  pulse  parameters  between  the  uncompensated  and 
the  cable-digitizer  compensated  electrical  fields  presented  in  Fig.  4(b).  The 
measurement  was  done  using  an  ACD-l(A)  D-dot  sensor  at  a  pulse  repeti¬ 
tion  frequency  of  60  Hz. 


Rise  time  (10-90%) 

Magnitude 

Pulse  width 

Electrical  field 

(ps) 

(kV/m) 

(ns) 

Uncompensated 

234 

84.8 

Ml 

Compensated 

166 

107.6 

0.98 

IV.  COMPENSATION  FOR  REFLECTIONS  IN  D-DOT 
SENSOR  ACD-1(R) 

The  sensing  elements  in  both  ACD-l(R)  and  ACD-l(A) 
D-dot  sensors  are  the  same  while  they  are  connected  to  the 
respective  SMA  connectors  differently.  In  the  ACD-l(A), 
the  sensing  element  and  the  SMA  connector  are  joined  in  the 
axial  direction  directly,  while  in  the  ACD-l(R)  they  are  con¬ 
nected  by  a  coaxial  line  through  three  right-angle  bends  in 
the  radial  direction,  as  schematically  drawn  in  Fig.  5.  The 
right-angle  bends  of  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  cause  re¬ 
flections  of  a  sensed  signal  in  the  sensor.  The  reflections 
result  in  a  magnitude  reduction  and  a  “shoulder”  on  the 
falling  edge  of  the  first  spike  in  the  output  voltage  of  the 
ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor,  as  shown  in  Fig.  6(a).  Although 
there  are  only  minor  influences  on  its  slow  variation  part, 
there  is  a  clear  consequence  on  the  fast  leading  edge  of  the 
pulse,  which  is  illustrated  in  Fig.  6(b).  The  leading  edge  is 
important  for  estimating  the  rise  time. 

If  we  do  not  consider  any  dispersions  which  may  be 
associated  with  the  sensors,  the  output  of  an  ACD-l(R) 
D-dot  sensor  is  the  transmission  of  the  original  signal  plus 
down-scaled  and  delayed  replicas  of  the  original  signal, 
therefore  its  impulse  response  can  be  approximated  as 

h{t)  =  aQS(t)-^aiS(t—  Ti)  +  a2^(^”'^2)»  (10) 

where  (^  =  0,1,2)  are  the  scaled  coefficients  and  {k 
=  1,2)  are  the  delay  times.  The  physical  constrains  for  the 
parameters  are  0<ai^<  1  and  Tf^>0.  The  effects  of  the  sens¬ 
ing  element  were  not  taken  into  account  because  the  sensor 
has  a  bandwidth  ^10  GHz,^^  and  the  low-pass  nature  of  the 
coaxial  line  and  the  SMA  connector  was  ignored.  The  first  S 
function  in  Eq.  (10)  is  for  the  transmitted  D-dot  signal 
through  the  right-angle  bends,  and  the  rest  of  them  are  for 

-  sensing  element 

!■< -  ground  plate 

^ —  SMA  connector 

(a) 


~0. Scm 
_ 


~5. Scm 


right-angle  SMA  connector  * 
dielectric  supportor _ 


m 


coaxial  plate 
(b) 


FIG.  5.  Geometric  configurations  and  dimensions  of  the  asymptotic  conical 
dipole  D-dot  sensors:  (a)  the  axial  model  ACD-l(R)  and  (b)  the  radial 
model  ACD-l(A). 


2224 


Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  Vol.  68,  No.  5,  May  1997 


Electromagnetic  pulses 


FIG.  6.  (a)  Comparison  between  measured  output  voltage  of  the  ACD-1(A) 
D-dot  sensor  (solid  lines)  and  that  of  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  (dashed 
lines).  The  two  sensors  were  located  at  a  symmetric  pair  of  locations  on  the 
top  and  the  bottom  ground  wall  of  the  TEM  cell,  respectively,  (b)  Compari¬ 
son  between  their  corresponding  electrical  fields  with  the  respective  cable- 
digitizer  compensation. 


the  reflections.  If  the  sensed  signal  were  a  S  function  and 
there  were  no  dispersion  associated  with  the  sensor,  and  if 
the  digitizer  were  infinitely  fast,  all  the  reflections  would  be 
separated.  From  Fig.  6(a),  it  seems  that  only  the  first  reflec¬ 
tion  had  an  obvious  effect  on  the  electrical  field,  so  only  two 
reflections  were  considered.  The  number  of  the  d  function 
included  in  Eq.  (10)  is  mainly  decided  by  the  high  frequency 
contents  in  the  pulse.  The  sharper  the  pulse  is,  the  more  S 
functions  might  be  needed.  For  a  given  set  of  parameters, 
P  =  {flo 1 ,  'T’l  ,•  •  •},  the  distortion  due  to  the  reflections  in  the 
ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  and  the  limitations  of  the  cable- 
digitizer  system  can  be  compensated  together  with 


U(f  )^{f)L{f)\ 
HM  )i/dd(/.P)  I 


where  H^{f,V)  is  the  transfer  function  given  by 
//ad(/,P)=«o+aie-^“">+«2^ 


(11) 

(12) 


where  o)  is  the  angular  frequency.  For  a  different  P  we  get  a 
different  To  determine  the  optimal  P,  the  Levenberg- 
Marguardt  algorithm*^  was  utilized  to  minimize  an  objective 
function  defined  as 


Ntl-l 

5(P)=  2  (13) 

71  =  0 


where  N  is  the  total  number  of  data  points  including  zero 
padding,  W  is  the  weighting  factor,  used  as  a  refer¬ 


ence,  is  the  electrical  field  obtained  with  the  cable-digitizer 
compensated  output  voltage  of  ACD-1(A)  D-dot  sensor. 
^rec(^/i>P)  is  the  electrical  pulse  to  be  optimized  through 
adjusting  P.  It  was  calculated  with  the  output  voltage  of 
ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  after  cable-digitizer  and  D-dot  sen¬ 
sor  compensation.  The  measurement  using  the  ACD-l(R) 
D-dot  sensor  was  done  at  a  specific  location  on  the  bottom 
ground  wall  that  was  symmetric  to  the  ACD-1(A)  about  the 
center  septum,  as  indicated  in  Fig.  1.  By  the  symmetry  of  the 
cell,  Djec  should  be  very  close  to  each  other,  and  the 

observed  difference  is  mainly  due  to  the  reflections  in  the 
ACD-l(R).  Adjusting  W  in  Eq.  (13)  allows  us  to  emphasize 
a  specific  portion  of  the  wave  form,  e.g.,  the  leading  edge. 
An  additional  phase  term  may  be  needed  in  Eq.  (12)  to  syn¬ 
chronize  E'reK^rt)  and  for  the  nonlinear  least- 

squares  optimization.  The  reason  for  utilizing  the  electrical 
field  rather  than  the  output  voltage  of  D-dot  sensors  is  that 
the  former  gives  a  better  recovery  to  its  leading  edge. 

In  this  iterative  minimization  procedure  the  parameters 
were  adjusted  in  time  domain  while  the  derivatives  were  cal¬ 
culated  in  frequency  domain  and  then  transformed  back  to 
time  domain.  The  derivatives,  which  are  needed  in  the 
Levenberg-Marguardt  algorithm,  were  calculated  as^° 


dS(F) 

dpk 


V/2-1 

=  2 

71  =  0 


2WiO[E„,it„,P)-EM] 


’P) 

^Pk 

(14) 


and 


S^S(P)  ^dE,,,{t,,P)  dE^it„,P) 

■=2/  2Wit„) - - - - - ,  (15) 


^Pk^Pl  n  =  0 


^Pk 


dpi 


where  p]^  and  pi  are  the  A:th  and  /th  parameters  in  P,  respec¬ 
tively,  and 


^^rec(^7i  >P) 

dPk 


n 


dw^(ti,P) 

3Pk 


\  /fcd(/ )/?L(/.P)  ^Pk  /’ 

(16) 

where  is  given  by  one  of  the  following: 

dao 


dH^{f,P) 
da  I 


j 


(17) 


dTi 


-jaiOie 


where  i  =  1,2.  When/=0,  the  terms  in  the  bracket  for  *  in 
Eq.  (16)  is  real.  Since  there  always  is  a  low-pass  filter  to 
eliminate  high-frequency  noises  because  of  oversampling, 
we  can  force  dH^^(f,F)/dpif\f^f^^=0.  The  above  condi¬ 
tions  ensure  that  the  inverse  Fourier  transform  in  Eq.  (16) 
gives  a  real  result.  The  details  of  the  formulation  and  the 
iterative  procedure  can  be  found  in  Ref.  23.  The  best  fitted 
parameters  are  listed  in  Table  11.  The  delay  time  and  the 


Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  Vol.  68,  No.  5,  May  1997 


Electromagnetic  pulses  2225 


TABLE  IL  Optimal  parameters  for  Eqs.  (10)  and  (12)  for  the  compensation 
of  reflections  in  ACD-1{R)  D-dot  sensor.  The  parameters  were  determined 
with  a  nonlinear  least-squares  procedure. 


Ti  (ps) 

"2 

T2  (ps) 

0.72 

0.28 

81.2 

0.0 1 

510 

magnitude  of  the  second  d  function  suggest  that  the  first 
reflection  occurs  at  the  joint  between  the  sensing  element  and 
the  coaxial  plate,  considering  the  dimensions  of  the  sensor.  It 
is  the  first  reflection  that  exhibits  the  strongest  effect.  The 
second  reflection  that  occurs  at  a  bend  of  the  SMA  connector 
is  very  minor,  at  least  to  this  specific  type  of  pulses.  Since  P 
was  estimated  from  a  least-squares  routine  v/iih  the  measured 
wave  forms,  H^^(f  ,P)  would  not  be  zero  in  this  frequency 
range. 

Figure  7  was  plotted  in  a  smaller  time  window  to  illus¬ 
trate  the  details.  Beyond  this  window,  the  effects  of  Eq.  (12) 
to  the  electrical  pulse  form  are  very  small.  Figure  7(a)  shows 
the  comparison  between  the  output  voltage  of  the  ACD-1(A) 
D-dot  sensor  with  cable-digitizer  compensation,  that  of  the 
ACD-l(R)  Z)-dot  sensor  with  cable-digitizer  compensation, 
and  that  of  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  with  cable  digitizer 
and  D-dot  sensor  compensation.  Figure  7(b)  presents  the 
comparison  between  their  corresponding  electrical  fields. 
There  is  a  step  (dashed  line)  at  the  leading  edge  of  the  elec¬ 
trical  field  obtained  with  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  with  only 


FIG.  7.  (a)  Comparison  between  output  voltage  of  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot 
sensor  with  cable-digitizer  compensation  (dashed  line),  that  of  the 
ACD-1(/?)  D-dot  sensor  with  both  cable-digitizer  and  D-dot  sensor  compen¬ 
sation  (dash-dot  line),  and  that  of  the  ACD-1(A)  D-dot  sensor  with  cable- 
digitizer  compensation  (solid  line),  (b)  Comparison  between  their  corre¬ 
sponding  electrical  fields. 


cable-digitizer  compensation  although  it  only  affects  the  fast 
change  part  of  the  peak  field.  Because  the  fully  compensated 
electrical  pulse  is  much  closer  to  the  reference  pulse,  it  gives 
a  more  accurate  estimation  of  the  rise  time  than  that  of  par¬ 
tially  compensated  one.  Despite  the  fact  that  the  semi- 
empirical  method  requires  more  computation,  it  has  follow¬ 
ing  advantages  over  the  empirical  method: 

(i)  more  clear  physics; 

(ii)  only  a  few  parameters  are  needed  for  the  transfer 
function  of  a  specific  type  sensor;  and 

(iii)  wider  valid  frequency  range  to  some  extent  as  long  as 
the  analytical  model  is  sound. 

The  degree  of  the  overall  improvement  to  the  measurement 
accuracy  is  determined  by  the  reference  pulses,  the  nature  of 
the  measurement  hardware,  and  the  validity  of  the  analytical 
model  of  impulse  response  for  the  D-dot  sensor. 

V.  DISCUSSION 

The  problems  associated  with  transient  electrical  field 
measurements  in  the  picosecond  domain  in  an  electromag¬ 
netic  exposure  facility  have  been  discussed.  An  approach 
with  a  two-step  deconvolution  routine  has  been  presented. 
The  transfer  function  for  the  connection  cable  and  the  SCD 
5000  transient  digitizer  was  empirically  evaluated  with  a  ref¬ 
erence  impulse  from  a  picosecond  pulse  generator.  The  right- 
angle  bands  in  the  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  causes  reflec¬ 
tions.  For  the  first  time,  the  impulse  response  for  the 
reflections  was  formulated  as  a  summation  of  ^function.  The 
parameters  in  the  S  functions  were  determined  with  a  sym¬ 
metric  pulse  measurement  using  an  ACD-l(A)  D-dot  sensor 
and  an  iterative  procedure  for  time  domain  optimization  us¬ 
ing  frequency  domain  derivatives.  With  this  routine,  the 
measurement  accuracy  has  largely  been  improved.  This 
method  can  be  easily  extended  to  other  fast  pulse  measure¬ 
ment  systems. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This  work  is  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Re¬ 
search  and  Materiel  Command  under  Contract  No.  DAMD 
17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices.  The 
views,  opinions,  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  author  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  Army  position,  policy,  or  decision  unless  so 
designated  by  other  documentation.  The  author  wishes  to 
thank  J.  C.  Lee  for  some  assistance  with  measurement  instru¬ 
ments,  M.  E.  Belt,  and  D.  D.  Cox  for  improving  the  pulse 
generator,  and  S.-T.  Lu  for  drawing  Fig.  1. 

*N.  S.  Nahman,  IEEE  Trans  Instrum.  Meas.  32,  117  (1983). 

^N.  S.  Nahman,  Proc.  IEEE  66,  441  (1978). 

^W.  L.  Cans,  Proc.  IEEE  74,  86  (1986). 

^R.  A.  Lawton,  S.  M.  Riad,  and  J,  R.  Andrews,  Proc.  IEEE  74,  77  (1986). 
^G.  Casalegno,  Electromagnetics  9,  17  (1989). 

®G.  J.  Rohwein,  J.  F.  Aurand,  C.  A.  Forst,  L.  D.  Roose,  and  S.  R.  Babcock, 
in  21st  International  Power  Modulator  Symposium,  Costa  Mesa,  CA 
(1994). 

^C.  E.  Baum,  in  Fast  Electrical  and  Optical  Measurements^  edited  by  J.  E. 
Thompson  and  L.  H.  Luessen  (Martinus  Nijhoif,  Boston,  1986). 

*M.  Kanda,  in  Time-Domain  Measurements  in  Electromagnetics,  edited  by 


2226  Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  Vol.  68,  No.  5,  May  1997 


Electromagnetic  pulses 


E.  K.  Miller  (Van  Nostrand  Reinhold,  New  York,  1986). 

D.  Jackson,  Classical  Electrodynamics^  2nd  ed.  (Wiley,  New  York, 
1975).  -- 

H.  Press,  B.  P.  Flannery,  S.  A.  Teukolsky,  and  W.  T.  Vetterling, 
Numerical  Recipes  in  C,  2nd  ed.  (Cambridge  University  Press,  Cam¬ 
bridge,  1992). 

"J.  V.  Candy,  R.  W.  Ziolkowski,  and  D.  KentLewis,  J.  Acoust.  Soc.  Am. 
88,  2235  (1990). 

^^N.  H.  Younan,  A.  B.  Kopp,  D.  B.  Miller,  and  C.  D.  Taylor,  IEEE  Trans. 
Power  Deliv.  6,  501  (1991). 

D.  Perez,  C.  Liu,  L.  Lawson,  T.  E.  Moore,  and  C.  R.  Chappell,  Ann. 
Geophys.  (France)  11,  889  (1993). 

D.  Blair,  J.  E.  Conte,  and  T.  R.  Rice,  IEEE  Trans.  Educ.  38,  211 
(1995). 

^^T.  K.  Sarkar,  D.  D.  Weiner,  and  V.  K.  Jain,  IEEE  Trans.  Antennas  Propag, 
29,  373  (1981). 


J.  Siweris  and  B.  Schiek,  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.  30, 
233  (1985). 

Sinha,  Phys.  Rev.  E  53,  4509  (1996). 

^^A.  V.  Oppenheim  and  R.  W.  Schafer,  Discrete-Time  Signal  Processing 
(Prentice-Hall,  Englewood  Cliffs,  1989). 

^®EG&G  Washington  Analytical  Services  Center,  Inc.,  Albuquerque,  NM. 

Specification  of  ACD  £)-dot  Sensor  (Data  Sheet  1119),  1987. 

^°J.  F.  Aurand,  P.  E.  Patterson,  and  C.  A.  Forst,  in  Conference  on  Precision 
Electromagnetic  Measurements,  Boulder,  Colorado,  1994. 

N.  S.  Nahman,  in  Fast  Electrical  and  Optical  Measurements,  Volume  /, 
edited  by  J.  E.  Thompson  and  L.  H.  Luessen  (Martinus  Nijhoff,  Boston, 
1986). 

22$.  M.  Riad,  Proc.  IEEE  74,  82  (1986). 

2^J.-Z.  Bao,  C.  C.  Davis,  and  R.  E.  Schmukler,  IEEE  Trans.  Biomed.  Eng. 
40.  364  (1993). 


Rev.  Set.  Instrum.,  Vol.  68,  No.  5,  May  1997 


Electromagnetic  pulses  2227 


1730 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  MICROWAVE  THEORY  AND  TECHNIQUES,  VOL.  45,  NO.  10,  OCTOBER  1997 


Complex  Dielectric  Measurements  and  Analysis 
of  Brain  Tissues  in  the  Radio  and 
Microwave  Frequencies 

Jian-Zhong  Bao,  Senior  Member,  IEEE,  Shin-Tsu  Lu,  and  William  D.  Hurt,  Senior  Member,  IEEE 


Abstract-^Vft  present  in-vitro  complex  dielectric  measurements 
of  gray  and  white  matter  of  rat  brains  in  the  frequency  range 
between  45  MHz  and  26.5  GHz  at  body  and  room  temper¬ 
atures  using  the  open-ended  coaxial  probe  technique  with  an 
HP8510B  network  analyzer.  The  measurement  data  exhibited 
two  separated  dispersions,  and  were  analyzed  by  means  of  a 
complex  nonlinear  least-squares  technique.  We  suggest  two  em¬ 
piric  models  to  describe  the  experimental  data:  one  containing 
two  Cole-Cole  functions  was  applied  to  the  data  from  this 
paper,  and  another  including  one  Havriliak-Negami  and  one 
Cole-Cole  function  was  utilized  to  a  combination  of  past  and 
present  literature  data  in  a  wider  frequency  range  from  100  kHz 
to  26.5  GHz.  The  adoption  of  previously  published  data  at  the 
frequencies  below  45  MHz  increases  the  valid  frequency  range 
of  the  model. 

Index  Terms — Brain  tissues,  complex  dielectric  constant,  com¬ 
plex  nonlinear  modeling,  open-ended  coaxial  probe  technique, 
radio  and  microwave  frequencies. 


1.  INTRODUCTION 

The  lack  of  sufficient  data  at  super-high  frequencies  and 
accurate  models  in  a  wide  frequency  range  for  complex 
dielectric  properties  of  tissues  has  presented  an  obstacle  for 
both  theoretical  and  experimental  studies  of  electromagnetic 
energy  deposition  in  human  or  animal  bodies.  Most  of  the  early 
studies  were  at  a  few  discrete  frequency  bands  or  scattered 
frequency  points,  and  in  frequencies  below  5  GHz.  There  are 
also  very  few  published  data  above  10  GHz,  and  virtually  no 
model  covers  a  wide  frequency  range  [l]-[3].  It  is  important 
to  establish  a  reliable  database  and  empirical  models  for  each 
organ  in  a  wide  frequency  range  for  studies  of  the  interaction 
between  electromagnetic  wave  and  biological  bodies  [4],  es¬ 
pecially  for  pulse  situations.  The  dielectric  information  is  also 
of  importance  for  clinical  applications  [5]. 

In  this  paper,  we  report  in-vitro  complex  dielectric  measure¬ 
ments  of  gray  and  white  matter  from  rat  brains  in  the  frequency 
range  between  45  MHz  and  26.5  GHz  using  the  open-ended 


Manuscript  received  February  27,  1997;  revised  June  20,  1997.  This  work 
was  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
under  Contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices. 

J.-Z.  Bao  is  with  McKesson  BioServices  and  the  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Research  Detachment,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  TX  78235  USA 
(e-mail:  jian@abba.brooks.af.mil). 

S.-T.  Lu  is  with  McKesson  BioServices  and  the  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Research  Detachment,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  TX  78235  USA. 

W.  D.  Hurt  is  with  Armstrong  Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San 
Antonio,  TX  78235  USA. 

Publisher  Item  Identifier  S  0018-9480(97)07109-3. 


(a)  (b) 

Fig.  1.  Tissue  and  probe  configuration  and  measurement  locations  on  the 
surface  of  a  rat  brain.  The  circles  indicate  the  locations  on  the  (a)  cerebral 
cortex  for  gray  matter  and  on  the  (b)  medulla  oblongata  for  white  matter 
measurements. 

coaxial  probe  technique  with  a  computer-controlled  HP8510B 
network  analyzer  and  the  complex  nonlinear  modeling  of  ex¬ 
perimental  data.  The  measurements  were  performed  at  37  °C 


0018-9480/97$10.00  ©  1997  IEEE 


BAO  et  aL:  COMPLEX  DIELECmiC  MEASUREMENTS  AND  ANALYSIS  OF  BRAIN  TISSUES 


1731 


TABLE  I 

Best-Fitted  Parameters  in  (3)  for  the  Gray  and  White  Matter 
OF  Rat  Brains  at  Room  and  Body  Temperatures.  The  Corresponding  Comparisons 
Between  the  Experimental  Data  and  Their  Fitting  Are  in  Figs.  5  and  6 


gray  matter 

white 

matter 

to 

0 

0 

37 

25  °C 

37 

Aei 

269.7  ±2.6 

309.8  ±7.8 

110.4  ±6.6 

130.3  ±9.1 

Ti  (ns) 

5.59  ±  0.04 

5.12  ±0.11 

6.24  ±0.35 

5.31  ±  0.40 

0^1 

0.910  ±0.003 

0.892  ±  0.026 

0.840  ±  0.005 

0.806  ±  0.007 

Ae2 

^50.26  ±  0.04 

46.68  ±0.11 

31.19  ±0.14 

28.12  ±0.16 

T2  (ps) 

k74±0.06 

4.87  ±0.12 

5.20  ±0.22 

3.04  ±0.17 

02 

0.907  ±  0.002 

0.939  ±  0.004 

0.732  ±  0.059 

0.760  ±0.007 

5.11  ±0.02 

4.54  ±  0.04 

4. 79  ±0.02 

4.40  ±  0.03 

(To  (S/m) 

0.366  ±  0.002 

0.368  ±  0.005 

0.234  ±  0.003 

0.241  ±  0.005 

and  24  for  gray  and  at  37  and  25  °C  for  white  matter. 
The  measured  data  were  analyzed  with  two  empirical  models. 
One  of  these  included  two  Cole-Cole  functions  [6]  and  was 
utilized  with  the  data  from  this  paper  to  obtain  a  model  for 
the  frequencies  between  45  MHz  and  26.5  GHz.  The  other 
model  contained  a  Havriliak-Negami  [6]  and  a  Cole-Cole 
function,  and  was  applied  to  the  combined  data  from  this 
paper  and  results  of  [7],  [8]  at  the  frequencies  below  45  MHz 
to  construct  a  model  which  covers  a  wider  frequency  range 
between  100  kHz  and  26.5  GHz.  Although  the  first  model 
gives  a  better  fit  to  the  measured  spectra  in  general,  the  second 
one  simulates  the  complex  dielectric  spectra  in  a  much  wider 
frequency  range. 


II.  Measurements 

A.  Open-Ended  Coaxial  Probe  Technique 

The  open-ended  coaxial  probe  technique  has  been  exten¬ 
sively  employed  for  the  dielectric  measurements  of  materials, 
especially  biological  samples  [9]-[13].  With  this  technique, 
the  complex  dielectric  spectra  can  be  easily  acquired  in  a 
wide  frequency  range  and  in  an  almost  continuous  form.  The 
technique  is  especially  suitable  for  liquids.  The  measurements 
for  solids  are  much  more  tedious,  and  the  main  problem  is  to 
assure  a  good  and  tight  contact  between  the  open  end  of  the 
coaxial  probe  and  the  sample  surface  [14],  [15].  A  veiy  tiny 
air  gap  could  introduce  a  very  large  error,  especially  to  the 
high  dielectric  constant  materials  [16].  For  soft  solids  such  as 
tissues,  a  good  contact  can  be  realized  by  applying  moderate 
pressure. 

The  measured  complex  reflection  coefficient  {pm)  contains 
the  desired  information  from  the  interface  between  the  open 
end  of  a  probe  and  the  material  under  measurement  as  well  as 
the  undesired  effects  of  the  network  analyzer  (which  was  not 
calibrated),  connectors,  and  coaxial  line.  With  a  linear  model 
for  the  interface,  pm  can  be  converted  to  the  complex  relative 


TABLE  n 

Best-Fitted  Parameters  in  (4)  for  the  Gray  and  White  Matter  of  Rat 
Brains  with  the  Adoption  of  Early  Published  Low-Frequency 
Data  of  a  Dog  Brain.  The  Corresponding  Comparisons  Between 
the  Experimental  Data  and  Their  Fitting  Are  in  Figs.  7  and  8 


gray  matter 

white 

matter 

24  “C 

37  °C 

25 

37  ®c 

Aei 

7703 

9217 

7961 

8502 

Ti  (ns) 

59.1 

182.1 

24.9 

605.5 

Oil 

0.300 

0.364 

0.214 

0.348 

3.190 

2.297 

5.010 

2.300 

A  £2 

45.27 

40.76 

29.01 

26.38 

T2  (ps) 

6.12 

4.27 

4.35 

2.96 

OL2 

0.999 

0.997 

!  0.787 

0.817 

4.92 

5.18 

4.55 

4.81 

(Jo  (S/m) 

0.155 

0.163 

0.102 

0.128 

dielectric  constant  (e  =  e'  -  je'',  where  j  =  \/^)  with  [17], 
[18] 


^iPm  ““  A2 

A3  •—  Pjjri 


(1) 


where  the  complex  coefficients  Ai,  A2,  and  A3  were  de¬ 
termined  with  a  calibration  procedure  using  three  reference 
measurements:  an  open,  a  short,  and  standard  saline.  This 
simple  rational  expression  maps  one  point  in  the  complex 
Pm  plane  to  one  point  in  the  complex  e  plane.  Although  this 
relation  is  based  on  assumptions  and  simplifications,  using 
standards  in  the  calibration  procedure  will  compensate  for 
the  measurement  errors  to  a  large  extent,  especially  when  the 
dielectric  properties  under  investigation  are  close  to  one  of  the 
standards  used  for  the  calibration  [18].  The  advantage  of  (1) 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  MICROWAVE  THEORY  AND  TECHNIQUES,  VOL.  45,  NO.  10,  OCTOBER  1997 


10 

Frequency  (MHz) 


Frequency  (MHz) 

Fig.  2.  Permittivity  and  conductivity  spectra  of  gray  matter  at  a:  37  ±  0.5  ®C,  b:  24  ±  0.5  ®C;  white  matter  at  c:  37  ±  0.5  °C,  and  25  ±  0.5  ®C 


TABLE  m 

Comparison  of  Values  From  (3)  and  (4)  Using  the  Parameters  Listed  in  Tables  I  and  II,  Respectively,  with  the 
Experimental  Data  for  Gray  Matter  at  37  ®C  at  Some  Selected  Frequency  Points.  These  Points  Are  in  Curves  a  of  Figs. 
6  AND  8.  The  Experimental  Data  at  0.1,  1,  and  10  MHz  Are  From  [1]  and  [7].  N/A  Stands  for  Not  Applicable 


a  (S/m) 


(MHz) 


0.1 


1.0 


10.0 


99.9 


901.8 


10179.8 


26500.0 


Eq.  (3)  Eq.  (4) 


data 


3800 


1250 


366  ±  14 


96.9  ±  7.0 


54.4  ±3.0 


45.0  ±2.0 


32.6  ±2.3 


value  of 

Eq.  (3) 

value  of 

Eq.  (4) 

N/A 

0.173 

N/A 

0.427 

data 


0.170 


0.210 

0.365  ±  0.015 


0.850  ±0.040 


1.18  ±0.10 


8.67  ±0.85 


36.7  ±2.7 


fEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  MICROWAVE  THEORY  AND  TECHNIQUES,  VOL.  45,  NO.  10.  OCTOBER  1997 


Frequency  (MHz) 


Frequency  (MHz) 

Fig.  4.  Comparison  of  permittivity  and  conductivity  spectra  of  rat  brain  tissues  between  this  paper  (solid  lines)  and  previously  published  data  of  dog  brain 
tissues  by  Foster  et  al  [20]  (o  and  ♦)  at  body  temperature.  Lines  a  and  open  circles  (o)  are  for  gray  matter  and  lines  b  and  stars  (*)  are  for  white  matter. 


TABLE  V 

Comparison  of  Values  From  (3)  and  (4)  Using  the  Parameters  Listed  in  Tables  I  and  II,  Respectively,  with  the  Experimental 
Data  for  Gray  Matter  at  24  ®C  at  Some  Selected  Frequency  Points.  These  Points  Are  in  Curves  a  of  Figs.  5 
and  7.  The  Experimental  Data  at  0.1,  1,  and  10  MHz  Are  From  [8]  at  24.5  °C.  N/A  Stands  for  Not  Applicable 


frequencies 

(MHz)  ' 


0.1 


1.0 


10.0 


99.9 


901.8 


10179.8 


28 


1197 

338 


94.4 


55.4 


44.6 


923  ±3 


265  i  5 


57.0  ±3.0 


44.6  ±2.1 


27.7  ±2.2 


(7  (S/m) 

value  of 

value  of 

experimental 

Eq.  (3) 

Eq.  (4) 

data 

N/A 

0.161 

0.150  ±0.020 

N/A 

0.202 

0.177  ±0.008 

N/A 

0.356 

0.295  ±0.005 

0.764  ±0.034 


10.6  ±0.8 


36.1  ±4.1 


26500.0 


28.0 


27.3 


33. 


BAO  et  ai:  COMPLEX  DIELECTRIC  MEASUREMENTS  AND  ANALYSIS  OF  BRAIN  TISSUES 


1735 


Frequency  (MHz) 


Fig.  5.  Comparison  between  the  measured  data  (•)  and  their  CNLS  fitting  (solid  lines)  with  (3).  Curves  a  are  for  gray  matter  at  24  ±  0.5  °C  while  curves 
6  are  for  white  matter  at  25  ±  0.5  ®C.  The  best-fitted  parameters  are  listed  in  Table  I.  The  error  bars  stand  for  the  standard  deviations. 


is  that  its  inversion  is  unique  so  that  no  efforts  were  needed 
to  distinguish  the  solutions  and  is  much  easier  than  that  with 
a  more  complicated  model. 

B.  Sample  Preparation  and  Experimental  Setup 

Male  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  were  used  as  tissue  donors.  They 
were  euthanized  by  CO2  inhalation  until  the  time  of  death. 
The  brain  and  approximately  5  mm  of  the  spinal  cord  were 
dissected  free  of  skull  and  dura  matter  of  the  meninges  in 
less  than  10  min  after  death.  The  cerebral  cortex  consists  of 
approximately  a  2-mm-thick  surface  layer  of  gray  matter  and 
about  a  6-mm-thick  layer  underneath  a  mixing  region  of  gray 
and  white  matter.  Since  the  gray  matter  was  in  direct  contact 
with  the  open  end  of  the  probe  and  the  measurement  thickness 
into  the  specimen  is  about  2  mm  [19],  gray  matter  contributed 


the  most  to  the  measurements.  Therefore,  gray  matter  was 
used  to  represent  the  cerebral  cortex.  Medulla  oblongata  was 
constituted  nearly  solely  by  white  matter  and  used  to  signify 
the  white  matter.  Its  thickness  is  about  7  mm.  The  specimens 
were  washed  with  and  immersed  in  0.9%  saline  during  the 
temperature  adjusting  process  and  measurements.  Keeping  the 
specimens  in  saline  has  the  following  advantages: 

1)  maintaining  the  tissues  in  a  more  physiologically 
friendly  environment  than  in  air; 

2)  making  the  temperature  control  easier; 

3)  avoiding  any  air  bubbles  which  would  possibly  exist 
between  the  flat  open  end  of  the  probe  and  the  specimen 
surface  if  the  specimen  were  kept  in  air. 

Measurements  at  room  temperature  were  done  within  40  min, 
and  at  body  temperature  within  60  min  after  the  euthanasia  of 


1736 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  MICROWAVE  THEORY  AND  TECHNIQUES,  VOL.  45,  NO.  10,  OCTOBER  1997 


10^  10^  10"^ 


Frequency  (MHz) 


Fig.  6.  Comparison  between  the  measured  data  (•)  and  their  CNLS  fitting  (solid  lines)  with  (3)  at  37  ±  0.5  °C.  Curves  a  are  for  gray  matter  and  curves 
6  are  for  white  matter.  The  best^fitted  parameters  are  listed  in  Table  I.  The  error  bars  stand  for  the  standard  deviations. 


the  rats.  The  whole  brain  tissue  was  kept  intact,  and  one  brain 
specimen  was  used  only  once  at  one  temperature  to  ensure 
that  the  measurements  were  on  fresh  tissues.  A  total  of  12  rat 
brains  were  utilized  in  this  study.  The  probe  position  and  the 
geometry  of  the  sample  container  were  kept  the  same  during 
the  saline  reference  and  the  tissue  measurements  to  minimize 
environmental  influences.  The  surface  of  specimens  was  in 
good  and  tight  contact  with  the  flat  open-end  of  the  probe. 
The  measurement  system  is  very  similar  to  the  one  which  has 
been  described  in  [17],  [18].  Measurements  were  done  on  the 
surface  of  specimens  using  an  HP8510B  network  analyzer  with 
a  semirigid  right-angle  coaxial  probe  of  2.2-mm  diameter  and 
15-cm  length.  Frequency  range  from  45  MHz  to  26.5  GHz 
was  swept  on  a  logarithmic  scale  over  201  points  in  less  than 
1  min.  The  temperature  was  controlled  by  a  water  circulator, 
and  measured  on  the  surface  of  tissue  specimens.  Fig.  1  shows 


the  tissue-probe  configuration  and  measurement  locations  of  a 
probe  on  the  surface  of  a  rat  brain.  The  complex  dielectric 
spectra  were  measured  at  different  locations  on  the  surface  of 
specimen  for  gray  and  white  matter,  respectively. 

III.  Measurement  Results 

The  dielectric  properties  of  tissues  in  radio  and  microwave 
frequencies  depend  on  their  cellular  and  subcellular  structures 
and  constituents.  Fig.  2  exhibits  the  measured  permittivity 
(eO  and  conductivity  (a)  spectra  of  gray  matter  at  37 
and  24  ®C,  and  of  white  matter  at  37  °C  and  25  in  the 
frequency  range  between  45  MHz  and  26.5  GHz.  cr  is  defined 
as  cr  =  a;eo6",  where  eo  is  the  permittivity  in  a  vacuum, 
and  (jj  is  the  angular  frequency.  Each  of  the  spectra  presents 
two  well-separated  major  dispersions,  which  are  commonly 


BAO  et  all  COMPLEX  DIELECmiC  MEASUREMENTS  AND  ANALYSIS  OF  BRAIN  TISSUES 


1737 


TABLE  VI 

Comparison  of  Values  From  (3)  and  (4)  Using  the  Parameters  Listed  in  Tables  I  and  II,  Respectively,  with  the  Experimental 
Data  for  White  Matter  at  25  ®C  at  Some  Selected  Frequency  Points.  These  Points  Are  in  Curves  h  of  Figs.  5 
AND  7.  The  Experimental  Data  at  0.1,  1,  and  10  MHz  Are  From  [8]  at  24.5  °C.  N/A  Stands  for  Not  Applicable 


frequencies 

(MHz) 

€' 

a  (S/m) 

value  of 

Eq.  (3) 

value  of 

Eq.  (4) 

experimental 

data 

value  of 

Eq.  (3) 

value  of 

Eq.  (4) 

experimental 

data 

0.1 

• 

N/A 

1365 

1425  ±  25 

N/A 

0.106 

0.150  ±0.050 

1.0 

N/A 

540 

401  ±1 

N/A 

0.125 

0.120 

10.0 

N/A 

165 

120  ±5 

N/A 

0.191 

0.165  ±0.005 

99.9 

51.5 

56.2 

51.8  ±5.2 

0.387 

0.343 

0.385  ±  0.060 

901.8 

36.5 

35.9 

36.4  ±  1.5 

0.597 

0.622 

0.572  ±0.075 

10179.8 

28.5 

28.4 

28.1  ±1.2 

5.23 

4.89 

5.37  ±0.50 

26500.0 

21.6 

21.9 

21.7±  1.3 

15.5 

15.6 

15,6  ±1.6 

referred  to  as  P-  and  7-dispersion  [1],  although  only  the  high 
frequency  tail  of  the  /3-dispersion  is  covered  in  this  frequency 
range.  The  /3-dispersion,  centered  in  the  megahertz  frequency 
range,  is  largely  due  to  the  occurrence  of  Maxwell-Wagner 
effects  at  the  interface  between  the  cell  membrane  and  the 
surrounding  aqueous  phase.  The  7-dispersion,  centered  in  the 
gigahertz  frequency  range,  is  attributed  to  the  relaxation  of 
water  molecules  in  the  aqueous  phase  or  bound  to  macro¬ 
molecules.  Besides  the  long  tails  of  /3-dispersion,  our  spectra 
do  not  show  a  distinct  so-called  ^'-dispersion.  If  it  existed, 
it  would  be  covered  in  our  frequency  range.  Gray  and  white 
matter  display  a  distinct  dielectric  property  in  this  frequency 
range,  where  e'  and  a  of  gray  matter  constantly  yield  a  higher 
value  than  those  of  white  matter  at  both  body  and  room 
temperatures,  respectively.  The  temperature  dependence  of  the 
spectra  shows  a  crossing  feature:  e'  increases  with  temperature 
at  low  and  high  frequency  ranges  of  this  spectra  and  decreases 
in  the  middle,  while  a  increases  with  temperature  in  the  low 
frequency  range  and  decreases  in  the  high  frequency  range. 
This  feature  is  consistent  with  an  earlier  observation  in  a 
different  cell  system  [18]. 

Fig.  3  illustrates  a  typical  time-course  of  the  measured  e' 
and  a  spectra  of  grey  matter  at  body  temperature.  Since  the 
tissue  samples  were  pressed  against  the  probe,  minor  damage 
took  place  on  their  surface.  The  surface  damage  in  turn  caused 
a  change  of  the  interfacial  properties  with  time.  The  systematic 
variation  with  time  may  be  resulted  from  the  leakage  of  the 
extracellular  and  intercellular  fluid  and/or  elastic  deformation 
of  the  tissues  around  the  open-end  of  the  probe,  but  not 
due  to  temperature  variation,  which  shows  a  different  feature 
(Fig.  2).  To  minimize  the  influence  caused  by  the  damage,  a 
measurement  should  be  performed  as  quickly  as  possible  after 
a  tissue  specimen  is  placed  in  good  contact  with  the  probe. 

Fig.  4  represents  the  comparison  between  the  measured 
spectra  of  this  paper  and  previously  published  data  of  a  canine 
brain  by  Foster  et  al.  [20]  at  37  °C.  Although  our  data 
constantly  show  a  larger  difference  for  both  e'  and  a  between 
gray  and  white  matter,  they  are  in  reasonable  agreement  with 


the  early  data  considering  the  factors  such  as  using  different 
measurement  techniques  and  tissues  from  different  species. 
One  possible  reason  for  the  larger  difference  in  our  data  is 
that  we  were  using  much  fresher  specimens.  In  addition,  our 
spectra  cover  a  wider  frequency  range. 

IV.  Complex  Nonlinear  Analysis 

To  analyze  these  two  well-separated  dispersions,  we  need 
at  least  two  dispersion  functions.  The  measured  spectra  were 
analyzed  using  two  models  with  and  without  considering 
previously  published  data  at  frequencies  below  45  MHz, 
respectively.  The  adoption  of  early  literature  data  in  this 
modeling  extends  the  valid  frequency  range  of  the  model.  The 
parameters  of  models  are  determined  by  means  of  a  complex 
nonlinear  least-squares  (CNLS)  fit,  which  simultaneously  fits 
the  real  and  imaginary  parts  to  ensure  a  complete  fit: 

S{P)^Y.^Wl[C,{u^k,P)  - 

k-1 

+  lT‘(ej„K,P)-4(a;0f}  (2) 

where  N  is  the  number  of  frequency  points,  eg  is  the  exper¬ 
imental  data,  Cm  is  given  by  an  empirical  model  [see  (3)  or 
(4)],  superscript  r  and  i  denote  the  real  and  imaginary  parts, 
respectively,  IV  is  a  weighting  factor,  and  P  represents  the 
set  of  real  parameters  in  the  model.  The  best-fit  values  of 
these  parameters  are  evaluated  by  minimizing  S  using  the 
Levenberg-Margaret  algorithm  [21].  The  procedure  of  pur 
fitting  routine  can  be  found  in  [22]. 

The  model  utilized  for  the  data  solely  from  this  paper 
contains  two  Cole-Cole  functions: 

where  is  the  high-frequency  limit  of  the  dielectric  constant, 
Ae  is  the  dielectric  decrements  of  the  dispersion,  r  is  the  re¬ 
laxation  times,  a  are  exponents,  and  ao  is  the  dc  conductivity. 
The  two  Cole-Cole  functions  are  for  the  two  dispersions,  and 


1738 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  MICROWAVE  THEORY  AND  TECHNIQUES,  VOL.  45,  NO.  10,  OCTOBER  1997 


10“^  10°  10^  10^  10®  lO^" 


Frequency  (MHz) 

Fig.  7.  Comparison  between  the  measured  data  from  this  paper  (•)  plus  previously  published  data  of  canine  and  bovine  brain  tissues  at  24.5  ®C  by 
Surowiec  et  al  [8]  (o  and  *)  and  the  CNLS  fitting  (solid  lines)  with  (4).  Curves  a  and  open  circles  (o)  are  for  gray  matter  and  curves  h  and  stars  (♦) 
are  for  white  matter.  The  best-fitted  parameters  are  listed  in  Table  II. 


subscripts  1  and  2  represent  the  dispersions  at  low-  and  high- 
frequency  ends,  respectively.  Since  the  data  from  this  paper 
covers  a  very  small  portion  of  the  ^-dispersion,  it  is  impossible 
to  retrieve  the  entire  ^-dispersion  from  these  data  alone,  and 
the  parameters  (Aei  and  n)  obtained  with  the  fitting  do  not 
reflect  the  /3-dispersion.  A  large  part  of  the  7-dispersion  was 
in  our  measurement  range  so  that  the  recovery  of  7-dispersion 
is  relatively  more  reliable.  Nevertheless,  we  suggest  that  the 
extracted  parameters  in  the  model  should  only  be  used  in  the 
frequency  range  where  the  experimental  data  reside.  Fig.  5 
shows  that  the  comparison  between  the  measurement  data  and 
their  CNLS  fitting  for  gray  and  white  matter  at  24  °C  and  at 
25  °C,  respectively,  and  Fig.  6  shows  a  similar  comparison  at 
37  ®C.  Only  half  of  the  measured  data  were  plotted  to  make 
the  fitting  lines  more  visible  in  these  two  figures.  Despite  some 


small  discrepancy  in  the  imaginary  part  at  high  frequencies, 
(3)  generally  gives  a  good  fit.  The  corresponding  best-fitted 
parameters  for  (3)  are  listed  in  Table  1. 

Because  the  difference  between  the  dielectric  properties  of 
the  same  organ  but  in  different  species  is  small  [19],  [23], 
and  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  there  is  no  published  low- 
frequency  data  (<45  MHz)  for  rat  brains  at  the  temperatures 
we  were  working  with,  we  adopted  the  data  of  canine’s  gray 
and  white  matter  at  lower  frequencies  (10  MHz,  1  MHz, 
and  100  kHz)  by  Stoy  et  al  [7]  at  body  temperature  and 
Surowiec  et  al.  [8]  at  room  temperature.  Utilizing  the  published 
data  as  references  (even  from  different  species)  at  frequencies 
below  our  measurement  range  in  the  fitting  can  increase  the 
frequency  range  of  validity  of  the  model.  There  are  only  a  few 
available  published  data  for  white  and  gray  matter,  regardless 


BAO  et  all  COMPLEX  DIELECTRIC  MEASUREMENTS  AND  ANALYSIS  OF  BRAIN  TISSUES 


1739 


Fig.  8.  ^mparison  between  the  me^ured  data  from  this  paper  (•)  plus  previously  published  data  of  dog  brain  tissues  by  Stoy  et  al.  [7]  (o  and  *) 
and  the  fitting  (solid  lines)  with  (4)  at  37  °C.  Curves  a  and  open  circles  (o)  are  for  gray  matters  and  curves  b  and  stars  (*)  are  for  white 

matters.  The  best-fitted  parameters  are  listed  in  Table  11. 


of  the  frequencies,  temperatures,  techniques,  and  species  [2], 
[23],  [24].  The  extended  dispersion  at  the  low-frequency  end 
was  modeled  with  a  Havriliak-Negami  rather  than  Cole-Cole 
function  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  the  model,  and  so  (3) 
becomes 


Aei 


■  + 


Ae2 


[1  +  1  -f  (ja;r2)^2 


cro 


(4) 


where  /3i  is  another  exponent.  Fig.  7  shows  that  the  compari¬ 
son  between  the  combined  data  and  their  CNLS  fitting  for  gray 
and  white  matter  at  room  temperatures,  while  Fig.  8  shows  a 
similar  comparison  at  body  temperature.  Only  one  quarter  of 
the  measured  data  from  this  paper  were  plotted  to  make  the 
fitting  lines  more  visible.  Although  the  quality  of  fit  with  (4) 
to  the  combined  data  is  not  as  good  as  that  with  (3)  to  the 
present  data,  (4)  covers  a  wider  frequency  range.  The  closest 


available  room  temperature  data  is  at  24.5  ®C  [8],  which  is  a 
half  degree  higher  than  our  gray-matter  temperature  and  a  half 
degree  lower  than  our  white-matter  temperature.  The  transition 
from  our  measured  spectra  to  the  early  published  data  are 
fairly  smooth  for  body  temperature  but  less  smooth  for  room 
temperature,  which  might  be  a  partial  result  of  the  0.5  °C 
difference  between  the  temperatures  at  which  the  data  were 
collected.  The  best-fitted  parameters  for  the  gray  and  white 
matter  in  the  extended  frequency  range  are  listed  in  Table 
II.  Since  the  combined  data  was  applied  to  extract  its  best- 
fit  parameters,  (4)  can  be  regarded  for  the  general  gray  and 
white  matter  in  the  frequency  range  between  100  kHz  and  26.5 
GHz.  Tables  III  and  VI  shows  the  comparison  of  calculated 
values  from  (3)  and  (4)  using  the  parameters  listed  in  Tables 
I  and  II,  respectively,  with  the  experimental  data  for  gray  and 


1740 


IEEE  TRANSACTIONS  ON  MICROWAVE  THEORY  AND  TECHNIQUES,  VOL.  45,  NO.  10,  OCTOBER  1997 


white  matter  at  body  and  room  temperatures  at  several  selected 
frequency  points.  These  points  are  around  curves  a  or  fc  of 
Figs.  5-8,  respectively.  Although,  in  general,  (3)  presents  a 
better  values  in  a  smaller  frequency  range,  both  (3)  and  (4) 
can  yield  reasonably  close  values  to  the  measurement  data  if 
the  experimental  uncertainty  are  taken  into  account. 

V.  Conclusions 

The  complex  dielectric  spectra  of  gray  and  white  matter  of 
rat  brains  have  been  measured  with  the  open-ended  coaxial- 
probe  technique  in  the  frequency  range  between  45  MHz 
and  26.5  GHz  at  body  and  room  temperatures.  This  paper’s 
data  have  been  analyzed  with’  two  Cole-Cole  functions  and 
a  combination  of  early  and  current  literature  data  has  been 
analyzed  with  one  Havriliak-Negami  and  one  Cole-Cole 
function  using  CNLS  technique  in  a  frequency  range  from 
100  kHz  to  26.5  GHz.  Furthermore,  we  explicitly  show  the 
time  variation  of  the  spectra  due  to  the  damage  of  the  sample 
surface.  Our  data  and  models  complement  a  few  existing  data, 
especially  for  the  high  frequencies  above  10  GHz. 

VI.  Acknowledgments 

The  authors  thank  M.  E.  Belt  and  D.  D.  Cox  for  building  the 
temperature  control  system,  and  P.  J.  Henry  for  help  with  the 
animals.  Author  J.-Z.  Bao  wishes  to  thank  Prof.  C.  C.  Davis 
for  the  data  acquisition  software.  The  views,  opinions,  and/or 
findings  contained  in  this  paper  are  those  of  the  authors  and 
should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  Army 
position,  policy,  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by  other 
documentation. 

References 

[1]  K.  R.  Foster  and  H.  P.  Schwan,  “Dielectric  properties  of  tissues,”  in 
Handbook  of  Biological  Effects  of  Electromagnetic  Fields,  C.  Polk  and 
E.  Postow,  Eds.  New  York;  CRC,  1996,  pp.  25-102. 

[2]  M.  A.  Stuchly,  T.  W.  Athey,  S.  S.  Stuchly,  G.  M.  Samaras,  and 
G.  Taylor,  “Dielectric  properties  of  animal  tissues  in  vivo  at  frequencies 
10  MHz-l  GHz,”  Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  2,  pp.  93-103,  1981. 

[3]  M.  A.  Stuchly  and  S.  S.  Stuchly,  “Dielectric  properties  of  biological 
substances — Tabulated,”  J.  Microwave  Power,  vol.  15,  pp.  19-26,  1980. 

[4]  C.-K.  Chou,  H.  Bassen,  J.  Osepchuk,  R.  Petersen,  M.  Meltz, 
R.  Cleveland,  J.  C.  Lin,  and  L.  Heynick,  “Radio  frequency  elec¬ 
tromagnetic  exposure:  Tutorial  review  on  experimental  dosimetry,” 
Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  17,  pp.  195-208,  1996. 

[5]  C.-K.  Chou,  “Evaluation  of  microwave  hyperthermia  applicators,”  Bio¬ 
electromagnetics,  vol.  13,  p.  581,  1992. 

[6]  C.  J.  F.  Bottcher  and  P.  Bordewijk,  Theory  of  Electric  Polariza¬ 
tion-Volume  II,  2nd  ed.  New  York:  Elsevier,  1978. 

[7]  R.  D.  Stoy,  K.  R.  Foster,  and  H.  P.  Schwan,  “Dielectric  properties  of 
mammalian  tissues  from  0.1  to  100  MHz:  A  summary  of  recent  data,” 
Phys.  Med.  Bio.,  vol.  27,  pp.  501-513,  1982. 

[8]  A.  Surowiec,  S.  S.  Stuchly,  and  A.  Swarup,  “Postmortem  changes  of  the 
dielectric  properties  of  bovine  brain  tissues  at  low  radio-frequencies,” 
Bioelectromagnetics,  vol.  7,  pp.  31-43,  1986. 

[9]  E.  C.  Burdette,  F.  L.  Cain,  and  J.  Seals,  “In  vivo  probe  measure¬ 
ment  technique  for  determining  dielectric  properties  at  VHF  through 
microwave  frequencies,”  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol. 
MTT-28,  pp.  414-427,  Apr.  1980. 

[10]  T.  W.  Athey,  M.  A.  Stuchly,  and  S.  S.  Stuchly,  “Measurement  of  radio 
frequency  permittivity  of  biological  tissues  with  an  open-ended  coaxial 
line:  Part  I.”  IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol.  MTT-30,  pp. 
82-86,  Jan.  1982. 

[11]  M.  A.  Stuchly,  A.  W.  Athey,  G.  M.  Samaras,  and  G.  E.  Taylor, 
“Measurement  of  radio  frequency  permittivity  of  biological  tissues  with 


an  open-ened  coaxial  line:  Part  II— Experimental  results,”  IEEE  Trans. 
Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol.  MTT-30,  pp,  87-92,  Jan.  1982. 

[12]  L.  L.  Li,  B.  Ismail,  L.  S.  Taylor,  and  C.  C.  Davis,  “Flanged  coaxial 
microwave  probes  for  measuring  thin  moisture  layers,”  IEEE  Trans. 
Bio-Med.  Eng.,  vol,  39,  pp.  49-57,  Jan.  1992. 

[13]  C.  Gabriel,  T.  Y.  A.  Chan,  and  E.  H.  Grant,  “Admittance  models  for 
open  ended  coaxial  probes  and  place  in  dielectric  spectroscopy,”  Phys. 
Med.  Biol.,  vol.  39,  pp.  2183-2200,  1994. 

[14]  S.  Bringhurst  and  M.  F.  Iskander,  “Open-ended  metallized  ceramic 
coaxial  probe  for  high-temperature  dielectric  properties  measurements,” 
IEEE  Trans.  Microwave  Theory  Tech.,  vol.  44,  pp.  926-935,  June  1996. 

[15]  G.  Q.  Jiang,  W.  H.  Wong,  E.  Y.  Raskovich,  W.  G.  Clark,  W.  A,  Hines, 
and  J.  Sanny,  “Open-ended  coaxial-line  technique  for  the  measurement 
of  the  microwave  dielectric  constant  for  low-loss  solids  and  liquids,” 
Rev.  Sci.  Instrum.,  vol.  64,  pp.  1614-1621,  June  1993. 

[16]  J.  Baker-Jarvis,  M.  D.  Janezic,  P.  D.  Domich,  and  R.  G.  Geyer, 
“Analysis  of  an  open-ended  coaxial  probe  with  lift-off  for  nondestructive 
testing,”  IEEE  Trans.  Instrum.  Meas.,  vol.  43,  pp.  711-718,  Oct.  1994. 

[17]  J.-Z.  Bao,  C.  C.  Davis,  and  M,  L.  Swicord,  “Microwave  dielectric 
measurements  of  erythrocyte  suspensions,”  Biophys.  J.,  vol.  66,  pp. 
2173-2180,  1994. 

[18]  J.-Z.  Bao,  M.  L.  Swicord,  and  C.  C.  Davis,  “Microwave  dielectric 
characterization  of  binary  mixtures  of  water,  methanol,  and  ethanol,” 
J.  Chem.  Phys.,  vol.  104,  pp.  4441-4450,  1996. 

[19]  M.  A.  Stuchly,  K.  A.  Stuchly,  and  A.  M.  Smith,  “Dielectric  properties 
of  animal  tissues  in  vivo  at  radio  and  microwave  frequencies:  compar¬ 
ison  between  species,”  Phyiscs  in  Medicine  and  Biology,  vol.  27,  pp. 
927-1159,  1982. 

[20]  K.  R,  Foster,  J.  L.  Schepps,  R.  D.  Stoy,  and  H.  P.  Schwan,  “Dielectric 
properties  of  brain  tissue  between  0.01  and  10  GHz,”  Phys.  Med.  Biol, 
vol.  24,  pp.  1177-1187,  1979. 

[21]  W.  H.  Press,  B.  P.  Flannery,  S.  A.  Teukolsky,  and  W.  T.  Vetterling, 
Numerical  Recipes  in  C,  2  ed.  Cambridge,  U.K.:  Cambridge  Univ. 
Press,  1992. 

[22]  J.-Z.  Bao,  C.  C.  Davis,  and  R.  E.  Schmukler,  “Impedance  spectroscopy 
of  human  erythrocytes:  System  calibration  and  nonlinear  modeling,” 
IEEE  Trans.  Bio-Med.  Eng.,  vol.  40,  pp.  364-378,  Apr.  1993. 

[23]  J.  C.  Lin,  “Microwave  properties  of  fresh  mammalian  brain  tissues 
at  body  temperature,”  IEEE  Trans.  Bio-Med.  Eng.,  vol.  BME-22,  pp. 
74-76,  Jan.  1975. 

[24]  N.  R.  V.  Nightingale,  A.  W.  J.  Dawkins,  R.  J.  Sheppard,  E.  H. 
Grant,  V.  D.  Goodridge,  and  J.  L.  Christie,  “The  use  of  time  domain 
spectroscopy  to  measure  the  dielectric  properties  of  mouse  brain  at 
radiowave  and  microwave  frequencies,”  Phys.  Med.  Biol,  vol.  25,  pp. 
1161-1165,  1980. 


Jian-Zhong  Bao  (M’92-SM’96)  was  bom  in  Bei¬ 
jing,  China,  in  1958.  He  received  the  B.S.  degree  in 
physics  from  Northwestern  University,  Xian,  China, 
in  1982,  and  the  Ph.D.  degree  in  chemical  physics 
from  the  University  of  Maryland  at  College  Park 
(UMCP),  in  1991. 

From  1982  to  1985,  he  was  a  Faculty  Member  at 
Xidian  University,  Xian,  China.  From  1986  to  1991, 
he  was  a  Graduate  Research  Assistant  in  the  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Electrical  Engineering,  UMCP,  working  on 
electrical  impedance  measurements  and  modeling  of 
red-blood  cells  in  the  frequencies  from  1  Hz  to  10  MHz,  membrane  phase 
transition,  and  electrical-field  simulation,  and  from  1992  to  1994,  he  was  a 
Research  Associate,  working  on  dielectrbmetry  of  macromolecules,  binary 
solutions  of  simple  molecules,  and  simple  cellular  systems  in  gigahertz  range. 
Since  1994,  he  has  been  with  McKesson  BioServices,  as  a  Senior  Research 
Engineer  with  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Brooks  Air  Force 
Base,  San  Antonio,  TX,  He  has  been  working  on  various  projects  that  include 
signal  processing  of  picosecond  electromagnetic  pulses  and  electromagnetic 
simulation  with  the  finite-difference  time-domain  method.  His  current  research 
interest  is  the  application  of  object-oriented  methodologies  to  electromagnetic 
modeling.  He  has  authored  over  20  publications  in  the  areas  of  impedance 
and  microwave  dielectric  measurements  and  characterization  of  materials, 
measurements  and  signal  processing  of  electromagnetic  pulses,  and  computer 
simulation  of  electromagnetics. 

Dr.  Bao  is  a  member  of  the  American  Physical  Society,  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society,  Biophysical  Society,  and  Computer  Society,  and  his  name  is  listed 
in  American  Men  and  Women  of  Science  and  Who's  Who  in  Science  and 
Engineering. 


BAO  et  al:  COMPLEX  DIELECTRIC  MEASUREMENTS  AND  ANALYSIS  OF  BRAIN  TISSUES 


1741 


Shin-T$u  Lu  was  bom  in  Taipei,  Taiwan,  R.O.C.,  in 
1943.  He  received  the  B.V.M.  degree  in  veterinary 
medicine  in  1968  from  National  Taiwan  Univer¬ 
sity,  Taipei,  and  the  M.S.  and  Ph.  D.  degrees  in 
radiation  biology  from  the  University  of  Rochester, 
Rochester,  NY,  in  1973  and  1977,  respectively. 

From  1972  to  1990,  he  served  as  a  Staff  and 
Faculty  Member  at  the  University  of  Rochester, 
School  of  Medicine,  Department  of  Medicine,  Car¬ 
diology  Unit,  Department  of  Radiation  Biology  and 
Biophysics,  Aerosol  Research  Laboratoiy,  and  De¬ 
partment  of  Biophysics.  He  also  served  as  a  Scientific  Consultant  to  various 
private  and  governmental  research  laboratories  and  a  Scientific  Reviewer 
on  publication  and  grant  applications.  Since  1990,  he  has  been  the  Senior 
Research  Physiologist  of  the  McKesson  BioServices  at  the  U.S.  Army  Medical 
Research  Detachment,  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  at  Brooks  AFB,  San 
Antonio,  TX.  His  research  has  concentrated  on  biological  effects  of  radio- 
frequency  radiation  and  ELF  fields. 

Dr.  Lu  is  a  member  of  the  Bioelctromagnetics  Society,  Engineering  in 
Medicine  and  Biology  Society,  and  ANSI  C95.4. 


William  D.  Hurt  (SM’78)  was  bom  in  Georgetown, 
TX,  on  March  16,  1942.  He  received  the  B.S.  degree 
and  the  M.S.  degree  in  physics  from  St.  Mary’s 
University,  San  Antonio,  TX,  in  1964  and  1971, 
respectively,  and  the  M.S,  degree  in  engineering 
from  the  University  of  Texas  at  Austin,  in  1976. 

He  is  a  Research  Physicist  at  the  Armstrong 
Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio. 

Mr.  Hurt  is  a  member  of  the  IEEE  Standards 
Coordinating  Committee  28,  Subcommittee  I,  Tech¬ 
niques,  Procedures,  and  Instrumentation. 


Bioelectromagnetics  20:216-223  (1999) 


Pulsed  Microwave  Induced  Light,  Sound, 
and  Electrical  Discharge  Enhanced 
by  a  Biopolymer 

Johnathan  L.  Klel,^*  Ronald  L.  Seaman,^  Satnam  P.  Mathur  * 

Jill  E.  Parker,^  John  R;  Wright,®  John  L.  Alls,^  and  Pedro  J.  Morales^ 

^Directed  Energy  Bloeffects  Division,  Air  Force  Research  Laboratory,  Brooks  AFB,  Texas 
^McKesson  BloServIces  and  U.S,  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment, 

Brooks  AFB,  Texas 

^Department  of  Physical  Sciences,  Southeastern  Oklahoma  State  University, 

Durant,  Oklahoma 

Intense  flashes  of  light  were  observed  in  sodium  bicarbonate  and  hydrogen  peroxide  solutions  when  they 
were  exposed  to  pulsed  microwave  radiation,  and  the  response  was  greatly  enhanced  by  a  microwave- 
absorbing,  biosynthesized  polymer,  diazoluminomelanin.  A  FPS-7B  radar  transmitter,  operating  at 
1.25  GHz  provided  pulses  of  5.73  ±  0.09  |xs  in  duration  at  10.00  ±  0.03  pulses/s  with  2.07  ±  0.08  MW 
forward  power  (mean  ±  standard  deviation),  induced  the  effect  but  only  when  the  appropriate  chemical 
interaction  was  present.  This  phenomenon  involves  acoustic  wave  generation,  bubble  formation,  pulsed 
luminescence,  ionized  gas  ejection,  and  electrical  discharge.  The  use  of  pulsed  microwave  radiation  to 
generate  highly  focused  energy  deposition  opens  up  the  possibility  of  a  variety  of  biomedical  applications, 
including  targeting  killing  of  microbes  or  eukaryotic  cells.  The  full  range  of  microwave  intensities  and 
frequencies  that  induce  these  effects  has  yet  to  be  explored  and,  therefore,  the  health  and  safety 
implications  of  generating  the  phenomena  in  living  tissues  remain  an  open  question.  Bioelectromagnetics 
20:216-223,  1999.  Published  1999  Wiley-Liss,  Inc.^ 

Key  words:  radio  frequency  radiation;  diazoluminomelanin;  free  radicals 


INTRODUCTION 

A  peroxidizing  mixture  of  diazoluminomelanin 
(DALM),  a  microwave  absorbing  polymer,  can  generate 
thermochemiluminescence  (TCL),  steady-state  lumines¬ 
cence  based  on  the  temperature,  when  exposed  to  micro- 
wave  radiation  [Kiel  et  al.,  1990;  Kiel  and  O’Brien, 
1991].  TCL  will  not  proceed  without  the  presence  of 
hydrogen  peroxide  and  a  source  of  carbon  dioxide  (so¬ 
dium  carbonate  or  bicarbonate  can  be  used  in  place  of  the 
gas).  The  polymer,  formed  in  bacteria,  makes  them  sen¬ 
sitive  to  a  profound  microwave  biological  effect  as  well. 
A  moderate  rate  of  energy  absorption  (100  mW/g)  of 
2450-MHz  radiation  has  previously  shown  a  large  mag¬ 
nitude  of  kill  (5  logs)  of  Bacillus  anthracis  (Anthrax 
bacteria),  when  the  bacteria  were  held  at  37  °C  during 
exposure  under  peroxidizing  conditions,  after  cultivation 
on  medium  inducing  DALM  biosynthesis  [Bruno  and 
Kiel,  1993].  In  1989,  we  [Kiel  and  Seaman,  unpublished 
data]  observed  flashes  of  light  in  peroxidizing  solutions 
of  the  water-soluble  TCL  polymer  DALM  with  applied 
microwave  pulses.  In  those  preliminary  experiments,  mi- 

Published  1999  Wiley-Liss,  Inc.  ^his  article  was  prepared 
by  a  group  consisting  of  both  United  States  government 
employees  and  non-United  States  government  employees, 
and  as  such  is  subject  to  17  U.S.C.  Sec.  105. 


crowave  energy  at  2450  MHz  was  delivered  as  40-jxs 
pulses  at  1-3  pulses/s.  Application  was  made  with 
3.6-mm  OD  open-ended  semirigid  coaxial  cable  con¬ 
nected  to  an  EPSCO  PG5KB/5238H  source,  in  contact 
either  with  sample  fluid  or  with  the  outside  of  its  cuvette; 
both  approaches  were  successful  in  generating  flashes  of 
light.  Here,  we  provide  evidence  for  a  pulsed-microwave 


Grant  sponsor:  United  States  Air  Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research 
and  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel;  Grant  number: 
DAMD17-94-C-4069. 

The  views,  opinions,  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those 
of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of 
the  Army  or  Department  of  the  Air  Force  position,  policy,  or  decision 
unless  so  designated  by  other  documentation. 

^Correspondence  to:  J.L.  Kiel,  AFRL/HEDB,  2503  Gillingham  Drive, 
Bldg.  175E,  Brooks  AFB,  TX,  78235-5102.  E-mail:  Johnathan, 
kiel  @  aloer.brooks.af.mil 

Received  for  review  14  August  1997;  Final  revision  received  7  August 
1998 


Microwave  Induced  Light  Production 


217 


mechanism  for  light  production  and  focusing  of  energy 
deposition  that  is  enhanced  by  DALM. 

MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 

Chemicals  and  Biosynthesis 

Luminol  (5-amino-2,3-dihydro- 1 ,4-phthalazinedi- 
'  one),  3-amino-L-tyrosine  dihydrochloride  (3AT),  sodium 
nitrite,  and  potassium  nitrate  were  obtained  from  Sigma 
(St.  Louis,  MO).  Diazoluminol  was  prepared  by  mixing 
0.17  g  of  luminol  and  0.65  g  of  NaN02  in  120  ml  of 
distilled  water  and  stirring  for  35  min.  The  solution  was 
filtered  twice.  In  the  case  of  luminol  and  bicarbonate 
solutions  used,  clear  supernatants  were  collected  off  sat¬ 
urated  aqueous  solutions  of  luminol  and  NaHC03. 

Biosynthetic  DALM  solutions  were  prepared  from 
Escherichia  coli  JM109,  pIC20RNRj  j  bacteria  (Amer¬ 
ican  Type  Culture  Collection  #  69905)  grown  on  medium 
containing  3-amino-L-tyrosine,  luminol,  and  potassium 
nitrate  in  a  tryptocase  soy  broth  base  (U.S.  Patent 
5,156,971)  for  5  days.  The  unfrozen  pigmented  superna¬ 
tant  was  removed  from  above  the  ice  of  frozen  cultures 
and  was  diluted  as  noted  below.  The  1:10  dilutions  of 
DALM  were  made  in  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  satu¬ 
rated  solutions,  except  that  when  determining  their  opti¬ 
cal  absorptions  at  350  nm,  deionized  water  was  used 
instead.  Optical  absorption  of  1:10  DALM  solution 
at  350  nm  wavelength  was  0.15.  Poly-diazotyrosine 
(pDAT)  was  synthesized  like  DALM,  as  previously  re¬ 
ported  [Kiel  and  O’Brien,  1991],  but  with  the  exclusion 
of  luminol,  and  was  dissolved  in  water  until  its  optical 
absorption  at  350  nm  matched  that  of  the  respective 
DALM  solutions.  These  proportions  were  preserved 
when  solutions  prepared  with  sodium  bicarbonate/lumi¬ 
nol  saturated  solutions  were  substituted  for  water. 

Reaction  Mixtures 

Premixed  reaction  mixtures  for  1:10  DALM  or 
pDAT  contained  1.8  ml  of  saturated  sodium  bicarbonate/ 
luminol  and  0.2  ml  of  DALM  or  pDAT  neat  solution, 
respectively,  to  which  was  added  1.2  ml  of  diazoluminol 
solution  and  additional  0.33  ml  of  saturated  sodium  bi¬ 
carbonate/luminol  solution,  with  or  without  0.495  ml  of 
,  3%  hydrogen  peroxide  (added  last).  Solutions  of  1:100 

DALM  or  pDAT  differed  from  the  1:10  solutions  in 
containing  1.2  ml  1:10  dilution  of  diazoluminol  solution 
and  0.2  ml  1 : 10  DALM  or  pDAT  in  sodium  bicarbonate/ 
luminol  saturated  solutions,  with  additional  0.66  ml  sat¬ 
urated  sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution,  with  or 
without  0.66  ml  of  3%  hydrogen  peroxide.  Except  for  the 
3%  hydrogen  peroxide,  which  was  added  to  samples 
previously  exposed  to  microwave  radiation,  when  com¬ 
ponents  of  the  reaction  mixtures  were  deleted,  samrated 


sodium  bicarbonate/luminol  solution  was  substituted  for 
the  excluded  components.  This  substitution  was  not 
made  when  sodium  bicarbonate  solution,  deionized  wa¬ 
ter,  or  hydrogen  peroxide  or  any  of  these  used  in  com¬ 
bination  (Table  1)  were  exposed.  All  reactions  were 
begun  at  room  temperature  (23  “C)  but  were  bulk  heated 
with  forced  hot  air  from  23.3  °C  to  54.5  °C  for  DALM 
and  pDAT  samples  without  hydrogen  peroxide  and  from 
28.2  °C  to  54.4  °C  for  those  same  samples  with  hydrogen 
peroxide.  This  scanning  of  temperature  was  required 
because  we  did  not  know  what  the  optimal  temperature 
or  level  of  thermochemiluminescence  was  required  to 
observe  the  pulse  effects. 

Microwave  Exposure 

Samples  were  placed  in  15-nil  polystyrene  tubes 
without  tops.  As  shown  in  Figure  1,  a  single  tube  was 
held  by  a  polyvinyl  support  beam  attached  to  a  section  of 
WR-650  microwave  waveguide  with  a  flangeless  open¬ 
ing  of  16.5  X  8.3  cm.  The  long  dimension  of  the 
waveguide  opening  was  horizontal,  providing  a  vertical 
electrical  field.  When  placed  in  a  hole  in  the  beam,  a  tube 
was  vertical  with  its  center  7.6  cm  from  the  waveguide 
opening  and  was  centered  horizontally  with  respect  to  the 
opening.  Microwave  pulses  were  generated  by  a  FPS-7B 
radar  transmitter  operating  at  1.25  GHz.  The  transmitter 
provided  pulses  of  5.73  ±  0.09  p.s  in  duration  at  10.00  ± 
0.03  pulses/s  with  2.07  ±  0.08  MW  forward  power 
(mean  ±  standard  deviation).  During  exposures,  temper¬ 
ature  was  monitored  by  means  of  nonperturbing  Vitek 
101  Electrothermia  Monitor  and  Luxtron  probes  in  and 
near  the  bottom  of  the  sample.  Specific  absorption  rates 
(SAR)  determined  in  separate  exposures  of  duplicate 
samples  are  listed  in  Table  1.  These  values  were  calcu¬ 
lated  from  the  rate  of  rise  of  temperature  (°C/s)  in  re¬ 
spective  samples  measured  by  nonperturbing  fiberoptic 
Luxtron  MPM  probes:  SAR  =  c(dT/dt).  Specific  heat  c 
was  taken  to  be  that  of  water,  4180  J/kg/°C,  for  all 
samples.  Equivalent  peak  SAR  of  the  pulses  was  approx¬ 
imately  2  X  lO'*  times  the  time-averaged  SARs  reported 
in  Table  1. 

Sound  and  Light  Recordings 

Sound  was  recorded  on  the  audio  track  of  videotape  by 
using  an  RCA  BK-6B  M-1 1017A  microphone  outside  of 
the  anechoic  chamber.  Sound  was  directed  to  the  micro¬ 
phone  through  a  plastic  tube  (1.9-cm  ID)  connected  to  a 
plastic  funnel  positioned  15  cm  above  the  sample  tube. 
The  acoustic  path  between  the  top  of  the  sample  mbe  and 
the  microphone  was  4.63  m  long,  with  a  calculated 
propagation  delay  of  approximately  13.4  ms.  The  video 
images  for  analysis  were  recorded  with  an  ITT  model 
#F4577  low-light  sensitive  black/white  camera  at  a  nor¬ 
mal  video  frame  recording  rate.  Images  to  spatially  re- 


TABLE  1.  Summary  of  Flash  Responses  Observable  on 

Video  Recordings* 

Sample 

SAR 

Onset 

Rash  burst 

Number 

Maximum  burst 

Duration 

(W/kg) 

delay  (s) 

type 

of  bursts 

duration  (s) 

observed  (s) 

Deionized  water 

50  ±  0.0® 

N/A 

None 

472 

H2O2 

40  ±  20 

N/A 

None 

_ 

_ 

464 

NaHCOg 

340  ±  40 

N/A 

None 

_ 

429 

W/H2O2 

370  ±  20 

94 

Sporadic 

14 

115 

454 

Luminol 

NaHC03 

300  ±  50 

301 

Sporadic 

3 

<1 

471 

W/H2O2 

400  ±  20 

12 

Continuous 

1 

242 

254 

Luminol  diazoluminol 

NaHCOa 

360  ±  20 

N/A 

None 

_ 

482 

W/H2O2 

370  ±  60 

N/A 

None 

_ 

438 

DALM 

(1:10) 

570  ±  230 

68 

Sporadic 

4 

9 

424 

W/H2O2 

480  ±  60 

10 

Sporadic 

8 

38 

390 

DALM 

(1:100) 

360  ±  50 

10 

Sporadic 

6 

47 

315 

W/H2O2 

610  ±  150 

63 

Sporadic 

20 

20 

444 

pDAT 

(1:10) 

370  ±  60 

N/A 

None 

_ 

_ 

461 

W/H2O2 

440  ±  70 

290 

Sporadic 

6 

<1 

571 

pDAT 

(1:100) 

320  ±  100 

85 

Sporadic 

12 

93 

432 

W/H2O2 

400  ±  60 

134 

Sporadic 

10 

<1 

677 

SAR  IS  the  averap  (spatial  and  temporal)  specific  absorption  rate  of  microwave  energy.  DALM  (diazoluminomelanin)  and  pDAT  (poly- 
diazotyrosine)  solutions  all  contained  luminol,  diazoluminol,  and  sodium  bicarbonate. 

®  ±  one  standard  deviation;  n  =  2  to  6. 


solve  the  light  source  were  recorded  with  an  Optronics 
DEI-470  integrating  color  camera  at  various  frame  inte¬ 
gration  times.  The  arrangement  of  this  apparatus  is 


Fig.  1.  Side  view  of  sample  positioned  for  exposure.  The  15-ml 
polystyrene  tube  containing  the  sample  was  held  by  a  nonme- 
tallic  support  beam  made  of  polyvinylchloride.  The  beam  was 
securely  fastened  to  the  WR-650  waveguide  by  brackets  made 
of  the  same  material.  The  inverted  plastic  funnel  directed  sound 
produced  in  the  sample  through  tubing  connected  to  a  micro¬ 
phone  outside  the  anechoic  chamber.  Not  shown  in  the  sketch 
are  secondary  support  braces  and  nonperturbing  temperature 
probe. 


shown  in  Figure  2.  The  exposure  was  performed  in  an 
anechoic  chamber  sealed  off  from  external  light  sources. 
The  cameras  were  placed  in  screen-wire  Faraday  cages 
with  holes  cut  in  the  cages  so  as  not  to  block  the  light 
path  to  the  lenses. 

For  analysis,  videotape  was  played  on  a  Panasonic 
TV/Recorder  AG-560  (27-cm  diagonal  screen)  with  con¬ 
trast  set  at  maximum  and  brightness  at  minimum.  The 
video  image  of  an  activated,  luminescing  solution  was 
approximately  3.5  cm  from  the  bottom  of  the  sample  tube 
to  the  fluid  meniscus  and  l.l  cm  wide. 

For  sensing  the  light  emissions,  a  sensing  element 
of  an  EXTECH  Light  Adapter  4010201  was  securely 
fastened  to  a  vertical  plate  having  a  variable  aperture. 
The  plate  was  held  in  place  in  front  of  the  monitor  screen 
by  stereotaxic  manipulators,  which  allowed  precise 
placement  of  the  aperture-sensor  combination.  The  signal 
from  the  light  adapter  was  amplified  by  a  Krohn-Hite 
3322  Dual  Filter  (20  dB,  low  pass  max  flat,  51  kHz),  and 
then  by  a  Gould  Model  20-4615-58  Universal  Amplifier 
(ext.  mV,  1  V  F.S.,  DC-30  Hz)  and  displayed  on  a 
Tektronix  2430A  Digital  Oscilloscope  and/or  recorded 
on  a  Gould  TA2000  Chart  Recorder. 

The  audio  output  of  the  monitor  was  amplified  by  a 
Krohn-Hite  filter  (0  dB,  high-pass  RC,  900  Hz)  and  by  a 
Rockland  Model  1022F  Dual  Hi/Lo  filter  (20  dB,  high- 


Microwave  induced  Light  Production 


219 


Fig.  2.  Top  view  of  the  experimental  apparatus  inside  the  ane- 
choic  chamber.  The  shielded  boxes  containing  cameras  were 
supported  from  the  floor  and  were  approximately  76  cm  from 
the  sample  tube.  Lines  of  sight  to  the  sample  are  shown  as 
dotted  lines.  Not  shown  are  cables  from  the  cameras,  tubing  for 
sound  transmission,  and  the  nonperturbing  temperature  probe, 
which  all  passed  through  the  cable  port  to  instrumentation 
outside  the  chamber.  Microwave  absorbing  material  lining  the 
interior  wall  of  the  chamber,  secondary  support  braces,  and 
funnel  for  sound  pick  up  are  also  not  shown. 


pass  RC,  11  Hz).  The  output  of  the  latter  was  connected 
to  the  second  Rockland  amplifier  (0  dB,  low  pass,  60  Hz) 
through  a  1N914B  signal  diode  to  provide  a  rectified 
signal.  The  amplified  signal  or  the  amplified  and  rectified 
signal  was  displayed  and/or  recorded  along  with  the  light 
signal. 

RESULTS 

We  first  attempted  to  reproduce  the  original  1989 
observation  by  formulating  DALM  solutions  with  max¬ 
imal  TCL.  One  such  solution  contained  sources  of  carbon 
dioxide  and  hydrogen  peroxide,  which  are  required  for 
DALM,  itself  a  complex  mixture  of  a  polymer  of  tyrosine 
and  covalently  and  noncovalently  linked  luminol  and 
diazoluminol,  to  luminesce.  Another  solution  was  made 
by  adding  a  polymer  formed  from  diazotyrosine  (pDAT), 
that  shows  similar  TCL  to  DALM.  When  exposed  to 
pulsed  (10/s)  1.25-GHz  microwave  radiation,  these  solu¬ 
tions  generated  flashes  that  were  clearly  distinguishable 
on  video  recordings  by  low-light  intensity  video  cameras. 

Figure  3  shows  sequential  video  frames  that  dem¬ 
onstrate  baseline  TCL  and  flashes  induced  by  microwave 
pulses.  As  in  the  original  observations  in  1989,  the 
flashes  appeared  in  bursts,  i.e.,  not  with  every  microwave 
pulse,  and  were  accompanied  by  audible  pops.  The  in¬ 
tensity  of  the  pops  correlated  with  the  intensity  of  the 
flashes,  as  clearly  shown  by  the  examples  of  processed 
sound  and  light  signals  in  Figure  4.  In  Figure  4D,  the  first 


of  each  pair  of  peaks  in  the  sound  signal  from  a  DALM 
solution  was  due  to  a  signal  induced  on  the  audio  channel 
by  operation  of  the  microwave  transmitter.  The  earlier 
peak  provided  a  convenient  reference  for  timing.  Note 
the  low  baseline  luminescence  (dashed  lines  in  Fig.  4) 
and  rapid  increases  in  luminescence  indicating  flashes. 
Ripples  on  the  light  signal  were  due  to  the  video  frame 
rate.  In  Figure  4B,  the  luminescence  was  higher  than  in 
A  (see  inserted  scale)  because  of  the  activation  by  hy¬ 
drogen  peroxide.  The  10  pulse/s  variations  in  lumines¬ 
cence  occurred  in  synchrony  with  the  microwave  pulses. 
In  Figure  4C,  by  using  only  luminol,  bicarbonate,  and 
hydrogen  peroxide,  the  luminescence  was  high  and  the 
flashing  was  persistent.  However,  not  all  the  flashes  were 
accompanied  by  a  loud  pop.  In  Figure  4D,  where  the 
tracing  time  scale  for  activated  1:100  DALM  solution 
was  expanded,  the  microwave  artifact  (brief,  coincident 
with  the  flashes  later  in  the  record)  and  pops  (longer, 
damped  fall  off  recordings),  due  to  the  sound  propaga¬ 
tion,  there  was  a  13.5  to  14  ms  delay.  The  small  waves 
seen  in  the  light  signal  were  attributable  to  the  video 
frame  rate.  Within  the  time  resolutions  of  the  recorded 
signals  and  analysis  procedures,  recorded  flashes  and 
pops  seem  to  be  occurring  at  the  same  time,  coincident  or 
nearly  coincident  with  each  microwave  pulse.  Figure  4 
also  illustrates  that  lower  intensity  pops  occurred  without 
flashes  before  and  sometimes  after  bursts  of  flashes,  that 
were,  in  turn,  accompanied  by  higher  intensity  pops. 

Integrated  imaging  (Fig.  3)  clearly  demonstrates 
that  flashes  originated  from  discrete  areas  in  the  menis¬ 
cus  of  the  sample.  Flashes  were  apparently  independent 
of  TCL  in  liquid  below  the  meniscus.  The  images 
strongly  suggest  discharges  in  gas  above  the  liquid.  In  all 
cases  in  which  flashes  were  frequent  and  intense,  bubbles 
were  observed  in  liquid  samples  during  and  after  micro- 
wave  exposure.  The  high-intensity  flash  among  the  series 
of  less  intense  flashes  of  ITT  camera  images  in  Figure  3 
was  attributable  to  inherent  differences  in  flash  intensity 
or  the  missing  of  the  peak  of  the  short-duration  flash 
between  video  frames. 

To  further  investigate  the  source  of  the  flashes,  we 
examined  the  components  of  DALM  solutions  separately 
and  in  combination  using  equal  sample  volumes  and  the 
same  incident  microwave  pulses  (Table  1).  Deionized 
water,  sodium  bicarbonate,  and  hydrogen  peroxide  solu¬ 
tions  all  failed  to  demonstrate  TCL  and  flashes,  despite 
extended  exposure  to  microwave  pulses.  Biosynthetic 
DALM  solutions  without  hydrogen  peroxide  activation 
displayed  bursts  of  flashes  with  greater  regularity,  but 
lower  intensity,  than  the  same  solutions  with  hydrogen 
peroxide  added.  When  DALM  was  excluded,  solutions 
containing  diazoluminol  and  luminol,  as  well  as  sodium 
bicarbonate  with  and  without  hydrogen  peroxide,  showed 
no  flashes,  although  the  peroxide-activated  solutions 


220 


Kiel  et  al. 


Fig.  3.  Two  series  of  video  frames  showing  repetitive  flashes 
with  microwave  exposures  In  samples  of  sodium  bicarbonate 
and  H2O2  solution  with  and  without  luminol  added.  A:  (luminol 
added)  Images  from  an  ITT  model  #F4577  low-light  sensitive 
black/white  camera,  normal  video  frame  rate  recording;  each 


frame  is  a  sequential  frame  representing  33  ms  of  integration 
time.  B:  (no  luminol)  Images  from  an  Optronics  DEI-470  inte¬ 
grating  camera,  recording  at  various  frame  integration  times  (15, 
8,  4,  or  1  s). 


showed  strong  background  luminescence.  When  the  di- 
azoluminol  was  excluded  from  the  luminol  and  bicarbon¬ 
ate  solutions,  flashes  occurred  sporadically  without  hy¬ 
drogen  peroxide,  but  more  intensely  in  the  peroxide- 
activated  solutions.  These  flashes  arose  from  discrete 
locations  on  the  menisci,  discharging  into  the  air  space 
above  the  tube  but  not  outside  the  tube.  Finally,  when 
exposed  to  microwave  pulses,  sodium  bicarbonate  and 
hydrogen  peroxide  solution  produced  bright  flashes  that 
were  sustained  for  several  seconds. 


In  all  cases  in  which  flashes  were  observed,  a  delay 
was  observed  after  initiation  of  microwave  pulses  until 
the  firing  of  the  first  flash.  The  delay  ranged  from  10  and 
12  s  for  hydrogen-peroxide-activated  DALM  and  lumi¬ 
nol  solutions,  respectively,  to  5  min  for  nonactivated 
luminol  solutions.  This  observation  and  the  presence  of 
gas  bubbles  in  all  cases  in  which  flashes  were  noted 
suggest  that  formation  of  gas  bubbles  that  collected  in  the 
menisci  was  necessary  for  the  flash.  DALM  seemed  to 
catalyze  the  formation  of  bubbles  in  nonactivated  solu- 


Microwave  Induced  Light  Production 


221 


B. 


6V 
1.5  V 


umiaiuui 


lljyuy^^ 


.vyLjuuiJUJLUJLiii^^ 


Fig.  4.  Processed  sound  (top  in  each  set)  and  light  (bottom  in 
each  set)  signals  from  videotape  records  from  an  ITT  low-light 
sensitive  camera.  The  scale  insets  are  the  chart  recorder  de¬ 
flections  in  volts  (6  and  1 .5  V  for  sound  and  light  intensities, 
respectively,  for  A,  B,  and  C  and  0.5  V  for  D)  and  the  time  scale 
in  seconds  for  A,  B,  and  C  and  milliseconds  for  D.  A:  Sample 
rectified-sound  and  light  signals  from  diazoluminomelanin 
(DALM)  (1:10)  solution.  Aperture  open  full.  B:  Sample  rectified- 
sound  and  light  signals  from  DALM  (1:10)  solution  with  H2O2. 
Aperture  approximately  1-cm  diameter  to  reduce  baseline  lumi¬ 


nescence  signal.  C:  Sample  rectified-sound  and  light  signals 
from  an  aqueous  solution  containing  luminol,  NaHCOs,  and 
H2O2.  Aperture  approximately  1  cm.  D:  Sample  sound  and  light 
signals  from  DALM  solution  (1:100)  with  H2O2  on  an  expanded 
time  scale  at  the  onset  of  a  flash  burst.  Aperture  full  open.  The 
amplified  or  rectified-amplified  audio  signal  was  recorded  at  1 
V/cm  for  A-C  and  0.25  V/cm  for  D.  In  D,  output  of  a  Rockland 
filter  (0  dB)  was  connected  directly  to  the  chart  recorder.  The 
light  signal  was  recorded  at  0.25  V/cm  for  A-D. 


tions  because  the  flashes  were  more  sustained  than  in 
luminol  solutions  alone. 

DISCUSSION 

An  intermediate  acoustic  mechanism  may  play  a 
role  in  the  phenomenon  observed  here  through  ther¬ 
moelastic  expansion  caused  by  rapid  temperature  rise 
due  to  the  microwave  pulse  [Foster  and  Finch,  1974; 
Borth  and  Cain,  1977;  Lin,  1980;  Chou  et  al.,  1982].  It 
should  be  noted  that  the  specific  absorption  per  micro- 
wave  pulse  in  our  experiments,  20-50  J/kg,  was  at  least 
three  orders  of  magnitude  larger  than  for  microwave 
pulses  known  to  elicit  auditory  sensations  [Seaman  and 


Lebovitz,  1989].  However,  we  have  recently  generated 
the  acoustic  part  of  the  effects  enhanced  by  DALM  with 
6  kW  peak  power  pulses  (10  PPS;  1.5-ms  pulse  width)  of 
2.06  GHz  radiation.  This  level  is  3  X  10'^  times  the  level 
described  in  this  paper  (unpublished  results). 

The  effects  reported  here  could  be  explained  by  the 
following  sequence:  (1)  the  products  of  the  chemical 
reactions  produce  enhanced  absorption  of  the  microwave 
energy;  (2)  the  pulse  form  of  the  radiation  and  the  spe¬ 
cific  molecular  absorption  stimulates  vibrations  that  be¬ 
come  sound;  (3)  the  container  resonates  at  certain  fre¬ 
quencies  of  the  sound;  (4)  the  resonance  amplifies  the 
sound;  (5)  the  sound  leads  to  cavitation,  bubble  forma¬ 
tion,  and  bubble  collapse  yielding  luminescence;  (6)  fi- 


222 


Kiel  et  al. 


nally,  the  gas  is  ejected  as  a  plasma  (gas  ionized  by  heat 
from  high  pressures  generated  in  the  bubble  collapse) 
because  of  the  anisotropic  (ellipsoidal)  bubble  collapse 
near  the  surface  of  the  liquid  sample  [Glanz,  1996;  Bar¬ 
ber  et  al.,  1997].  This  latter  result  produces  a  supersonic 
jet  of  hot,  ionized  gas  that  then  electrically  discharges 
because  of  the  microwave  radiation’s  electric  field.  The 
spectacular  “lightning  in  a  bottle”  effect  imaged  in  Fig¬ 
ure  3  is  the  consequence.  The  lack  of  discharge  above  the 
tube  opening  and  the  absence  of  an  electrical  arc  to  the 
microwave  waveguide  also  support  this  conclusion  and 
rule  out  other  sources  of  electrical  discharge.  Also,  the 
building  of  sound  intensity  with  the  burst  of  flashes 
suggests  a  build  up  of  hot  ionized  gas  before  the  dis¬ 
charge.  The  sporadic  nature  of  the  flashes,  especially 
when  major  discharges  were  observed,  suggests  a  possi¬ 
ble  depletion  of  the  ionized  gas  that  must  again  build  up 
for  subsequent  flashes.  The  popping  observed  has  also 
been  heard  in  classic  ultrasonic-induced  sonlumines- 
cence  (SL)  and  is  believed  to  result  from  the  rebounding 
of  the  shock  wave  [Walton  and  Reynolds,  1984;  Glanz, 
1996;  Barber  et  al.,  1997].  The  popping  reported  here  is 
not  from  boiling,  because  the  sound  that  leads  to  the  pops 
is  not  chaotic.  It  follows  the  pulse  rate  of  the  microwave 
radiation,  and  the  pops  show  evidence  of  a  build  up  of  the 
sound  pulses  corresponding  to  the  microwave  radiation 
pulse  rate  (see  Fig.  4). 

The  lack  of  flashes  and  the  lack  of  pulsed  sound 
generation  in  sodium  bicarbonate  and  hydrogen  peroxide 
solutions  alone  suggest  that  specific  gases  may  be  nec¬ 
essary  for  the  effect  that  occurs  when  these  reactants  are 
in  solution  together.  Also,  the  high  nonphysiologic  level 
of  carbonate  used  here  was  not  sufficient  to  generate  the 
effect.  Therefore,  it  was  not  merely  dependent  on  high 
ion  concentration.  The  carbonate  radical  has  been  previ¬ 
ously  reported  as  the  major  product  of  mixtures  of  so¬ 
dium  bicarbonate  or  sodium  carbonate  and  hydrogen 
peroxide  [Michelson  and  Maral,  1983].  Other  possibili¬ 
ties  are  superoxide,  hydroxyl,  and  formate  radicals.  We 
also  suspect  that  peroxycarbonate  may  be  formed.  These 
substances  may  be  released  in  hot  vapors  or  as  gases.  The 
absence  of  flashes  when  diazoluminol  was  present  in 
luminol,  bicarbonate,  and  hydrogen  peroxide  solutions 
suggests  that  this  compound  is  quenching  the  reactive 
radical  or  ion  that  mediates  the  phenomenon.  The 
quenching  is  not  because  diazoluminol  is  not  responsive 
to  SL.  It  has  been  recently  reported  to  be  a  SL-enhancing 
compound,  when  ultrasound  is  the  inducing  source 
[Maddox  et  al.,  1998].  When  DALM  or  pDAT  was 
present,  the  quenching  was  reversed.  This  reversal  sug¬ 
gests  that  DALM  or  pDAT  can  assist  in  the  generation  of 
light  and  sound  by  pulsed-microwave  radiation  and  that 
free  radicals  are  likely  to  be  involved.  The  interaction  of 


diazoluminol  with  the  radicals  was  probably  responsible 
for  the  increased  chemiluminescence  observed. 

In  both  the  pulse  effects  reported  here  and  the 
killing  of  anthrax  bacteria,  the  average  temperature  was 
not  sufficient  to  explain  the  results.  Both  studies  required 
the  same  kind  of  chemical  reactions  and  conditions  to 
produce  the  effects  observed.  Although  the  killing  of 
anthrax  was  done  with  continuous  wave  microwave  ra¬ 
diation,  the  specific  absorption  rate  was  high  and  the 
temperature  was  actively  maintained  by  air  cooling.  This 
approach  led  to  a  large  flux  of  energy  through  the  bac¬ 
teria.  By  itself,  this  thermal  flux  was  not  sufficient  to  kill 
the  bacteria  unless  they  contained  DALM  that  was  being 
peroxidized  in  the  presence  of  carbon  dioxide  or  carbon¬ 
ate  at  the  same  time.  These  similarities  suggest  a  mech¬ 
anism,  other  than  frank  heating,  that  focuses  energy  on 
vulnerable  structures  and  is  accentuated  by  pulsing  of  the 
microwave  radiation, 

CONCLUSIONS 

Pulsed  microwave  radiation  interacting  with  certain 
reduction/oxidation-type  biochemical  reactions  can  en¬ 
hance  localized  absorption  of  microwave  radiation  lead¬ 
ing  to  sound  and  light  generation  and  electrical  dis¬ 
charge.  The  evidence  for  this  conclusion  includes  (1)  the 
necessity  for  certain  chemical  reactions  to  generate  the 
phenomena;  (2)  the  necessity  for  sound  generation  by  the 
microwave  radiation  to  produce  light  that  follows  the 
microwave  pulse  rate,  (3)  the  surface  ejection  of  plasma 
from  the  reaction  liquid,  and  (4)  electrical  discharge  as  a 
result  of  the  interaction  of  the  microwave  radiation  elec¬ 
tric  field  with  the  ejected  plasma.  The  phenomenon  we 
describe  here  opens  up  the  possibility  of  a  microwave 
bioeffect  mechanism  unique  to  pulsed  microwave  radia¬ 
tion  and  the  potential  for  applying  pulsed  microwave 
radiation  to  surface  sterilization  and  focal  tissue  destruc¬ 
tion. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We  thank  B.E.  Stuck  and  P.K.  Kennedy  for  com¬ 
ments  on  earlier  drafts  and  D.D.  Cox  for  design  and 
fabrication  of  the  sample  support  beam.  We  also  thank 
the  Navy  Medical  Research  Institute  Detachment  of  the 
Triservice  Radiofrequency  Radiation  Facility  for  provid¬ 
ing  access  to  the  FPS  transmitter. 

REFERENCES 

Barber  BP,  Hiller  RA,  Lofstedt  R,  Putterman  SJ,  Weninger  KR.1997. 

Defining  the  unknowns  of  sonoluminescence.  Phys  Rep  281:65- 

143. 


Borth  DE,  Cain  CA.  1977.  Theoretical  analysis  of  acoustic  signal  gener¬ 
ation  in  materials  irradiated  with  microwave  energy.  IEEE  Trans 
Microwave  Theory  Tech  25:944-954. 

Bruno  JG,  Kiel  JL.  1993.  Effect  of  radio-frequency  radiation  (RFR)  and 
diazoluminomelanin  (DALM)  on  the  growth  potential  of  bacilli.  In: 
Blank  M,  editor.  Electricity  and  magnetism  in  biology  and  medi¬ 
cine.  San  Francisco:  San  Francisco  Press,  p  231-233. 

Chou  CK,  Guy  AW,  Galambos  R.  1982.  Auditory  perception  of  radio- 
frequency  electromagnetic  fields.  J  Acoust  Soc  Am  71:1321—1334. 

Foster  KR,  Finch  ED.  1974.  Microwave  hearing:  evidence  for  ther¬ 
moacoustic  auditory  stimulation  by  pulsed  microwaves.  Science 
185:258-258. 

Glanz  J.  1996.  The  spell  of  sonoluminescence.  Science  274:718-719. 

Kiel  JL,  O’Brien  GJ.  1991.  Diazoluminomelanin  and  a  method  for  prepar¬ 
ing  same.  U.S.  Patent  5,003,050. 

Kiel  JL,  Gabriel  C,  Simmons  DM,  Erwin  DN,  Grant  EH.  1990.  Diazolu¬ 
minomelanin:  a  conductive  luminescent  polymer  with  microwave 


Microwave  Induced  Light  Production  223 

and  radiowave  absorptive  properties.  In:  Pedersen  PC,  Onaral  B, 
editors.  Proceedings  of  the  twelfth  annual  international  conference 
of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  Society,  Vol.l2, 
No.  4,  Philadelphia:  IEEE,  p  1689-1690. 

Lin  JC.  1980.  The  microwave  auditory  phenomenon.  Proc  IEEE  68:67-73. 

Maddox  L,  Reeves  M,  Wood  K.  Roberts  K,  Studer  J,  Wetzel  J,  Smith  T, 
Holwitt  E,  Alls  J,  Kiel  J,  Wright  JR.  1998.  Acoustic  wave  dosim¬ 
etry  based  on  diazotized  luminol  solutions.  Microchem  J  58:209- 
217. 

Michelson  AM,  Maral  J.  1983.  Carbonate  anions:  effects  on  the  oxidation 
of  luminol,  oxidative  hemolysis,  y-irradiation  and  the  reaction  of 
activated  oxygen  species  with  enzymes  containing  various  active 
centres.  Biochimie  65:95-104. 

Seaman  RL,  Lebovitz  RL.  1989.  Thresholds  of  cat  cochlear  nucleus  neu¬ 
rons  to  microwave  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics  10:147-160. 

Walton  AJ,  Reynolds  GT.  1984.  Sonoluminescence.  Adv  Phys  33:595- 
660. 


INT.  J.  RADIAT.  BIOL  1999,  VOL.  75,  NO.  1,  115-120 


Frequency  of  micronuclei  in  the  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of 
mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 

VIJAYALAXMIt* * * §,  R.  L.  SEAMAN+,  M.  L.  BELTJ,  J.  M.  DOYLEJ,  S.  P.  MATHURJ  and 
T.  J.  PRIHODA§ 

(Received  15  May  1998;  accepted  18  August  1998) 


Abstract. 

Purpose:  To  investigate  the  extent  of  genetic  damage  in  the 
peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to 
ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation  (UWBR). 

Materials  and  methods:  CF-1  male  mice  were  exposed  to  UWBR 
for  15  min  at  an  estimated  whole-body  average  specific  absorption 
rate  of  37mWkg“^  Groups  of  untreated  control  and  positive 
control  mice  injected  with  mitomycin  C  were  also  included  in 
the  study.  After  various  treatments,  half  of  the  mice  were  killed 
at  18h,  and  the  other  half  at  24  h.  Peripheral  blood  and  bone 
marrow  smears  were  examined  to  determine  the  extent  of 
genotoxicity,  as  assessed  by  the  presence  of  micronuclei  (MN)  in 
polychromatic  erythrocytes  (PCE). 

Results:  The  percentages  of  PCE  and  the  incidence  of  MN  per 
2000  PCE  in  both  tissues  in  mice  killed  at  18h  were  similar  to 
the  frequencies  observed  in  mice  terminated  at  24  h.  There  were 
no  significant  differences  in  the  percentage  of  PCE  between 
control  and  the  mice  with  or  without  UWBR  exposure;  the 
group  mean  values  ( +  standard  deviation)  were  in  the  range  of 
3,1  ±0.14  to  3.2  +  0.23  in  peripheral  blood,  and  49.0  +  3.56  to 
52.3  +  4.02  in  bone  marrow.  The  mean  incidence  of  MN  per 
2000  PCE  in  control  and  in  mice  with  or  without  UWBR 
exposure  ranged  from  7.7  +  2.00  to  9.7  +  2.54  in  peripheral  blood 
and  7.4  +  2.32  to  10.0  +  3.27  in  bone  marrow.  Pairwise  compar¬ 
ison  of  the  data  did  not  reveal  statistically  significant  differences 
between  the  control  and  mice  with  or  without  UWBR  exposure 
groups  (excluding  positive  controls). 

Conclusion:  Under  the  experimental  conditions  tested,  there  was 
no  evidence  for  excess  genotoxicity  in  peripheral  blood  or  bone 
marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWBR. 

1.  Introduction 

Electromagnetic  devices  capable  of  producing 
signals  wdth  pulse  widths  of  a  few  nanoseconds  and 
electric  field  amplitudes  exceeding  100  000  Vm  ^ 


*Author  for  correspondence. 

I  Department  of  Radiology,  Division  of  Radiation  Oncology, 
and  Center  for  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology,  The 
University  of  Texas  Health  Science  Center  at  San  Antonio,  7703 
Floyd  Curl  Drive,  San  Antonio,  TX  78284,  USA.  e-mail: 
vijay@uthscsa.edu 

J  McKesson  BioServices  and  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch, 
US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base, 
San  Antonio,  TX  78235,  USA. 

§  Department  of  Pathology,  The  University  of  Texas  Health 
Science  Center  at  San  Antonio,  7703  Floyd  Curl  Drive,  San 
Antonio,  TX  78284,  USA. 


are  being  considered  in  the  USA  and  elsewhere  for 
use  in  warfare  settings,  for  example  electronic  coun¬ 
termeasures  to  identify  and  track  incoming  armour- 
piercing  rounds  that  threaten  ground  vehicles  (Fuerer 
1991,  Taylor  1991,  Toevs  etal  1992).  Ultra-wideband 
electromagnetic  radiation  (UWBR)  in  the  radiofre¬ 
quency  range  is  in  this  category  of  signal,  and  can 
be  characterized  as  having  a  large  band  spread  of 
up  to  2  GHz,  a  rapid  rise  time  of  less  than  0.2  ns, 
and  a  pulse  duration  of  a  few  ns.  It  is  conceivable 
that  personnel  could  be  exposed  to  such  signals  while 
operating  and/or  working  in  the  vicinity  of  radar  or 
communications-jamming  equipment,  and/ or  by 
similar  friendly  or  enemy  equipment  (Sherry  et  al 
1995).  Such  potential  exposure  to  UWBR  raises 
issues  related  to  possible  bioeffects  and/or  possible 
human  health  hazards. 

Recently,  Albanese  et  al  (1994)  described  possible 
useful  applications  of  ultra-short  electromagnetic 
pulses  in  medical  settings.  These  included  electropor¬ 
ation,  which  would  allow  chemotherapeutic  drugs  to 
enter  more  readily  and  kill  cancer  cells,  and  the 
development  of  new  techniques  for  imaging  tissue 
structures.  The  authors  also  associated  their  theoret¬ 
ical  considerations  with  undesirable  health  effects 
resulting  from  potential  tissue  damage  mechanisms, 
including  macromolecular  conformation  changes, 
alterations  in  chemical  reaction  rates,  membrane 
effects  and  temperature-mediated  adverse  responses. 
Merritt  et  al  (1995)  subsequently  challenged  most  of 
these  associations,  and  indicated  the  limited  availabil¬ 
ity  of  experimental  (biological)  data.  The  small 
number  of  published  scientific  reports  has  not  indi¬ 
cated  any  discernible  physiological  or  behavioural 
change  in  rats  and  monkeys  exposed  to  UWBR 
(Sherry  et  al  1995,  Walters  et  al  1995). 

The  potential  of  UWBR  exposure  to  induce  gen¬ 
etic  damage,  if  any,  is  important  for  risk  assessment 
related  to  mutation  and  cancer  induction.  Recently, 
Pakhomova  et  al  (1997,  1998)  reported  an  absence 
of  mutagenic  effects  of  UWBR  exposure  on  the  D7 
strain  of  the  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae.  As  far  as  is 
known,  an  examination  of  the  genetic  effects  of 


International  Journal  of  Radiation  Biology  ISSN  0955-3002  print/ISSN  1362-3095  online  ©  1999  Taylor  &  Francis  Ltd 

http://www.tandf.co.uk/JNLS/rab.htm 

http://www.taylorandfrancis.com/JNLS/rab.htm 


116 


Vijayalaxmi  et  al. 


UWBR  exposure  of  mammalian  cells,  either  in  vitro 
or  in  vivOy  has  not  been  reported  in  the  literature. 
The  rodent  micronucleus  (MN)  test  has  been  widely 
accepted  as  an  in  vivo  test  system  for  detecting 
genotoxic  agents,  and  has  become  a  standard  assay 
used  in  regulatory  testing  in  several  countries  (Auletta 
et  al  1993,  Health  Protection  Branch  Geno toxicity 
Committee  (Canada)  1993,  Kirkland  1993,  Sofuni 
1993).  The  objective  of  the  present  investigation  was 
to  assess  the  extent  of  genetic  damage,  as  determined 
from  the  incidence  of  MN,  in  peripheral  blood  and 
bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWBR  for 
15  min. 

2.  Materials  and  methods 

A  protocol  approved  by  the  Institutional  Animal 
Care  and  Use  Committee  of  the  United  States  Air 
Force  Armstrong  Laboratory,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base 
was  followed.  The  Standard  Operating  Procedures 
were  compatible  with  the  requirements  of  the  United 
States  National  Toxicology  Program. 

2.1.  UWBR  exposure 

The  UWBR  exposure  facility  is  located  at  Brooks 
Air  Force  Base  in  San  Antonio.  Mice  were  exposed 
to  UWBR  pulses  in  a  giga-transverse-electromagnetic 
(GTEM)  cell  comprised  of  a  tapered  rectangular 
coaxial  transmission  line  with  a  square  cross  sec¬ 
tion  (originally  constructed  by  Sandia  National 
Laboratory,  Albuquerque,  NM,  USA).  The  outer 
ground  conductor  had  a  square  cross  section  measur¬ 
ing  11— 71cm  inside  the  cell  (the  range  results  from 
the  tapered  structure  of  the  cell).  The  centre  con¬ 
ductor  was  7.8-56.3  cm  wide  in  the  same  region, 
and  was  2.6  cm  thick  throughout  the  cell.  An  approxi¬ 
mate  volume  of  20x20x40  cm  was  available  on 
each  broad  side  of  the  centre  conductor  for  placing 
a  single  mouse  in  a  circular  plastic  holder.  A  modified 
RG-220  coaxial  cable  connected  the  GTEM  cell  to 
a  high  voltage  source.  Ionization  of  pressurized  nitro¬ 
gen  gas  in  a  spark  gap  in  the  cable  resulted  in  high 
voltage  pulses  that  led  to  UWBR  pulses  in  the  GTEM 
cell.  In  this  system,  the  electric  field  was  directed 
from  the  centre  conductor  to  the  ground  conductor, 

The  propagating  UWBR  pulses  in  the  GTEM  cell 
were  monitored  during  exposures  of  mice  using 
signals  from  a  time-derivative  (D-dot)  probe  mounted 
in  the  wall  of  the  cell.  Stored  wave  forms  were  later 
processed  using  a  correction  algorithm  to  give  the 
electric  field  strength  versus  time  (Bao  1997).  Pulses 
were  triggered  at  600  pulses  per  second  by  an  external 
pulse  generator.  The  peak  amplitude  of  the  UWBR 
pulse  was  91. 1-102.9 kVm“^  at  the  location  of  the 


centre  of  the  animal  holder.  The  pulse  rise  time 
was  146.6-166.1  ps  and  the  pulse  duration  was 
0.92-0.97  ns.  The  whole-body  specific  absorption 
rate  (SAR)  was  estimated  to  be  37mWkg“L  This 
was  done  by  integrating  the  product  of  the  power 
spectrum,  computed  from  the  corrected  UWBR  pulse 
field  strength,  and  the  normalized  SAR  (W  kg“^  per 
mW  cm”^)  for  a  prolate  spheroidal  model  of  a 
medium-sized  mouse  (Durney  et  al  1986)  in  the 
frequency  domain.  The  average  for  k-  and  H- 
polarizations  of  the  animal  was  used  to  account  for 
the  movement  of  the  animal  in  the  UWBR  field. 


2.2.  Mice  and  maintenance 

CF-1  male  mice  aged  10-12  weeks  old,  weighing 
33-48  g,  were  obtained  from  Charles  River 
Laboratories  (Portage,  MI,  USA).  Upon  arrival  they 
were  housed  two  to  four  per  cage  in  an  animal 
facility  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base.  The  room  was 
maintained  at  a  temperature  of  22±1°C  and  a 
relative  humidity  of  50  +  5%,  with  an  air-flow  rate  of 
10-15  exchanges  per  hour.  A  time-controlled  system 
provided  a  daily  05.00-17.00  light  and  17.00-05.00 
dark  cycle.  All  mice  were  given  ad  libitum  access  to 
Purina  rodent  chow  and  to  tap  water. 

After  a  10  day  quarantine  period,  a  total  of  61 
mice  were  distributed  into  separate  groups  using  a 
randomized  block  design.  There  were  nine  mice  in 
the  untreated  control  group,  12  mice  in  the  positive 
control  group  and  10  mice  in  each  of  UWBR  expo¬ 
sure  groups.  Each  mouse  was  placed  in  a  circular 
plastic  holder  that  did  not  restrict  the  movement  of 
the  animal.  The  mouse  in  its  holder  was  placed  in 
the  GTEM  cell  for  UWBR  exposure  for  15  min  at 
600  pulses  per  second  ( +  UWBR),  or  to  no  pulses 
(—UWBR);  the  exposure  was  carried  out  at  room 
temperature,  one  mouse  at  a  time.  The  selection  of 
the  15  min  duration  of  the  UWBR  exposure  was 
based  on  an  earlier  observation  (unpublished),  which 
indicated  a  potential  UWBR  exposure  time-related 
effect  on  morphine-induced  analgesia  in  these  mice. 
After  each  UWBR  exposure,  the  holder  was  removed 
from  the  GTEM  cell  and  the  mouse  was  taken  out. 
All  mice  were  returned  to  their  cages  and  kept  in  the 
animal  facility  until  sacrifice  at  18  or  24  h  when  the 
peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  were  col¬ 
lected  for  the  genetox  study  reported  here. 

2.3.  Positive  controls 

Mice  in  this  group  were  given  an  i.p.  injection  of 
mitomycin  C  (MMC;  1  mgkg“  ^  body  weight)  (Sigma; 
St  Louis,  MO,  USA)  at  18  or  24  h  before  sacrifice. 


Micronuclei  in  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 


117 


MMC  is  a  known  clastogen  that  has  been  shown  to 
induce  MN  (Heddle  et  al  1984). 

2.4.  Peripheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  smears 

From  each  group,  half  of  the  mice  were  killed  at 
18h,  and  the  remaining  half  at  24  h.  From  each 
mouse,  before  sacrifice,  a  small  drop  of  peripheral 
blood  was  collected  on  a  clean  microscope  slide  by 
snipping  the  end  of  the  tail.  A  thin  smear  was  made 
over  an  area  of  2-3  cm  by  pulling  the  blood  behind 
a  coverglass  held  at  a  45°  angle.  Following  sacrifice, 
bone  marrow  from  both  femurs  was  flushed  with 
0.5  ml  of  foetal  calf  serum  into  a  microfuge  tube 
using  a  1  ml  syringe  fitted  with  a  22  G  needle.  The 
cells  were  concentrated  by  gentle  centrifugation  at 
600^  for  1—3  min  and  a  small  drop  of  resuspended 
cells  was  placed  on  a  clean  microscope  slide  to  make 
a  smear  as  described  above.  All  smears  were  air- 
dried,  fixed  in  absolute  methanol  and  stained  using 
acridine  orange. 

Coded  slides  were  examined  under  X  1000  magni¬ 
fication  using  a  fluorescence  microscope  equipped 
with  appropriate  filters.  Immature  erythrocytes  (PCE) 
were  identified  by  their  orange -red  colour,  mature 
erythrocytes  by  their  green  colour  and  the  MN  by 
their  yellowish  colour.  For  each  mouse,  1000  erythro¬ 
cytes  in  peripheral  blood  and  200  erythrocytes  in 
bone  marrow  were  examined  to  obtain  the  percent¬ 
age  of  PCE.  In  addition,  for  each  mouse,  2000 
consecutive  PCE  were  examined  in  peripheral  blood 
and  in  bone  marrow  to  determine  the  incidence 
of  MN.  Decoding  of  the  slides  was  done  after 
completing  the  microscopic  analysis. 

2.5.  Statistical  analysis 

The  statistical  methods  used  were  descriptive  stat¬ 
istics  of  mean,  standard  deviation  and  analysis  of 
variance  of  the  groups  used  in  the  experiment. 
Pairwise  multiple  comparisons  of  individual  means 
of  different  groups  were  done  to  compare  the  con¬ 
trols,  +  UWBR  and  —  UWBR  exposures,  and  MMC 
group  for  sacrifice  times  at  18  and  24  h.  Residuals 
were  analysed  to  determine  whether  the  best  skewness 
and  kurtosis  were  with  the  raw  data  or  the  usual 
transformations  for  small  percentages  and  for  small 
frequency  counts  (Zar  1974).  In  addition,  deleted 
residuals  versus  raw  residuals  were  plotted  to  verify 
that  no  one  observation  had  undue  influence  on  the 
results.  A  final  plot  of  residuals  versus  predicted 
values  was  used  to  verify  normality  of  distribution, 
homogeneity  of  variance  and  lack  of  outliers,  yielding 
a  valid  analysis. 


3*  Results 

The  mean  percentages  of  PCE  and  the  average 
incidence  of  MN  per  2000  PCE  for  the  mice  in  the 
control,  -hUWBR/— UWBR-exposed  and  positive 
control  groups  (killed  at  18  and  24  h)  are  shown 
in  table  1. 


3.1.  Peripheral  blood 

The  percentages  of  PCE  in  the  control,  -hUWBR 
and  —UWBR  mice  killed  at  18  and  24 h  were  all 
within  the  range  of  3.1+0.14  to  3.2  +  0.23  [p  = 
0.1326  for  the  overall  effect  of  UWBR).  The  positive 
control  mice  injected  with  MMC  exhibited  decreased 
percentages  of  PCE  when  killed  at  18h  (2.9  +  0.14) 
and  at  24  h  (2.6  +  0.17). 

The  frequencies  of  MN  per  2000  PCE  in  control 
mice  killed  at  18  and  24  h  were  8.3  +  3.30  and  9.2 
+  2.68,  respectively.  The  indices  for  MN  per  2000 
PCE  in  +UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice  killed 
at  18  and  24  h  were  similar,  ranging  from  7.7  +  2.00 


Table  1 .  The  percentages  of  polychromatic  erythrocytes  (PCE) 
and  the  incidence  of  micronuclei  (MN)  in  the  peripheral 
blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  ultra- 
wideband  electromagnetic  radiation  (UWBR)  for  15  min. 


Group 

Group  mean*  Group  mean 

%  PCE  MN  per  2000  PCE 

(  +  SD)  (±SD) 

Peripheral  blood 

Mice  sacrificed  at  18  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

3.1  (0.17) 

8.3 

(3.30) 

UWBR- 

3.2  (0.23) 

7.7 

(2.00) 

UWBR-F 

3.1  (0.17) 

9.7 

(2.54) 

Mitomycin  C 

2.9  (0.14) 

99.2 

(3.31) 

Mice  sacrificed  at  24  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

3.1  (0.14) 

9.2 

(2.68) 

UWBR- 

3.2  (0.23) 

8.8 

(2.20) 

UWBR  + 

3.1  (0.20) 

9.4 

(2.88) 

Mitomycin  C 

2.6  (0.17) 

107.3 

(8.07) 

Bone  marrow 

Mice  sacrificed  at  18  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

49.0  (3.56) 

8.8 

(2.06)  . 

UWBR- 

51.4  (3.04) 

7.4 

(2.32) 

UWBR  + 

51.2  (2.61) 

8.7 

(2.00) 

Mitomycin  C 

44.6  (3.07) 

102.7 

(9.09) 

Mice  sacrificed  at  24  h  after  UWBR  exposure 

Controls 

52.3  (4.02) 

9.8 

(2.86) 

UWBR- 

50.5  (3.55) 

8.1 

(2.28) 

UWBR-h 

50.0  (1.42) 

10.0 

(3.27) 

Mitomycin  C 

42.3  (2.14) 

114.8  (14.88) 

*  For  each  mouse,  1000  consecutive  erythrocytes  in  the  peri¬ 
pheral  blood  and  200  consecutive  erythrocytes  in  the  bone 
marrow  were  examined. 


118 


Vijayalaxmi  et  al. 


to  9.7  +  2.54  (j&  =  0.0975  for  the  overall  effect  of 
UWBR).  The  positive  control  mice  treated  with 
MMC  exhibited  a  significantly  increased  incidence 
of  MN  per  2000  PCE  when  killed  at  both  18  h 
(99.2  +  3.31)  and  24h  (107.3  +  8.07)  {p  =  0.000l). 

3.2.  Bone  marrow 

The  percentages  of  PCE  in  control  mice  killed  at 
18  and  24  h  were  49.0  +  3.56  and  52.3  +  4.02,  respect¬ 
ively.  In  +UWBR  and  —  UWBR-exposed  mice,  the 
percentage  of  PCE  (at  both  times  of  sacrifice)  ranged 
between  50.0+1.42  and  51.4  +  3.04  (/?  =  0.705  for 
the  overall  effect  of  UWBR).  The  positive  control 
mice  exhibited  a  decrease  in  the  percentage  of  PCE 
when  killed  at  18  h  (44.6  +  3.07)  and  at  24  h 
(42.3  +  2.14). 

The  frequencies  of  MN  per  2000  PCE  in  control 
mice  killed  at  18  and  24h  were  8.8  +  2.06  and 
9.8  +  2.86,  respectively.  The  indices  for  MN  per  2000 
PCE  in  +UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice  ter¬ 
minated  at  18  and  24h  ranged  between  7.4  +  2.32 
and  10.0  +  3.27  (/?  =  0.072  for  the  overall  effect  of 
UWBR).  The  positive  control  mice  treated  with 
MMC  exhibited  significantly  increased  frequencies 
of  MN  per  2000  PCE  when  killed  at  both  18  h 
(102.7  +  9.09)  and  at  24h  (114.8+14.88)  {p  = 
0.0001). 

4.  Discussion 

In  mammals,  during  erythroblastosis,  for  a  still 
unknown  reason,  the  main  nucleus  is  expelled  and 
lagging  chromosomal  fragments  and/ or  whole  chro¬ 
mosomes  that  are  not  incorporated  into  daughter 
nuclei  during  cell  division  persist  as  easily  recogniz¬ 
able  micronuclei  in  immature  erythrocytes  (PCE). 
The  first  appearance  of  MN  in  PCE  occurs  10-12  h 
after  a  clastogenic  exposure.  This  lag  period  results 
from  the  time  required  for  the  erythroblast  to  divide, 
to  expel  its  main  nucleus  to  become  the  polychro¬ 
matic  erythrocyte,  and  any  mitotic  delay  induced  by 
the  genotoxic  agent  (Heddle  et  al  1984).  Once 
induced,  the  MN  persists  in  the  PCE  for  about  30  h 
(Jenssen  and  Ramel  1978).  Hence,  the  clastogenic 
and/ or  aneugenic  effect  of  a  given  treatment  can  be 
detected  at  any  point  during  this  time  interval 
(Heddle  et  al  1984).  The  main  requirement  of  the 
treatment  and/or  sampling  schedule  is  to  obtain  at 
least  one  sample  at  or  near  to  the  time  of  the 
maximum  incidence  of  micronucleated  PCE 
(MacGregor  et  al  1987).  In  the  present  study,  peri¬ 
pheral  blood  and  bone  marrow  cells  were  examined 
at  18  and  24  h  following  UWBR  exposure. 

There  were  no  significant  differences  in  the 


percentage  of  PCE  between  the  controls  and  the 
+  UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice,  and  this 
indicates  that  the  time  required  for  nucleated  erythro¬ 
poietic  cells  to  become  PCE  is  not  altered  by  in  vivo 
exposure  of  mice  to  +UWBR  and  —UWBR  used 
in  this  study;  a  marked  reduction  in  the  frequency  of 
PCE  would  have  indicated  that  the  division  and 
maturation  of  the  nucleated  erythropoietic  cells  had 
been  inhibited  (MacGregor  et  al  1987). 

The  incidence  of  MN  observed  in  the  bone  marrow 
cells  of  control  mice  was  comparable  with  values 
reported  earlier  for  adult  CF-1  mice  (average  of 
4MN  per  1000  PCE)  (Okine  et  al  1983).  The 
influence  of  UWBR  exposure  on  the  incidence  of 
MN  per  2000  PCE  in  both  the  peripheral  blood  and 
bone  marrow  cells  determined  by  pairwise  analysis 
did  not  indicate  significant  differences  between  con¬ 
trol  and  +UWBR  and  —UWBR-exposed  mice.  In 
recently  published  genetoxicity  investigations, 
Pakhomova  et  al  (1997)  observed  no  significant 
difference  in  the  occurrence  of  chromosome  recomb¬ 
inations,  mutations  and  abnormal  colonies  (i.e. 
mitotic  crossovers,  segregations,  revertants  and  con- 
vertants)  between  the  UWBR-exposed  and  sham- 
exposed  D7  strain  of  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae;  in 
that  study,  the  UWBR  exposure  was  for  30  min,  with 
a  pulse  repetition  rate  of  16-600  Hz,  a  pulse  duration 
of  1.01-1.02  ns  and  a  pulse  rise  time  of  164-166  ps. 
This  gives  a  bandwidth  of  190%  (Foster  et  al  1995) 
and  a  peak  electric  field  strength  of  101-104kVm“^ 
In  a  subsequent  paper,  the  same  authors  reported 
no  significant  effect  of  similar  UWBR  exposure  on 
the  incidence  of  ultraviolet  light-  (UV;  2.25Jm“^ 
s”^  and  a  total  exposure  of  lOOJm”^)  induced 
reciprocal  and  non-reciprocal  recombination  or 
mutagenesis,  or  on  UV-induced  cytotoxicity 
(Pakhomova  et  al  1998). 

Earlier  investigations  in  rats,  mice  and  monkeys 
exposed  to  UWBR  did  not  demonstrate  any  altered 
physiological  responses.  Walters  et  al  (1995)  reported 
no  significant  differences  in  a  swimming  performance 
test,  in  blood  chemistry,  or  in  the  expression  of  c-fos 
protein  in  brain  cells,  between  control  rats  and 
those  exposed  to  UWBR  for  2  min  (pulse  repetition 
rate  60  Hz,  pulse  duration  7-8  ns,  bandwidth 
0.25-2.5  GHz,  peak  E-field  strength  250kVm“^, 
and  far  field  equivalent  peak  power  density  of 
1.7  X  10^  W  cm“^).  In  a  recent  report,  Jauchem  et  al 
(1997)  indicated  no  significant  differences  in  heart 
rate  and  arterial  blood  pressure  between  UWBR- 
exposed  (pulse  repetition  rate  1  kHz,  pulse  rise  time 
300 ps  and  E-field  strength  21kVm~^)  and  control 
rats.  Sherry  et  al  (1995)  exposed  six  monkeys  to 
UWBR  for  2  min  (pulse  frequency  60  Hz,  pulse 
duration  5- 10  ns,  a  total  of  7200  pulses,  bandwidth 


Micronuclei  in  mice  exposed  to  ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  radiation 


119 


100  MHz  to  1.5  GHz,  peak  E-field  strength  of 
250kVm“\  and  a  whole-body  SAR  calculated  to 
be  0.5mWkg”^).  Each  monkey  was  exposed  to 
UWBR  twice,  with  an  interval  of  6  days  between 
exposures.  The  mean  primate  equilibrium  platform 
performance  for  all  monkeys  after  UWBR  exposure 
was  not  different  from  that  observed  before  each 
UWBR  exposure.  Seaman  et  al.  (1998)  reported  that 
exposure  of  mice  to  UWBR  for  30  min  (60—600 
pulses  per  second,  pulse  duration  1.0  ns,  rise  time 
200 ps,  pulse  amplitude  100 kVm”^  and  a  calculated 
bandwidth  of  184.3%  (Foster  et  al.  1995))  did  not 
result  in  significant  changes  in  normal  or  morphine- 
induced  nociception  and  locomotor  activity.  In  con¬ 
trast,  an  in  vitro  exposure  of  murine  macrophages  to 
UWBR  (with  similar  exposure  conditions),  under 
certain  conditions  of  macrophage  stimulation, 
resulted  in  an  increase  in  the  production  of  nitric 
oxide  (Seaman  et  al.  1996). 

The  results  from  this  investigation  did  not  indicate 
excess  genotoxicity  in  both  peripheral  blood  and 
bone  marrow  cells  of  mice  exposed  to  UWBR  for 
15  min. 


Acknowledgements 

This  work  was  supported  by  the  United  States 
Army  Medical  Research  and  Material  Command 
under  contract  DAMD 1 7-94-G-4069  awarded  to 
McKesson  BioServices,  and  by  the  United  States  Air 
Force  Office  of  Scientific  Research  grant  No. 
F49620-95- 1-0337.  The  authors  thank  T,-S.  Lu  for 
discussions  on  the  estimate  of  SAR  and  and  W.  D. 
Hurt  for  SAR  calculation. 

The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in 
this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not 
be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of  the  Army 
position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by 
other  documentation. 

In  conducting  the  research  using  animals,  the 
investigator (s)  have  adhered  to  the  ‘Guide  for  the 
Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals’  prepared  by 
the  Committee  on  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
Animals  of  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal 
Resources,  National  Research  Council  (NIH 
Publication  #  86-23,  Rev.  1985). 

References 

Albanese,  R.,  Blaschak,  J.,  Medina,  R.  and  Penn,  J.,  1994, 
Ultrashort  elecromagnetic  signals:  biophysical  questions, 
safety  issues,  and  medical  opportunities.  Aviation  Space  and 
Environmental  Medicine^  65,  Al  16— A 120. 

Auletta,  a.  E.,  Dearfield,  K.  L.  and  Cimino,  M.  C.,  1993, 
Mutagenicity  test  schemes  and  guidelines:  US  EPA  Office 


of  Pollution  Prevention  and  Office  of  Pesticide  Programs. 
Environmental  and  Molecular  Mutagenesis^  21,  38-45. 

Bao,  J.-H.,  1997,  Picosecond  domain  electromagnetic  pulse 
measurements  in  an  exposure  facility:  an  error  compensa¬ 
tion  routine  using  deconvolution  techniques.  Review  of 
Scientific  Instruments^  68,  2221-2227. 

Durney,  C.  H.,  Massoudi,  H.  and  Iskander,  M.  F.,  1986, 
Radiojrequency  Radiation  Handbook^  4th  edition.  Report 
TR-85-73  (San  Antonio,  TX:  USAF  School  of  Aerospace 
Medicine,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base). 

Foster,  P.  R.,  Halsey,  J.  D.  and  Hussain,  G.  M.,  1995, 
Ultra-wideband  antenna  technology.  In  Introduction  to 
Ultra-Wideband  Radar  Systems^  edited  by  J.  D.  Taylor  (Boca 
Raton,  FL:  CRC  Press),  pp.  145-286. 

Fuerer,  D.,  1991,  Electronic  countermeasures  in  wideband 
spectrum  systems.  In  Propagation  Limitations  for  Systems  Using 
Band  Spreading,  (Neuilly  Sur  Seine:  AGARD)  LS-172, 

pp.  1-11. 

Health  Protection  Branch  Genotoxicity  Committee 
(Canada),  1993,  The  assessment  of  mutagenicity:  Health 
Protection  Branch  Mutagenicity  Guidelines.  Environmental 
and  Molecular  Mutagenesis,  21,  15-37. 

Heddle,  j.  a.,  Stuart,  E.  and  Salamone,  M.  F.,  1984,  The 
bone  marrow  micronucleus  test.  In  Handbook  of  Mutagenicity 
Test  Procedures,  edited  by  B.  J.  Kilbey,  M.  Legator,  W. 
Nichols  and  C.  Ramel  (Amsterdam:  Elsevier), 
pp.  441-457. 

Jauchem,  J.  R.,  Frei,  M.  R.,  Ryan,  K.  L.,  Merritt,  J.  H.  and 
Murphy,  M.  R.,  1997,  Lack  of  effects  on  heart  rate  and 
blood  pressure  in  ketamine-anesthetized  rats  briefly 
exposed  to  ultrawideband  electromagentic  pulses.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering  (in  press). 

Jens  SEN,  D.  and  Ramel,  C.,  1978,  Factors  affecting  the  induction 
of  micronuclei  at  low  doses  of  X-rays,  MMS  and  dimethyl- 
nitrosamine  in  mouse  erythroblasts.  Mutation  Research, 
58,  51-65. 

Kirkland,  D.  J.,  1993,  Genetic  toxicology  testing  requirements: 
official  and  unofficial  views  from  Europe.  Environmental 
and  Molecular  Mutagenesis,  21,  8-14. 

MacGregor,  J.  T.,  Heddle,  J.  A.,  Hite,  M.,  Margolin,  B.  H., 
Ramel,  C.,  Salamone,  M.  F.,  Tice,  R.  R.  and  Wild,  D., 
1987,  Guidelines  for  the  conduct  of  micronucleus  assays 
in  mammalian  bone  marrow  erythrocytes.  Mutation 
Research,  189,  103-112. 

Merritt,  J.  H.,  Kiel,  J.  L.  and  Hurt,  W.  D.,  1995, 
Considerations  for  human  exposure  standards  for  fast- 
rise-time  high-peak-power  electromagnetic  pulses.  Aviation 
Space  and  Environmental  Medicine,  66,  586-589. 

Okine,  L.  K.  N.,  Ioannides,  C.  and  Parke,  D.  V.,  1983,  Studies 
on  the  possible  mutagenicity  of  b-adrenergic  blocker 
drugs.  Toxicology  Letters,  16,  167-174. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C. 
and  Akyel,  Y.,  1997,  Lack  of  genetic  effects  of  ultrawide¬ 
band  electromagnetic  radiation  in  yeast.  Electro-  and 
Magnetobiolog)},  16,  195-201. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  R,  Lee,  J.  G. 
and  Akyel,  Y.,  1998,  Ultra-wide  band  electromagnetic 
radiation  does  not  affect  UV-induced  recombination  and 
mutagenesis  in  yeast.  Bioelectromagnetics,  19,  128-131. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.  and  Mathur,  S.  P., 
1998,  Ultra-wideband  electromagnetic  pulses  and  mor¬ 
phine-induced  changes  in  nociception  and  activity  in 
mice.  Physiology  and  Behavior  (in  press). 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Kiel,  J.  L.,  Parker,  J.  E.,  Grubbs,  T.  R.  and 
Prol,  H.  K.,  1996,  Effects  of  ultra-wide-band  pulses  on 
nitric  oxide  production  in  murine  macrophages.  Eighteenth 


120 


Micronuclei  in  mice  exposed  to  ultra-undeband  electromagnetic  radiation 


Annual  Meeting  of  The  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  (Frederick, 
MD,  The  Bioelectromagnetic  Society),  p.  213. 

Sherry,  C.  J.,  Buck,  D.  W.,  Walters,  T.  J.,  Brown,  G.  C. 
and  Murphy,  M.  R.,  1995,  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in 
non-human  primates  after  exposure  to  ultrawideband 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  the  microwave  frequency 
range.  Radiation  Research,  143,  93-97. 

SoFUNi,  T.,  1993,  Japanese  guidelines  for  mutagenicity  testing. 
Environmental  and  Molecular  Mutagenesis,  21,  2-7. 

Taylor,  J.  D.,  1991,  Ultrawideband  radar.  IEEE  International 
Microwaves  Symposium  Digest,  MTT-S-1,  367-370. 


Toevs,  j.  W.,  Smith,  D.  R.,  Byrne,  D.  P.  and  Ross,  G.  F., 
1992,  UWB  radar  for  ground  vehicle  self  protection. 
IEEE  International  Microwaves  Symposium  Digest  MTT-S-3, 
1492-1494. 

Walters,  T.  J.,  Mason,  P.  A.,  Sherry,  C.  J.,  Steffen,  C.  and 
Merritt,  J.  H.,  1995,  No  detectable  bioeffects  following 
acute  exposure  to  high  peak  power  ultra-wide  band 
electromagnetic  radiation  in  rats.  Aviation  Space  and 
Environmental  Medicine,  66,  562-567. 

Zar,  j.  H.,  1974,  Biostatistical  Analysis  (Englewood  Cliffs,  NJ: 
Prentice  Hall). 


ELECTRO-  AND  MAGNETOBIOLOGY,  17(2),  115-125  (1998) 


A  PILOT  STUDY  OF  THE 
MILLIMETER-WAVELENGTH  RADIATION 
EFFECT  ON  SYNAPTIC  TRANSMISSION 


Andrei  G.  Pakhomov,  H.  Kenneth  Prol,  and  Yahya  Akyel 

McKesson  BioServices 
Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch 
U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment  of  the 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base 
San  Antonio,  Texas  78235-5324 


ABSTRACT 

Effects  of  41.34  GHz  millimeter  waves  (MMWs)  were  studied  in  the 
isolated  hemisected  frog  spinal  cord  preparation.  The  purpose  of  the  work  was 
to  establish  whether  MMW  irradiation  alters  conduction  in  a  poly¬ 
synaptic  pathway  from  dorsal  root  (DR)  afferent  fibers  to  efferents  of  the 
respective  ventral  root  (VR).  After  isolating  and  placement  of  the  cord  in 
the  exposure  bath,  the  DRjx  or  DRx  was  stimulated  with  single  supra¬ 
maximal  pulses  every  30  s.  Experiments  began  after  30-160  min  of  stabili¬ 
zation  and  lasted  for  65  min,  without  any  changes  or  interruptions  of  the 
stimulation  routine.  Each  experiment  included  two  identical  5-min  MMW 
exposures  (2.8  mW/cm^  at  25  and  50  min  into  the  experiment).  During  the 
rest  of  the  time  the  preparation  was  sham  exposed.  VR  responses  to  the 
DR  stimulation  (DR-VRRs)  represented  a  variable  polyphasic  wave  with 
a  latency  of  8-15  ms,  0.5-3  mV  peak  amplitude,  and  30-70  ms  duration.  All 
DR-VRRs  recorded  during  the  experiment  were  stored  for  automated 


The  use  of  animals  in  this  study  was  in  compliance  with  the  Animal  Welfare  Act  and  other 
federal  statutes  and  regulations  relating  to  animals  and  experiments  involving  animals,  and 
adhered  to  the  principles  stated  in  the  Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory  Animals,  NIH 
publication  85-23.  The  animal  use  protocol,  No.  AD4002,  has  been  approved  by  the  Armstrong 
Laboratory  Animal  Care  and  Use  Committee. 

Address  correspondence  to:  Dr.  A.  Pakhomov,  USA-MCMR,  U.S.  Army  Medical  Re¬ 
search  Detachment,  8308  Hawks  Road,  Building  1168,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  San  Antonio,  TX 
78235-5324.  Fax:  (210)  536-5382.  E-mail:  pakhomov@netxpress.com 

115 


Copyright  ©  1998  by  Marcel  Dekker,  Inc. 


www.dekker.com 


116 


PAKHOMOV,  PROL,  AND  AKYEL 


analysis  of  spontaneous  (unforced)  waveform  changes  and  MMW-induced 
changes.  For  the  entire  studied  group  of  13  preparations,  the  first  MMW 
irradiation  increased  the  waveform  changes  by  14%  (p  <  .02  compared  with 
the  preceding  sham  exposure).  Of  this  group,  9  preparations  with  the  most 
pronounced  reaction  to  the  first  MMW  exposure  had  no  reaction  to  the 
second  exposure.  In  contrast,  the  other  4  preparations  with  subtle  or  no 
effect  of  the  first  exposure  reacted  strongly  to  the  second  exposure.  The 
difference  in  the  effect  of  two  consequent  and  identical  MMW  exposures 
infers  that  this  effect  was  not  caused  by  MMW  heating  and  involved  regu¬ 
latory  physiological  mechanisms,  such  as  adaptation  and  sensitization. 


INTRODUCTION 

Until  now,  effects  of  low-intensity  millimeter  waves  (MMWs,  30-300  GHz  fre¬ 
quency  range)  have  been  studied  in  a  limited  number  of  excitable  tissue  preparations, 
i.e.,  isolated  peripheral  nerves  (1-5),  striated  muscle  and  heart  pacemaker  (5),  crayfish 
stretch  receptor  (6),  and  snail  neurons  (7).  The  present  work  is  the  first  attempt  to  study 
MMW  effects  on  key  processes  of  interneuronal  interaction,  namely  on  the  conduction 
of  excitation  in  a  polysynaptic  pathway  from  primary  afferents  to  motoneurons  in  the 
amphibian  spinal  cord. 

This  preparation  offers  a  unique  combination  of  features  essential  for  this  type 
of  research.  The  highly  organized  neuronal  circuitry  of  the  spinal  cord  allows  one  to 
study  virtually  any  known  neuron  function,  including  mono-  and  polysynaptic  conduc¬ 
tion  via  chemical  and  electrical  synapses,  pre-  and  postsynaptic  inhibition,  spatial  and 
temporal  summation,  synaptic  plasticity  phenomena,  and  pacemaker  activity.  During 
exposure  of  the  spinal  cord  to  MMWs  the  roots  and  recording  electrodes  can  be 
shielded  from  the  radiation,  which  is  very  important  for  providing  artifact-free  condi¬ 
tions.  The  isolated  frog  spinal  cord  has  good  performance  and  viability  in  vitro,  along 
with  an  appropriate  size  and  shape  for  experiments  with  MMW,  which  do  not  penetrate 
deep  into  biological  tissues.  Most  morphological  and  biochemical  correlates  of  spinal 
cord  electrical  activity  are  known  in  great  detail  [see  Kudo  (8)  for  review],  thus  provid¬ 
ing  opportunities  for  understanding  physiological  mechanisms  of  MMW  effects,  if  any 
are  observed. 

However,  experimentation  with  the  isolated  spinal  cord  is  quite  laborious.  There¬ 
fore,  the  present  study  was  intended  only  to  reveal  possible  MMW  effects  and  to  define 
adequate  exposure  techniques  and  biopotential  analysis  procedures  for  future  studies. 

Previously,  we  established  that  MMW  irradiation  of  an  isolated  nerve  prepara¬ 
tion  can  significantly  alter  its  ability  to  sustain  a  high-rate  electrical  stimulation  (3,4). 
Among  tested  frequencies  of  the  radiation,  the  frequency  of  41.34  GHz  (7.25-mm 
wavelength)  was  the  most  effective,  and  was  therefore  chosen  for  the  spinal  cord 
experiments. 


MATERIALS  AND  METHODS 

Spinal  Cord  Preparation  and  Data  Acquisition 

Experiments  were  performed  on  an  isolated  and  hemisected  spinal  cord  of 
the  bullft-og  Rana  catesbeiana  (1).  Active  adult  frogs  were  kept  in  vivarium  conditions 


MM  WAVES  AND  SYNAPTIC  TRANSMISSION 


117 


(22-25°C,  30-70%  relative  humidity,  12  h  light/12  h  dark  diurnal  light  cycle)  for  at  least 
1  week  prior  to  experiments.  Animals  were  chilled  for  15-20  min  on  ice  and  immobi¬ 
lized  by  mechanical  destruction  of  the  brain.  The  spinal  cord  was  approached  by  a 
dorsal  laminectomy  and  cut  at  the  level  of  the  upper  thoracic  segments.  Dorsal  and 
ventral  roots  (DR  and  VR)  of  segments  IX  and/or  X  needed  for  electrophysiological 
recording  were  cut  as  far  from  the  cord  as  possible;  all  other  roots  were  cut  close  to  the 
cord.  The  cord  was  carefully  removed  from  the  vertebral  column  and  placed  in  chilled 
Ringer’s  solution  (NaCl  114;  KCl  2.0;  NaHCOj  2.0;  CaClj  1.8;  glucose  5.5  (mM);  pH 
7.4_7.6).  The  solution  was  supplemented  with  hydrogen  peroxide  (0.004%)  to  improve 
tissue  oxygenation  and  viability  of  the  preparation  in  vitro  (9).  After  a  sagittal  hemisec- 
tion,  one  part  of  the  cord  was  transferred  to  the  exposure  bath  and  laid  lateral  side 
downward.  The  roots  were  extended  upward  along  the  walls  of  the  bath  and  put  in 
contact  with  bipolar  stimulating  and  recording  electrodes.  The  electrodes  were  made 
of  thin  gold  wire  and  permanently  mounted  on  the  walls  of  the  bath. 

The  exposure  bath  was  designed  to  keep  the  preparation  viable  for  a  long  period 
(hours),  and  to  enable  artifact-free  root  stimulation  and  biopotential  recording  during 
MMW  irradiation,  which  was  performed  from  underneath,  through  the  0.5-mm-thick 
Plexiglas  bottom  of  the  bath.  The  spinal  cord  was  continuously  superfused,  at  a  rate  of 
2.7  ml/min,  with  Ringer’s  solution  chilled  to  9-10°C.  The  solution  layer  above  the  cord 
was  1 .5-2  mm  thick,  and  the  distal  parts  of  the  roots  extending  upward  from  the  solution 
to  the  electrodes  were  covered  with  a  mixture  of  petroleum  jelly  and  mineral  oil  to 
prevent  them  from  drying. 

Special  care  was  taken  to  avoid  formation  of  any  saline  gap  between  the  cord  and 
the  bottom  of  the  chamber,  which  could  strongly  attenuate  the  MMW  radiation.  For 
this  purpose,  the  area  of  segments  IX  and  X  of  the  cord  was  gently  pressed  down  to 
the  bottom  of  the  bath  with  the  help  of  a  micromanipulator-driven  plastic  holder.  In 
contrast,  the  roots  in  the  area  of  their  contact  with  electrodes  were  shielded  from  the 
radiation  by  the  cord  itself  and  the  saline  layer  above  it. 

The  electrodes  were  connected  to  a  Grass  Instruments  Stimulator  S8800  (USA) 
and  BIOPAC  Systems  MPlOO  electrophysiological  data  acquisition  system  (USA).  Af¬ 
ter  positioning  of  the  cord  in  the  exposure  bath,  supramaximal  electrical  stimuli  were 
applied  to  one  of  the  DR  (20-30  V,  0.6  ms  width,  1  pulse  per  30  s).  If,  for  any  reason 
(such  as  damage  during  isolation),  this  stimulation  did  not  evoke  VR  responses  (DR- 
VRRs),  or  if  they  were  too  weak,  the  stimulation  was  switched  to  the  other  DR.  With 
the  DR  stimulation  continuing,  the  preparation  was  left  to  stabilize  for  30-160  min 
before  the  onset  of  the  experiment.  The  stimulation  routine  was  not  altered  or  inter¬ 
rupted  before  completion  of  the  entire  experiment. 

It  should  be  emphasized  that  the  only  difference  between  the  stabilization  period 
and  the  experiment  itself  was  that  during  stabilization  we  recorded  DR-VRRs  on  the 
monitor,  and  during  the  experiment  we  also  stored  the  records  for  subsequent  analysis. 
In  other  words,  there  was  no  “signal”  to  the  preparation  by  which  it  could  recognize 
when  the  experiment  actually  began.  We  intentionally  varied  the  duration  of  the  sta¬ 
bilization  period  in  order  to  avoid  any  specific  timing  between  spinal  cord  isolation, 
onset  of  stimulation,  and  MMW  exposures  performed  during  the  experiment. 

Each  successful  spinal  cord  preparation  was  used  in  only  a  single  experiment, 
which  lasted  for  65  min;  for  the  convenience  of  data  processing,  this  period  was  condi¬ 
tionally  divided  into  13  intervals  of  5  min  each.  Two  identical  5-min  MMW  exposures 
(2.8  mW/cm^  41.34  GHz)  were  performed  during  the  6th  and  the  10th  intervals  (25  and 


118 


PAKHOMOV,  PROL,  AND  AKYEL 


50  min  into  the  experiment);  for  the  remainder  of  the  time  the  preparation  was  sham- 
exposed.  For  the  sham  exposure,  the  waveguide  attenuators  were  tuned  to  maximum 
(about  80  dB  field  attenuation),  while  the  MMW  generator  and  all  other  devices 
remained  turned  on.  Switching  from  sham  to  MMW  irradiation  conditions  was  per¬ 
formed  by  rotation  of  attenuator  control  knobs,  and  was  not  accompanied  by  any  vi¬ 
brations,  noise,  or  changes  in  the  power  frequency  (60  Hz)  fields. 

During  each  5-min  interval,  10  DR-VRRs  were  recorded,  stored,  and  measured. 
The  measurements  included  latency,  peak-to-peak  and  maximum  amplitude,  standard 
deviation  of  the  amplitude  (SDA),  and  subtended  area  of  the  DR-VRR  signal.  (The 
SDA  is  a  measure  of  the  instant  amplitude  variation  during  the  course  of  the  DR-VRR. 
In  this  respect,  it  is  a  characteristic  of  the  signal  shape,  and  has  no  relation  to  and  should 
not  be  confused  with  statistical  analysis  of  data.)  All  these  parameters,  excluding  la¬ 
tency,  were  measured  automatically  by  the  MPlOO  software  for  the  period  between  10 
and  60  ms  after  DR  stimulation.  In  addition,  a  special  method  of  analysis  was  applied 
to  quantify  changes  in  the  DR-VRR  waveform  during  the  experiment  (see  the  Results 
and  Discussion  section). 

The  measurement  data  were  plotted  against  the  time  from  the  onset  of  the  ex¬ 
periment  and  analyzed  both  directly  (without  any  normalization  or  averaging),  then 
with  averaging  for  the  5-min  intervals  in  each  experiment,  and  with  normalization  and 
averaging  for  the  entire  group  of  preparations.  Statistical  analysis  of  differences  in 
DR-VRRs  recorded  during  MMW  and  sham-exposure  intervals  was  done  with  a  2- 
tailed  Student’s  t  test  and  test.  Although  the  experimental  conditions  were  not  dou¬ 
ble-blind,  the  complete  automatization  of  the  stimulation,  recording,  storage  of  the 
records,  and  measurement  procedures  excluded  any  subjective  impact  of  the  experi¬ 
menter  on  the  results. 


Irradiation  and  Dosimetry 

The  MMW  exposure  equipment,  methods  of  dosimetry,  and  field  mapping  were 
described  in  detail  in  our  previous  publications  (3,4).  The  microwave  power  generator 
(model  G4-141,  Russia)  operated  in  a  continuous-wave  regimen  at  a  frequency  of  41.34 
GHz.  The  output  waveguide  line  terminated  in  a  tapered  dielectric  rod  antenna  posi¬ 
tioned  vertically  under  the  exposure  bath;  the  bottom  of  the  bath  was  25  mm  above  the 
tip  of  the  rod.  At  this  distance,  the  field  was  virtually  uniform,  with  the  maximum  (2.8 
mW/cm^)  on  the  axis  of  the  antenna.  The  field  intensify  decrease  within  a  5-mm  radius 
from  the  axis  of  the  antenna  did  not  exceed  2  dB,  while  the  exposed  segment  of  the 
spinal  cord  was  less  than  2  mm  wide  and  4—6  mm  long.  The  E-field  was  aligned  with 
the  long  axis  of  the  cord.  Exact  radiation  frequency  and  net  input  power  to  the  irradi¬ 
ating  antenna  were  monitored  through  a  bidirectional  coupler,  using  an  EIP  model 
548A  frequency  counter  and  M3-21  wattmeter  (Russia).  Fluctuations  of  the  radiation 
frequency  and  intensify  from  one  experiment  to  another  did  not  exceed  2  MHz  and 
10%,  respectively. 

The  temperature  of  the  Ringer’s  solution  at  the  outflow  port  of  the  exposure  bath 
was  monitored  with  a  Luxtron  Instruments  model  850  multichannel  fluoroptic  ther¬ 
mometer.  Within  the  accuracy  of  about  0.2°C,  these  measurements  demonstrated  no 
temperature  changes  during  MMW  exposures. 


MM  WAVES  AND  SYNAPTIC  TRANSMISSION  119 

RESULTS  AND  DISCUSSION 

A  total  of  13  experiments  were  performed,  and  1690  DR-VRR  records  were 
analyzed.  In  most  of  the  preparations,  DR-VRR  represented  a  variable  polyphasic 
wave  with  a  latency  of  8-15  ms,  0.5-3  mV  peak  amplitude,  and  30-70  ms  duration. 
Figure  1  shows  original  DR-VRRs  recorded  before,  during,  and  after  the  first  MMW 
exposure  in  two  different  preparations.  In  these  two  experiments,  as  well  as  in  the  other 
ones,  the  irradiation  caused  no  readily  visible  effects:  the  amplitude  and  shape  of  the 
biopotentials  fluctuated  within  the  same  limits  as  without  exposure,  and  the  latency 
stayed  quite  stable  throughout  the  experiment. 

Usually,  measured  values  of  DR-VRR  amplitude,  SDA,  and  subtended  area 
varied  substantially  from  one  stimulus  to  another.  Nevertheless,  in  some  preparations 
the  data  averaged  for  5-min  intervals  showed  a  significant  change  during  MMW  irra¬ 
diation,  such  as  illustrated  in  Figure  2A.  In  this  preparation,  the  first  irradiation  sig¬ 
nificantly  decreased  DR-VRR  amplitude,  SDA,  and  area  as  compared  with  the  pre¬ 
vious  interval  of  sham  exposure  <  .01).  However,  consecutive  intervals  of  sham 


FIGURE  1.  Sequential  records  (from  top  to  bottom)  of  the  ventral  root  (VR)  discharges 
in  two  isolated  spinal  cord  preparations  (A  and  B).  The  discharges  are  evoked  every  30  s  by 
stimulation  of  the  respective  dorsal  root  (DR).  Periods  of  millimeter  wave  (MMW)  irradiation 
(41.34  GHz,  2.8  mW/cm^  for  5  min)  are  shown  by  vertical  black  bars.  Calibration:  10  ms,  3  mV 
(A);  and  10  ms,  6  mV  (B). 


A 


Peak  ampl.  (mV)  . 


Area  (mV*ms) 


0  10  20  30  40  50  60 


FIGURE  2.  Effect  of  millimeter  wave  (MMW)  irradiation  on  the  area,  peak  amplitude, 
and  standard  deviation  of  the  amplitude  of  ventral  root  responses  to  dorsal  root  stimulation 
(DR-VRRs).  (A  and  B)  Two  different  spinal-cord  preparations.  The  dorsal  root  is  stimu¬ 
lated  every  30  s.  Black  dots  indicate  the  original  measured  values  of  the  parameters  of  each 
DR-VRR.  Horizontal  bars  are  the  same  values  averaged  for  5-min  intervals  (mean  ±  SE,  n 
=  10).  MMW  exposures  lasted  from  25  to  30  min  of  the  experiment,  and  from  50  to  55  min;  the 
rest  of  the  time  the  preparations  were  sham  exposed. 


MM  WAVES  AND  SYNAPTIC  TRANSMISSION 


121 


h  =  19.53 


I 3  =  15.83 
Nh  =  81% 


U  - 15.86 
Nh  - 100% 

h  - 14.80 
Nh  -  93% 

It- 22.83 
NIt-154V. 

17-36.39 
Nh  -  72% 

I,  - 18.60 
m,  - 113% 


FIGURE  3.  Illustration  of  the  waveform  data  processing  procedure.  (A)  Original  records 
of  ventral  root  responses  to  dorsal  root  stimulation  (DR- VRR)  taken  every  30  s  during  the 
first  5-min  interval  (R;,  R^;  •  ■  •>  R/o).  (B)  DR- VRR  records  accumulated  for  sequential  5-mln 
intervals  (ARn).  AR;  is  a  sum  of  waveforms  R;  through  R;o,  AR2  is  a  sum  of  waveforms  R/; 
through  R20  (not  shown),  and  so  forth.  (C)  Difference  (D„)  in  sequential  AR  signals  (D„  =  AR„ 
-  AR„-i).  In  is  the  tracing  integral  of  D„  (the  area  between  the  trace  and  the  zero  line,  regardless 
of  the  sign,  in  mV  •  ms).  NE  is  the  normalized  value  of  the  total  integral  (NE  =  100%  I„/In-i). 
See  text  for  further  explanation.  ARs,  Ds,  h,  and  NIa  correspond  to  the  first  millimeter-wave 
(MMW)  exposure  (records  for  the  second  exposure  are  not  shown);  all  other  records  are  for 
sham  exposures.  Calibration:  100  ms  for  all  the  fragments,  2  mV  for  A,  20  mV  for  B,  and  10  mV 
forC. 


exposure  occasionally  could  also  differ  from  each  other  (e.g.,  the  first  and  second  in¬ 
tervals  in  Fig.  2A),  and  some  spinal  cord  preparations  showed  virtually  no  response  to 
MMW  (Fig.  2B). 

Among  the  observed  changes,  the  decrease  in  SDA  due  to  the  first  exposure  was 
the  most  consistent:  It  was  statistically  significant  in  the  first  6  experiments  performed, 
but,  for  unknown  reasons,  weakened  or  disappeared  in  the  next  experiments.  Although 
these  observations  could  not  be  taken  as  a  proof  of  the  MMW  effect,  they  suggested 
that  the  measured  DR- VRR  parameters  were  not  always  adequate  to  reveal  this  effect. 
DR- VRR  is  a  complex  signal,  produced  by  polysynaptic  transmission  from  primary 
afferents  to  motoneurons  and  summation  of  excitation  on  the  motoneurons;  it  is  never 


122 


PAKHOMOV,  PROL,  AND  AKYEL 


FIGURE  4.  Millimeter  wave  (MMW)  irradiation  effect  on  changes  in  the  waveform  of  the 
ventral  root  response  to  dorsal  root  stimulation  (DR-VRR).  The  changes  are  expressed  by 
the  normalized  integral  (NI)  of  differences  of  waveforms  accumulated  for  5-min  intervals 
(see  text  and  Figure  3  for  details  of  NI  calculation).  NI  values  are  averaged  (mean  ±  SE) 
for  the  entire  studied  group  (A,  n  =  13),  preparations  with  a  pronounced  response  to  the  first 
exposure  (B,  n  =  9),  and  for  the  remaining  4  preparations  (C,  n  =  4).  Periods  corresponding  to 
MMW  exposures  are  outlined  by  a  different  shading  (25-30  min  and  50-55  min). 


the  same  in  shape,  amplitude,  or  time  course  in  any  two  spinal  cord  preparations.  De¬ 
pending  on  the  DR-VRR  particulars  in  each  individual  preparation,  the  MMW  effect 
may  or  may  not  show  up  as  changes  in  amplitude,  area,  or  SDA.  Then,  demonstration 
of  the  MMW  effect  (if  any)  requires  a  different  analysis  procedure  sensitive  to  any 
changes  in  the  DR-VRR  waveform,  and  also  able  to  quantify  them.  This  analysis  was 
accomplished  by  using  special  waveform  math  and  processing  features  included  in  the 
MPlOO  system  software. 

The  waveform  processing  method  employed  is  illustrated  in  Figure  3.  First,  all 
DR-VRR  records  within  each  5-min  interval  were  summed  together,  thus  yielding  one 
“accumulated”  waveform  for  each  interval  (AR;,  AR^, ...,  AR„,  where  n  is  the  number 
of  the  5-min  interval,  from  1  to  13).  To  evaluate  the  difference  (D„)  between  the  se¬ 
quential  accumulated  waveforms,  they  were  subtracted  from  each  other  (D„  =  AR„  - 
AR„_,),  yielding  twelve  D„  traces  (from  2  to  13).  One  should  note  that  this  was  a  “geo¬ 
metrical”  subtraction,  i.e.,  one  entire  waveform  was  subtracted  from  another  (this  is 
principally  different  from  subtraction  of,  say,  peak  amplitudes  or  subtended  areas  of 
the  signal).  The  difference  D„  was  quantified  by  an  automated  measurement  of  the 


MM  WAVES  AND  SYNAPTIC  TRANSMISSION 


123 


tracing  integral  (I„),  which  is  the  total  area  between  the  zero  line  and  the  D„  trace 
(regardless  of  the  sign). 

By  this  procedure,  any  alteration  in  the  DR-VRR  time  course,  shape,  amplitude, 
etc.,  within  a  5-min  interval  as  compared  with  the  previous  5-min  interval  is  detected 
and  quantified  as  I„.  Due  to  natural  fluctuations  of  the  DR-VRR,  I„  is  always  a  positive 
number.  The  MMW  effect,  if  present,  can  be  detected  as  an  additional  increase  in  I„ 
compared  to  the  I„  in  the  preceding  intervals  of  sham  exposure. 

For  convenience  of  comparison  of  I„  in  different  preparations,  we  used  the 
normalized  integral  (NI),  which  was  calculated  as;  NI„  =  100%  Obviously,  if 

changes  in  the  waveform  during  a  given  5-min  interval  are  equal  to  those  during  the 
previous  interval,  then  NI  =  100%.  If  for  any  reason  the  changes  increase,  the  NI 
increases  as  well,  and  vice  versa.  One  should  note  that  for  13  analyzed  intervals  (1  to 
13),  this  processing  gives  12 1„  values  (2  to  13)  and  11  NI„  values  (3  to  13). 

The  NI  values,  averaged  for  the  entire  group  of  13  spinal  cord  preparations,  are 
presented  in  Figure  4A.  Before  MMW  exposure,  NI  showed  only  minor  fluctuations 
and  stayed  virtually  at  100%.  The  first  MMW  irradiation  caused  a  pronounced  and 
highly  significant  (p  <  .02)  increase  in  NI,  testifying  that  MMWs  affected  the  function 
of  the  preparations.  This  effect  was  followed  by  a  decrease  in  NI  (perhaps  only  because 
the  high  I„  value  from  the  previous  interval  with  MMW  exposure  now  was  in  the  de¬ 
nominator  for  NI  calculation),  and  stabilization  at  about  100%.  The  second  MMW 
irradiation  did  not  produce  a  statistically  significant  effect. 

The  next  step  was  to  find  out  whether  this  physiological  effect  could  be  attributed 
to  MMW  heating  of  the  preparation  or  not.  Although  we  observed  no  changes  in  the 
superfusing  solution  temperature,  this  does  not  mean  that  the  temperature  of  the  spinal 
cord  itself  also  remained  stable  during  exposure.  For  each  particular  preparation,  the 
heating  caused  by  the  first  and  the  second  MMW  exposures  was  exactly  the  same 
(preparations  were  never  moved  or  altered  in  any  other  way  from  the  onset  of  the 
stabilization  period  to  the  end  of  the  entire  experiment).  In  other  words,  the  heating 
effect  of  the  first  and  the  second  exposures  was  always  the  same,  but  their  physiological 
effect  was  different. 

Because  the  size  of  the  spinal  cord  preparations  and  their  position  in  the  exposure 
bath  could  vary  slightly,  the  MMW  heating  of  the  individual  preparations  could  also 
be  somewhat  different.  For  the  thermal  mechanism  of  the  MMW  effect,  the  prepara¬ 
tions  with  a  greater  response  to  the  first  exposure  (because  they  were  heated  more  than 
the  others)  should  also  have  had  a  greater  response  to  the  second  exposure  (because 
the  heating  effect  in  both  instances  was  the  same).  However,  the  actual  situation  proved 
to  be  the  opposite. 

As  shown  in  Figure  4B,  nine  preparations  selected  for  their  greater  response  to 
the  first  MMW  exposure  showed  no  reaction  to  the  second  irradiation.  And,  quite 
unexpectedly,  the  remaining  4  preparations,  which  had  a  subtle  or  no  response  to  the 
first  exposure,  reacted  strongly  to  the  second  exposure  (Fig.  4C). 

This  type  of  reaction  to  MMWs  cannot  be  explained  by  a  thermal  mechanism. 
Earlier,  we  performed  comprehensive  studies  of  heating  effects  in  the  isolated  frog 
spinal  eord  (10,11),  as  well  as  in  other  isolated  preparations  of  excitable  tissues  of 
poikilothermic  animals  (4,12).  In  all  of  these  preparations,  a  reaction  to  repetitive  heat¬ 
ing  by  0.5-5°C  depended  solely  on  the  increase  in  temperature,  no  matter  how  many 
times  and  how  frequently  the  heating  was  done.  In  the  present  study,  the  pronounced 
difference  in  reactions  to  the  first  and  the  second  MMW  exposures  makes  a  strong  case 


124 


PAKHOMOV,  PROL,  AND  AKYEL 


that  the  effect  is  not  thermal  and  involves  specific  regulatory  processes,  such  as  adap¬ 
tation  and  sensitization. 

At  this  point,  physiological  interpretation  of  the  established  MMW  effect  appears 
exceedingly  complicated.  Conduction  of  a  signal  from  dorsal  to  ventral  roots  in  a  frog 
spinal  cord  includes  nerve  conduction  via  terminals  of  the  primary  afferents,  synaptic 
transmission  (through  both  chemical  and  electrical  synapses),  summation  of  postsy- 
naptic  potentials  on  inter-  and  motoneurons,  and  the  firing  of  these  neurons.  Any  of 
these  processes  could  be  affected  by  MMWs,  leading  to  an  alteration  of  the  moto¬ 
neurons’  discharge,  which  was  detected  as  a  change  in  the  DR-VRR  waveform.  With¬ 
out  consistent  changes  in  the  amplitude,  latency,  or  area  of  the  potentials,  this  effect 
should  be  regarded  as  a  mild  modulation  of  the  reflex  conduction  rather  than  its  inhi¬ 
bition  or  facilitation. 

An  important  conclusion  from  this  study  is  that  the  effect  of  even  a  short  MMW 
irradiation  is  not  limited  to  changes  taking  place  during  this  irradiation.  The  aftereffect 
of  the  first  MMW  exposure  was  not  detectable  by  physiological  indices,  but  manifested 
itself  as  a  change  in  the  sensitivity  to  the  second  exposure.  Moreover,  this  aftereffect 
could  be  either  a  decrease  or  an  increase  in  the  sensitivity  of  the  preparation,  depending 
on  whether  the  preparation  responded  to  the  first  exposure  or  not.  The  possibility  of 
this  long-lasting  alteration  of  MMW  sensitivity  must  be  taken  into  account  in  further 
experimentation,  particularly  when  studying  effects  of  prolonged  or  repetitive  MMW 
exposures. 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The  work  described  here  was  performed  while  A.G.  Pakhomov  held  a  National 
Research  Council-AMRMC  Research  Associateship,  and  was  supported  by  the  U.S. 
Army  Medical  Research  and  Material  Command  under  contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069 
awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices.  The  views,  opinions,  and  findings  contained  in  this 
report  are  those  of  the  authors,  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official  Department 
of  the  Army  position,  policy,  or  decision. 


REFERENCES 

1.  Burachas,  G.,  and  Mascoliunas,  R.:  Suppression  of  nerve  action  potential  under 
the  effect  of  millimeter  waves,  in  Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,  N.D. 
Devyatkov,  ed.,  Radioelectornica,  Moscow,  168-175, 1989. 

2.  Sazonov  A.Yu.,  and  Rizshkova,  L.V.:  Effects  of  electromagnetic  radiation  of  mil¬ 
limeter  range  on  biological  subjects  of  various  complexity,  in  Millimeter  Waves  in 
Medicine  and  Biology,  Digest  of  papers  of  the  10th  Russian  Symposium  (April  1995, 
Moscow,  Russia),  IRE  RAN,  Moscow,  112-114, 1995. 

3.  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Prol,  H.K.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Campbell,  C.B.G.:  Fre¬ 
quency-specific  effects  of  millimeter  wavelength  electromagnetic  radiation  in  iso¬ 
lated  nerve.  Electro-  Magnetobiol.  16, 43-57, 1997. 

4.  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Prol,  H.K.,  Mathur,  S.P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Campbell,  C.B.G.:  Search 
for  frequency-specific  effects  of  millimeter-wave  radiation  on  isolated  nerve  func¬ 
tion,  Bioelectromagnetics  18, 324-334, 1997. 


MM  WAVES  AND  SYNAPTIC  TRANSMISSION 


125 


5.  Chemyakov,  G.M.,  Korochkin,  V.L.,  Babenko,  A.P.,  and  Bigdai,  E.V.:  Reactions 
of  biological  systems  ofvarious  complexity  to  the  action  of  low-level  EHF  radiation, 
in  Millimeter  Waves  in  Medicine  and  Biology,  N.D.  Devyatkov,  ed.,  Radioelec- 
tronica,  Moscow,  141-167, 1989. 

6.  Khramov,  R.N.,  Sosunov,  E.A.,  Koltun,  S.V.,  Ilyasova,  E.N.,  and  Lednev,  V.V.: 
Millimeter-wave  effects  on  electric  activity  of  crayfish  stretch  receptors,  Bioelec¬ 
tromagnetics  12,  203-214, 1991. 

7.  Alekseev,  S.I.,  and  Ziskin,  M.C.:  Millimeter  waves  thermally  alter  the  firing  rate 
of  the  Lymnaea  pacemaker  neuron.  Bioelectromagnetics  18, 89-98, 1997. 

8.  Kudo,  Y.:  The  pharmacology  of  the  amphibian  spinal  cord.  Prog.  Neurobiol.  11, 
1-78, 1978. 

9.  Walton,  K.,  and  Fulton,  B.:  Hydrogen  peroxide  as  a  source  of  molecular  oxygen 
for  in  vitro  mammalian  CNS  preparations.  Brain  Res.  278, 387-393, 1983. 

10.  Pakhomov,  A.G.:  Effect  of  microwave  irradiation  and  temperature  on  spontaneous 
ventral  root  discharges  in  frog  spinal  cord.  Neurophysiology  20, 723-728, 1988. 

11.  Pakhomov,  A.G.;  Effects  of  high-power  microwaves  on  synaptic  transmission  in 
frog  spinal  cord,  Sechenov  Physiol.  J.  USSR  77, 37-44, 1991. 

12.  Pakhomov,  A.G.,  Dubovick,  B.V.,  Kolupayev,  V.E.,  and  Pronkevich,  A.N.:  Ab¬ 
sence  of  non-thermal  microwave  effects  on  the  function  of  giant  nerve  fibers,  J. 
Bioelectr.  10, 185-203, 1991. 


ERROR  CORRECTION  IN  TRANSIENT  ELECTROMAGNETIC  FIELD 
MEASUREMENTS  USING  DECONVOLUTION  TECHNIQUES 


Jian-Zhong  Bao,  Jonathan  C.  Lee,  Michael  E.  Belt,  David  D.  Cox, 
Satnam  P.  Mathur,  and  Shin-Tsu  Lu 

McKesson  Bio  Services  and  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas  78235 


INTRODUCTION 

It  is  difficult  to  make  an  accurate  transient  measurement  on  electromagnetic  pulses  in  the 
pico-second  domain  because  of  the  limitations  of  measurement  components.  In  this  paper, 
we  present  a  two-step  deconvolution  routine  to  compensate  for  the  measurement  distortions 
in  our  short  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  exposure  facility  for  studying  biological  effects.  As 
depicted  in  Figure  1,  the  facility  mainly  consists  of  a  pulse  generator  and  a  GTEM  cell.  The 
measurement  system  includes  a  Tektronix  SCD  5000  transient  digitizer  (4.5  GHz  bandwidth), 
connection  cables,  and  two  Asymptotic  Conical  Dipole  (ACD)  D-dot  (dD/dt)  sensors:  ACD- 
1(A),  which  is  mounted  on  the  top  ground  wall  of  the  ceU  and  utilized  for  real  time  monitoring 
during  exposures,  and  ACD~1(R),  which  is  used  to  map  the  field  on  the  bottom  ground  wall 
of  the  cell  where  the  specimens  are  placed. 


High  Frequency  Absorber 


Septum 

Monitoring  D-dot  Sensor:  ACD-1  (A) 
Mapping  D-dot  Sensor:  ACD-1  (R) 
Access  Screen  Door 


'  4'  RG220  Cable 


Spark 

Gap 


Mallory  8  mm  Silicone 
Suppression  Wire 

1:120 

High  Voltage 
Pulse  Transformer 


Gamma  HV  Research 

1 

RRM000R/M373 

1 

500  V 

Tek  SCD  5000 
(Bandwidth=  4.5  GHz) 


DC  Supply  ^ 

Trigger  In 

Figure  1:  Short  electromagnetic  pulse  (EMP)  exposure  facility  and  data  acquisition  system. 


Ultra-Wideband,  Short-Pulse  Electromagnetics  3 
Edited  by  Baum  et  al.  Plenum  Press,  New  York,  1997 


373 


Because  of  the  low-pass  nature  of  the  connection  cables  and  the  limited  bandwidth  of 
the  SCD  5000,  the  measured  signal  is  a  distorted  output  of  a  D-dot  sensor.  An  empirical 
transfer  function  of  the  cable-digitizer  system  is  evaluated  using  a  reference  impulse  generated 
by  a  Pico  Second  Pulse  Lab  (PSPL)  4050B  step  generator  with  a  5210  Impulse  Forming 
Network  (IFN)  and  characterized  with  a  Tektronix  CSA  803  communication  signal  analyzer 
with  a  SD  30  sampling  head  (40  GHz  bandwidth).  The  reference  impulse  is  injected  into 
the  connection  cable  at  the  D-dot  sensor  end  and  measured  with  the  SCD  5000  while  the 
cable  is  kept  in  the  same  position  as  for  making  D-dot  measurements  to  ensure  an  in-place 
calibration. 

Due  to  its  right- angle  structures,  the  ACD-l(R)  gives  a  different  output  from  that  of  ACD- 
1(A)  to  the  same  pulse,  especially  to  the  fast  leading  edge  although  the  sensing  elements  for 
both  sensors  are  the  same.  The  right- angle  bends  in  ACD-l(R)  cause  reflections  of  D-dot 
signals  in  the  sensor.  To  correct  the  errors  due  to  the  reflections,  we  have  developed  a 
semi-empirical  procedure:  the  impulse  response  of  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor  is  assumed  as  a 
summation  of  5-function  and  its  parameters  are  determined  with  a  reference  measurement 
using  ACD-l(A)  and  an  optimization  procedure  with  Levenberg-Marguardt  algorithm  [1]. 


ITERATIVE  CAUSAL  DECONVOLUTION 

By  assuming  that  the  measurement  system  is  linear  and  time-invariant  (LTI),  we  can  have 

/+00 

v{r)h{t  —  T)dr n{t) ^  (1) 

-oo 

where  u{t)  is  the  measured  signal,  v{t)  is  the  true  signal  before  any  degradations,  h{t)  is  the 
system  impulse  response,  n{t)  is  the  additive  noise,  and  *  denotes  convolution,  which  smears 
fast  changing  features  in  v(t).  Here  we  have  an  inverse  problem:  finding  v{t)  from  u(t),  h(t), 
and  n(t),  i.e.,  deconvolution,  which  is  an  ill-posed  problem  mathematically:  small  changes 
in  u{t)  can  be  mapped  into  large  changes  in  v(t).  This  is  such  a  serious  problem  that  an 
effective  noise-control  procedure  has  to  be  implemented  because  none  of  the  measurements 
are  noise-free.  Performing  Fourier  transform  on  Eq.  (1),  we  get 


U{f)^V{f)H{f)^N{f),  (2) 

where  upper  case  letters  are  Fourier  transforms  of  the  corresponding  lower  case  letters,  re¬ 
spectively,  H{f)  is  the  system  transfer  function,  and  /  is  the  frequency.  Now  v{t)  can  be 
solved  by  performing  inverse-Fourier  transform: 


v{t)  =  F-\ 


Uif)-N{f) 
H{f)  ^ 


(3) 


where  stands  for  inverse  Fourier  transform.  If  we  had  an  exact  knowledge  about  ?/(/), 
N{f)j  and  H(f)  in  the  entire  frequency  range,  and  if  the  measurement  system,  as  assumed, 
were  LTI,  v{t)  can  be  recovered  exactly.  Unfortunately,  none  of  the  above  information  can  be 
obtained  exactly  in  practice  because  of  the  ever  presence  of  noise  and  error.  In  general,  the 
noise  spectra  N{f)  cannot  be  separated  from  the  measured  signal  spectra  U{f)  unless  there 
are  other  information  or  assumptions  available.  So  Eq.  (3)  can  only  be  applied  approximately 
with  U{f)  —  N{f)  ^  U(/).  To  minimize  the  error  due  to  N{f)  in  the  least  square  sense, 
we  applied  a  Wiener  filter[l]:  ^(/)  =  1—  |  N(f)  /  |  U{f)  |^.  If  we  assume  that  the 
power  spectra  of  noise  |  N{f)  with  a  D-dot  signal  excitation  is  the  same  as  that  after  the 
excitation,  we  can  obtain  it  from  a  measurement  in  a  time  window  of  the  same  size  that  is 
remote  after  the  excitation.  In  this  study,  all  the  waveforms  were  sampled  with  1024  points 
in  a  10  ns  window,  which  gives  a  maximum  frequency  of  51.15  GHz,  and  are  the  average  of 
200  waveforms  to  remove  random  noises  and  increase  the  signal-to-noise  ratio.  All  the  raw 
data  was  pre-treated  before  applying  the  Fast  Fourier  Transform  (FFT).  The  pre-treatment 


includes  subtracting  baseline  offset,  converting  attenuator  factor,  zero-padding  to  avoid  aliases 
and  to  make  u  periodically  causal,  and  data- windowing  to  avoid  sharp  changes  at  the  edges. 
Since  the  signal  is  over  sampled,  a  low  pass  filter,  L(/),  is  mandatory.  With  $(/)  and  L{f), 
Eq.  (3)  can  be  rewritten  as 


v{t)  ^  -F-H^(/)}  =  -F~H— (4) 

where  the  cutoff  edge  of  !.(/)  is  a  half  Hann  window  [1].  Another  problem  is  that,  in  gen¬ 
eral,  directly  performing  F  ^  in  Eq.  (4)  does  not  guarantee  a  causal  v(t)  from  band-limited 
frequency  domain  data,  and  the  absence  of  causality  may  cause  errors  although  an  acausal 
inverse-transform  generally  gives  satisfactory  results.  To  enforce  causality  on  v{t),  the  real 
(Vr)  and  imaginary  (Vj)  part  of  y(/)  in  Eq.  (4)  must  follow  the  Hilbert  transform[2]: 

j  N-i  ^  (  N,  k  =  0, 

“  XI  -  m),  where  YN{k)  =  <  -j2  cot(7rA;/2),  k  =  odd,  (5) 

0,  k  ~  even, 

where  j  —  y/—l  and  N  is  the  total  number  of  data  point  including  zero-padding, 

1  . 

jVi{k)  =  —  X  -  m),  and  (6) 

m—0 

1  .. 

7r(^)  =  X  0yi{m)Zr^{k  ~m)  +  v(0)  -f  (-l)^i;(iV/2),  (7) 

m=0 

where  Zj\[{k)  =  Y]\[{k)  —  NS{k).  In  the  time  domain,  above  relations  can  be  represented  as: 

v{n)  =  Ve(n)y!^{n),  and  Vo{n)  ^  Ve{n)zj^{n),  (8) 

where  vn  =  IFFT{yjv}/iV,  -  IFFT{^jv}/A^,  I'e  -  IFFT{yij}/A,  and  i;o  -  IFFT{iV/}/A, 

where  IFFT  stands  for  inverse  FFT,  Ve  and  Vo  are  even  and  odd  parts  of  v  =  Vg  +  Vo^  respec¬ 
tively.  V  is  referred  periodically  causal  if  v{n)  —  0  for  n  >  N/2. 

Eqs.  (5)  to  (7)  suggest  that  a  causal  v  can  be  restored  completely  from  the  real  part  or 
almost  from  the  imaginary  part.  In  practice,  since  Vr  and  Vj  may  not  foUow  the  Hilbert 
transform,  the  causal  v  recovered  from  Vr  alone  will  not  be  consistent  with  that  restored 
from  Vj.  To  overcome  this  disagreement,  we  have  improved  an  algorithm  initially  developed 
by  Sarkar  et  al.  [3]  to  extract  the  causal  time  domain  sequence  in  an  iterative  manner.  Our 
algorithm  shows  a  faster  and  more  stable  convergence.  In  Eqs.  (4)  and  (12),  F~^  means  the 
following  iterative  procedure: 


1.  Calculate  an  even  and  an  odd  time  domain  sequence  with  Ug  =  IFFT{T^}/iNr  and 

Vo  =  IFFT{jVj}/N^  respectively,  and  calculate  S  —  +  Vo{i)]^. 

2.  Create  a  new  odd  time  domain  sequence  as 

Vo,new(0  :N-1)  =  {0,  ^(1  :  N/2  -  1)  -h  Ve(l  :  N/2  -  l)]/2, 

0,  [vo{N/2  +  1  :  iv  -  1)  -  Ve{N/2  +  1:N~  l)]/2}. 

3.  Calculate  a  new  imaginary  part  of  frequency  domain  data  with  Vj^new  =  FFT{t;o,new}- 

4.  Create  an  average  imaginary  part  of  frequency  domain  data  as 
Vi,avg{0  :  N/2)  =  {0,  [Vj{l  :  N/2  -  1)  -h  y/,neu,(l  :  N/2  -  l)]/2,  0},  and 

^l,avg{N/2  +  1  :  iV  —  1)  =  —Vj^avg{N/2  —  1  :  1),  where  V7,ovp(0  :  iV  —  1)  has  been  forced 
to  follow  the  symmetric  property  that  ensures  a  real  inverse  transform. 


375 


5.  Calculate  another  new  odd  time  domain  sequence  with  Vo^avg  =  IFFT{jVj^avg}/^ • 

6.  Create  a  new  even  sequence  as 

t^e,ne^  =  {t^e(O),  be(l  :  N/2  -  1)  +  Vo.avgil  :  N/2  -  l)]/2, 

Ve{N/2),  [ve{N/2  +  1  :  iv  -  1)  -  Vo,avg{N/2  +  1  :  iV  -  l)]/2}. 

7.  Calculate  a  new  real  part  of  frequency  domain  data  with  VR^new  =  FFT{i;e,ncty}- 

8.  Create  an  average  real  part  of  frequency  domain  data  as 
VR,avg{0  :  N/2)  =  {[Vr{Q  :  N/2)  +  VR,new{0  :  N/2)]/2},  and 

VR^avg{N/2  +  1  :  iV  -  1)  =  VR^avg{N/2  -1:1),  where  VR^avgi^  :N-1)  has  been  forced 
to  follow  the  symmetric  property  that  ensures  a  real  inverse  transform. 

9.  Calculate  another  even  part  of  time  domain  sequence  with  Ve  =  IFFTjVii^ov^j/iV'o 

10.  Calculate  a  better  causal  sequence  with  v  =  Ve  +  Vo  and  Snew  — 
smaller  Snew  impHes  a  better  periodically  causal  v. 

11.  Calculate  |  Snew  —  S  \  /Snew  If  it  is  less  than  a  sufficient  resolution,  say  10“^,  stop 

the  iteration  and  output  a  causal  time  domain  sequence  v]  otherwise,  let  Vr  =  VR^newj 
Vj  =  Vj^newj  —  '^e,neiyj  '^o  ~  '^o,7ievJi  and  S  —  Snew-^  and  go  to  step  2.  ^ 

COMPENSATION  FOR  CONNECTION  CABLE  AND  SCD  5000 

A  PSPL  405 OB  step  generator  with  a  5210  IFN  was  utihzed  to  generate  an  impulse  with 
a  magnitude  of  2.8  V  and  a  pulse-width  of  58  ps  as  the  reference.  Since  the  output  impulses 
from  the  IFN  are  identical,  they  can  be  characterized  by  a  CSA  803  with  a  SD30  sampling 
head.  The  characterized  pico-second  impulse  was  injected  into  the  connecting  cable  between 
the  D-dot  sensor  and  the  SCD  5000  at  the  D-dot  sensor  end.  Figure  2  shows  the  reference 
impulse  characterized  by  the  CSA  803,  the  impulse  measured  by  the  SCD  5000,  and  the 
respective  Fourier  spectra.  There  is  a  significant  difference  between  the  reference  and  the 
measured  impulses  in  both  time  and  frequency  domain.  The  magnitudes  of  the  FFT  spectra 
suggest  that  the  reference  impulse  is  much  stronger  than  measured  impulse  in  a  wide  frequency 
range  (DC-20  GHz),  which  gives  us  the  physical  basis  that  we  can  numerically  expand  the 
bandwidth  of  the  measurement  hardware  to  a  wider  frequency  range. 


Figure  2:  Comparison  between  the  reference  impulse  characterized  using  a  CSA  803  with  a 
SD30  sampling  head  and  the  measured  impulse  with  SCD  5000  in  time  and  frequency  domain. 

Rearranging  Eq.  (1)  to  a  form  for  the  evaluation  of  system  transfer  function,  we  have: 

H"  T^outi/')  ~  [^m(t)  “{“  ^i7i(t)]  *  hcrf(t),  (9) 


376 


where  X(nit{f^)-\-nout{'t)  is  the  impulse  measured  by  the  SCD  5000,  in  which  x^utit)  is  the  desired 
signal  we  want  to  obtain  and  ncmtit)  is  the  additive  noise,  Xin(t)  +  nin{t)  is  the  characterized 
impulse  by  the  CSA  803,  in  which  Xin(t)  is  the  real  signal  and  nin{t)  is  the  noise,  and  hcd{t) 
is  the  impulse  response  of  the  cable-digitizer  system  to  be  obtained  from  the  measurements. 
By  taking  Fourier  transform  on  Eq.  (9),  we  can  get  the  frequency  domain  form: 


.  .  Xcratif) -\- N^tif)  _  .  .  l~\-Nout{f)/X^t{f) 

Xinif)  +  Nir^if)  1  +  NUf)/XUf) 


(10) 


where  the  upper  case  letters  stand  for  the  Fourier  spectra  of  the  corresponding  lower  case 
letters,  respectively,  and  H{f)  —  Xout{f)/Xin{f)  is  the  true  transfer  function.  The  fraction 
term  behind  H{f)  is  the  noise  contribution,  which  is  close  to  one  at  the  frequencies  at  which 
the  signal-to-noise  ratios  of  measured  data  are  very  large.  At  the  frequencies  where  Xin{f)  is 
close  to  zero,  Xout{f)  should  be  close  to  zero,  too.  Consequently,  Hcdif)  is  just  noise.  Since 
H{f)  can  only  be  obtained  approximately  in  practice,  an  exact  deconvolution  is  inherently 
impossible  [4]. 

Hcd  was  utilized  in  Eq.  (4)  as  the  transfer  function,  i/,  to  compensate  the  effect  of  the 
connection  cable  and  the  SCD  5000  for  the  measurements  obtained  with  a  mounted  ACD-l(A) 
on  the  top  ground  wall.  Figure  3  shows  the  measured  and  cable-digitizer  compensated  D-dot, 
E  field,  and  energy  density  spectra  of  corresponding  E  field  at  a  pulse  repetition  frequency 
of  60  Hz.  Clearly,  the  compensated  data  give  a  faster  rise  time  and  a  higher  magnitude  than 
those  directly  measured.  The  comparison  of  their  pulse  parameters  is  listed  in  Table  1. 


Comparison  of  D-dot 


Figure  3:  Comparison  between  cable-digitizer  compensated  (solid  lines)  and  uncompensated 
(dashed  lines)  D-dot,  E  field,  and  energy  density  spectra  of  E  field.  The  measurement  was 
done  with  an  ACD-1(A)  D-dot  sensor  at  a  pulse  repetition  frequency  of  60  Hz. 


377 


Table  1.  Comparison  of  pulse  parameters  between  the  uncompensated  and  the  cable-digitizer 
compensated  E  filed  presented  in  Figure  3. 


rise  time  (ps) 

magnitude  (kV/m) 

pulse  width  (ns) 

uncompensated  E  field  234 

84.8 

1.11 

compensated  E  field  166 

107.6 

0,98 

COMPENSATION  FOR  REFLECTIONS  IN  D-DOT  SENSOR  ACD-l(R) 

The  sensing  elements  (“eggs”)  in  both  ACD-l(R)  and  ACD-1(A)  are  the  same  while  they 
are  connected  to  the  respective  SMA  connectors  differently.  In  ACD-l(A),  the  sensing  element 
and  the  SMA  connector  are  joined  in  the  axial  direction  directly  while,  in  ACD-l(R),  they  are 
connected  by  a  coaxial  line  through  three  right- angle  bends  in  the  radial  direction,  as  drawn 
in  Figure  4. 


ACD-1  (R)  ACD-1  (A) 


Figure  4:  Schematic  diagrams  of  ACD-l(R)  and  ACD-1  (A)  D-dot  sensors. 

The  right-angle  bends  of  ACD-1  (R)  cause  reflections  of  D-dot  signals  in  the  sensor.  The 
reflections  result  in  a  magnitude  reduction  and  a  “shoulder”  on  the  falling  edge  of  the  first 
spike,  as  shown  in  Figure  5(a).  Although  there  are  only  minor  influences  on  its  slow  variation 
part,  there  is  a  clear  effect  on  the  fast  leading  edge  of  the  pulse,  as  shown  in  Figure  5(b), 
which  is  important  for  estimating  the  rise  time. 


Comparison  of  measured  D— dot  with  ACD— 1  (A)  and  ACD— 1  (R) 


Comparison  of  cable— digitizer  compensated  E— field  with  ACD— 1  (A)  and  ACD— 1  (R) 


Figure  5:  Comparison  of  (a)  measured  D-dot  with  ACD- 1(A)  (solid  lines)  and  ACD-l(R) 
(dashed  lines)  at  a  symmetric  pair  of  locations  on  the  top  and  the  bottom  ground  walls, 
respectively,  and  (b)  their  corresponding  cable-digitizer  compensated  E  field  wave  forms. 


The  output  of  ACD-l(R)  is  the  transmission  of  the  original  signal  plus  scaled  and  delayed 
replicas  of  the  original  signal,  therefore  its  impulse  response  can  be  modeled  as 

h{t)  =  +  a\6{t  —  r\) a28{t  —  (11) 

where  <  1,  (A:  ==  0, 1, 2)  are  the  scaled  coefficients,  and  Tk>  0,  (A;  =  1,2)  are  the  delay  times. 
We  did  not  take  the  effects  of  the  sensing  element  into  account  because  it  has  a  bandwidth 
>  10  GHz  [5],  and  ignored  the  low  pass  nature  of  the  coaxial  line  and  the  SMA  connector. 
The  first  ^-function  in  Eq.  (11)  is  for  the  transmitted  D-dot  signal  through  the  right-angle 
bends,  and  rest  of  them  are  for  the  refiections.  Prom  Figure  5(a),  it  seems  that  only  the  first 
refiection  has  an  obvious  effect  on  the  E  field,  so  we  only  include  two  reflections:  one  for  the 
right-angle  band  at  the  joint  between  the  “egg”  and  the  coaxial  line,  and  another  for  a  bend 
at  SMA  connector.  For  a  given  set  of  parameters,  P  =  {ao,  ai,ri,  ♦  •  •},  the  distortion  due  to 
the  refiections  in  ACD-l(R)  and  the  cable-digitizer  limitations  can  be  compensated  together 
with  " 


Wrec{t,'P)=F 


Hcd{f)Hdd{f,P) 


}. 


(12) 


Comparison  of  D— dot 


Figure  6:  D-dot  and  E  field  measured  using  an  ACD-l(R)  compensated  with  Eq.  (4)  (dashed 
line)  and  Eq.  (12)  with  the  optimized  parameters  (dash-dot  line),  and  those  measured  using 
an  ACD-1(A)  compensated  with  Eq.  (4)  (solid  line). 

where  Hddift  P)  is  the  transfer  function  given  by 

Hddif.  P)  =  ao  +  -h  (13) 

where  u  is  the  angular  frequency.  For  a  different  P,  we  get  a  different  Wrec-  To  determine  P, 
we  have  developed  an  optimization  procedure  which  uses  the  Levenberg-Marguardt  algorithm 
[1]  to  minimize  an  objective  function  (S):  the  parameters  are  adjusted  in  time  domain  while 


379 


tlie  derivatives  are  calculated  in  frequency  domain  and  then  transformed  back  to  time  domain 
[6].  S  is  defined  as 


JV/2-1 

S(P)=  Y.  W{t„)[Eref{tn)-Eree(tn,P)?,  (14) 

n=0 

where  W  is  the  weighting  factor,  £?re/(tn)  =  ^Ylk-0'^ref{'^k)i  used  as  a  reference,  is  the  j* 

E  field  obtained  from  the  cable-digitizer  compensated  D-dot  measured  using  the  mounted 
ACD-l(A),  ErecCtnjP)  =  P)  Is  the  E  field  after  cable-digitizer  and  D-dot 

sensor  compensation  for  a  measurement  using  an  ACD-l(R)  at  a  specific  location  on  the 
bottom  ground  wall  that  is  symmetric  to  the  ACD-l(A)  about  center  septum,  as  indicated  in 
Figure  1.  c  is  a  converting  coefficient.  By  the  symmetry  of  the  cell,  Free  and  Eref  should  be  ^ 
very  close  to  each  other,  and  the  observed  difference  is  mainly  due  to  the  reflections  in  ACD- 
1(R).  It  has  been  found  that  utilizing  the  wave  forms  of  E  field  in  the  optimization  procedure  | 

gives  a  better  recovery  to  its  leading  edge  than  that  obtained  with  D-dot  wave  forms.  Figure  6  t 

shows  the  results  for  the  best  fitted  parameters;  oq  =  .72,  ai  =  .28,  ri  =  81.2  ps,  02  =  .01, 
and  r2  =  510  ps,  from  which  we  can  see  the  reflection  at  the  SMA  connector  is  very  minor. 
Although  the  semi-empirical  method  requires  more  computation,  it  is  of  following  advantages: 

(i)  more  clear  physics,  (ii)  easier  portability  for  transform  function  due  to  a  small  number  of 
parameters,  and  (iii)  wider  valid  frequency  range  because  of  using  an  analytical  model. 

In  summary,  we  have  presented  an  error  compensation  routine  for  the  electromagnetic 
pulse  measurements  in  the  pico  second  domain,  which  includes  an  algorithm  of  an  iterative 
causal  deconvolution  and  evaluations  of  an  empirical  transfer  function  for  a  cable-digitizer 
system  and  a  semi-empirical  transfer  function  for  an  ACD-l(R)  D-dot  sensor. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This  work  is  supported  by  the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command  under 
contract  DAMD17-94-C-4069  awarded  to  McKesson  BioServices.  The  views,  opinions  and/or 
findings  contained  in  this  report  are  those  of  the  authors  and  should  not  be  construed  as 
an  official  Department  of  Army  position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so  designated  by  other 
do  cument  at  ion . 

REFERENCES 

[1]  W.  H.  Press,  B.  P.  Flannery,  S.  A.  Teukolsky,  and  W.  T.  Vetterling.  Numerical  Recipes 
in  C.  Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge,  UK,  2  edition,  1992. 

[2]  A.  V.  Oppenheim  and  R.  W.  Schafer.  Discrete-Time  Signal  Processing.  Prentice  Hall, 

New  Jersey,  1989. 

[3]  T.  Sarkar,  H.  Wang,  R.  Adve,  and  M.  Moturi.  Evaluation  of  a  causal  time  domain 
response  from  bandlimited  frequency  domain  data.  In  H.  L.  Bertoni,  L.  Carin,  and  L.  B. 
Felsen,  editors.  Ultra- Wideband,  Short-Pulse  Electromagnetics^  pages  501-515,  Plenum 
Press,  New  York,  1993. 

[4]  N.  S.  Nahman.  Software  correction  of  measured  pulse  data.  In  J,  E.  Thompson  and  L.  H. 
Luessen,  editors,  Fast  Electrical  and  Optical  Measurements.  Volume  /,  pages  351-417, 
Martinus  Nijhoff  Publishers,  Boston,  1986. 

[5]  Specification  of  ACD  D-dot  Sensor  (Data  Sheet  1119).  EG&G  Washington  Analytical 
Services  Center,  Inc.,  Albuquerque,  New  Mexico,  1987. 

[6]  J.-Z.  Bao.  Time  domain  optimization  with  frequency  domain  derivatives.  To  be  published. 


380 


Contract  No. 
DAMD17-94-C-4069 


Technical  Report  on  the  Safety  of  Army 
Personnel  from  Exposure  to  Radiofrequency 
Radiation  from  Advanced  Membrane 
Transducer  Antenna 

Submitted  to: 

Bruce  E.  Stuck,  Director 
U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment 
Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas 


McKesson  BioServices 

14665  Rothgeb  Drive 

Rockville,  MD  20850 

i 

,  IvKO-lfe - 

Satns 

PniMathuV,  Ph.  D. 

Sr.  Electrical  Engineer 

June  12, 1998 

Shin-Tsu  Lu,  Ph.  D. 

Sr.  Research  Scientist 

An  Equal  Opportunity  Employer 


Technical  Report  on  the  Safety  of  Army  Personnel  From  Exposure  to  Radiofrequency 
Radiation  from  Advanced  Membrane  Transducer  Antenna 

The  US  Army  Dismounted  Battlespace  Battle  Lab  (DBBL)  ACT  II  Advanced  Membrane 
Transducer  (AMT)  Antenna  has  been  developed  for  the  US  Army  to  provide  increased  flexibility 
while  operating  in  urban  environment.  It  is  intended  to  be  attached  directly  to  vehicles,  radio 
systems  or  worn  in  a  soldiers’  BDU.  A  technical  assesment  of  AMT  antenna  has  been  completed 
to  determine  if  the  radiofrequency  radiation  (RFR)  from  the  antenna  conforms  to  the  permissible 
exposure  limits  (PEL)  as  defined  in  DoD  Instruction  Number  6055. 1 1  (February  21,  1995). 

Even  though  AMT  antenna  was  found  to  produce  large  electric  fields  close  to  the  antenna 
surface,  the  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  was  found  to  be  lower  than  those  prescribed  in  the 
safety  guidelines.  The  induced  currents  in  the  ankle  and  wrist  was  also  found  to  be  within  the 
safety  limits.  Specific  recommendations  regarding  safe  use  of  this  device,  when  worn  by  a  soldier, 
are  included. 

Introduction 

The  US  Army  DBBL  ACT  II  AMT  antenna  is  a  planar,  conformal  antenna  designed  to  be 
attached  directly  to  vehicles,  radio  systems  or  worn  in  a  soldiers’  BDU.  No  additional  hardware 
or  ground  plane  is  required.  It  is  fed  by  a  standard  RG-58  cable  and  measures  19.6  cm  by  14  cm 
in  size.  Typical  operating  parameters  are;  SINGCARS  30  -  88  MHz,  5  watts,  though  it  has  been 
effectively  operated  by  US  Forces  from  1  W  to  100  W, 

Since,  the  AMT  antenna  is  going  to  be  mounted  on  a  soldier’s  back,  there  is  a  need  for 
quantifying  maximum  induced  currents  and  local  SAR  distribution  in  the  human  body  in  the 
immediate  vicinity  of  the  antenna.  Radio  Frequency  PELs  ( 1)  applicable  to  the  intended  use  of 
the  AMT  antenna,  in  the  frequency  range  of  interest,  are: 

For  controlled  environments: 

1.  •  A  spatial  peak  SAR,  not  exceeding  8  W/kg  as  averaged  over  any  1  g  of  tissue 


1 


2.  The  induced  currents  in  the  body  conform  with  the  maximum  permissible  exposure 
(MPE)  in  Table  1  of  reference  (a);  viz,  100  mA  through  each  foot  of  a  free¬ 
standing  individuals  (not  in  contact  with  metallic  objects). 

For  Uncontrolled  Environments: 

1 ,  A  spatial  peak  SAR,  not  exceeding  1,6  W/kg  as  averaged  over  any  1  g  of  tissue, 

2,  The  induced  currents  in  the  body  conform  with  the  maximum  permissible  exposure  (MPE) 
in  Table  1  of  reference  (a);  viz,  45  mA  through  each  foot  of  a  free-standing  individuals 
(not  in  contact  with  metallic  objects). 

In  addition,  root  mean  square  (RMS)  electric  field  strengths  would  be  restricted  to  61.4 
V/m  for  controlled  environments  and  to  27.5  V/m  for  uncontrolled  environments.  However,  for 
partial  body  exposures,  which  is  the  case  with  intended  use  AMT  antenna,  the  peak  value  of 
mean  squared  electric  field  can  be  up  to  20  times  the  values  stated  above,  i.e.,  754  kVVm^  for 
controlled  environments  and  151.25  kVVm^  for  uncontrolled  environments  or  peak  electric  field 
strengths  of  274.6  V/m  and  123  V/m  for  controlled  and  uncontrolled  environments  respectively. 

The  intended  use  of  AMT  antenna  conforms  to  the  definition  of  a  controlled  environment. 
For  other  personnel  working  in  the  vicinity,  who  will  be  exposed  to  the  radiation  from  the 
antenna,  limits  for  the  uncontrolled  environment  will  apply.  If  SAR  and  induced  currents  conform 
to  limits  placed  on  the  controlled  environment  exposures,  then  it  is  likely  to  also  conform  to  the 
uncontrolled  environments  as  electromagnetic  field  will  drop  substantially  away  from  the  antenna. 

It  is  to  be  noted  that  low  power  device  exclusions  mentioned  in  section  4.2  of  the  safety 
standards  do  not  apply  in  this  case  since  the  device  (AMT  antenna)  is  designed  to  be  used  at  a 
distance  of  less  than  2.5  cm  from  the  body. 


Testing  the  AMT  Antenna 


The  testing  of  the  AMT  antenna  was  divided  into  three  distinct  categories: 

Free-space  Tests:  These  tests  were  conducted  to  determine  direction  and  amplitude  of  maximum 
fields,  to  determine  if  there  are  any  RF  hot  spots,  and  to  determine  the  rate  at  which  electric  field 
strength  falls  with  distance.  Following  tests  were  conducted: 

a.  near-zone  angular  radiation  pattern, 

b.  near-zone  field  distribution  on  a  plane  parallel  to  the  antenna  surface 

c.  variation  of  electric  field  with  increasing  axial  distance  from  the  antenna  suiface 

All  free-space  tests  were  conducted  at  a  mid  frequency  of  50  MHZ.  All  the  tests  were 
conducted  in  an  anechoic  chamber  appropriate  for  low  frequency  operation. 

Tests  to  Determine  Surface  Heating;  A  muscle  equivalent  phantom  of  human  torso  was 
constructed  according  to  the  recipe  given  in  RFR  dosimetry  handbook  (2)  for  a  frequency  of  70 
MHZ.  This  frequency  was  chosen  because  the  recipe  was  available  at  frequencies  of  40.68,  70 
and  100  MHZ.  Since  the  frequency  of  operation  of  AMT  antenna  is  30  -  88  MHZ,  the  recipe  at 
70  MHZ  will  model  the  electrical  characteristics  (conductivity  and  dielectric  constant)  of  the 
muscle  equivalent  material  fairly  well  from  30  to  88  MHZ.  The  conductivity  of  muscle  equivalent 
material  at  70  MHZ  is  0.79  S/m.  The  conductivity  is  12.7%  higher  at  100  MHZ  (0.89  S/m)  and 
13.9  %  lower  at  40,68  MHZ  (0.68  S/m).  The  dielectric  constant  of  muscle  equivalent  material  at 
70  MHZ  is  84.0  and  it  is  15,5%  higher  at  40  68  MHZ  (97.0)  and  14  6  %  lower  at  100  MHZ 
(71.7).  Therefore,  a  muscle  equivalent  phantom  of  human  torso  at  70  MHZ  yields  a  maximum 
error  of  ±1 5%  at  other  frequencies  of  interest. 

A  thermographic  camera  system  was  also  used  to  determine: 

a.  surface  heating  of  the  antenna  and  feed-cable  system 


3 


b.  possible  thermal  hot  spots  (temperature  rise)  on  the  surface  of  the  phantom. 

Three  measurements  were  done  at  various  frequencies  of  interest. 

Induced  Current  and  SAR  Measurements 

SAR  Distribution:  Spatial  SAR  distribution  in  the  vicinity  of  expected  RF  hot  spots  in 
the  phantom  of  human  torso  was  measured  using  commercially  available  non-perturbing,  fluroptic 
Luxtron  probes  embedded  in  the  phantom.  Temperature  rise  in  the  phantom,  resulting  from 
application  of  high  input  power  to  the  antenna  for  1  minute  was  measured.  SAR  was  calculated 
from  the  measured  temperature  gradient.  The  measurement  was  done  at  various  frequencies  of 
interest. 

Induced  Currents;  Induced  currents  in  ankle  and  wrist  were  measured  using 
commercially  available  induced  current  meters.  The  measurement  was  done  for  free  standing 
individuals  at  various  frequencies  of  interest. 

Free-Space  Test  Setup 


Figure  la  shows  the  setup  for  antenna  radiation  pattern  measurement.  Antenna  is 
mounted  on  a  plastic  stand  and  base.  The  antenna  can  be  mounted  either  vertically  or  horizontally 
(Figure  lb),  and  it  can  be  rotated  about  the  vertical  axis  from  0®  (broadside  to  the  probe)  to  ±90° . 
The  probe  is  mounted  on  plastic  stand  that  can  be  raised  or  lowered  to  facilitate  alignment  of  the 
antenna  and  the  probe.  The  probe  used  is  an  omnidirectional,  E-field  probe  along  with  Holaday 
field  strength  meter.  The  probe  measures  the  electric  field  radiated  by  the  antenna  in  any 
polarization  and  the  meter  displays  the  power  density  in  mW/cm^.  The  power  density  displayed 
by  the  meter  is  based  on  the  far  field  expression; 


(mWIcm^) 


eL 

3770  (Ohm) 


(1) 


4 


In  this  test  we  are  interested  in  measuring  the  near-zone  field  of  the  AMT  antenna. 
Equation  (1)  was  used  to  calculate  the  root  mean  square  (RMS)  value  of  near-zone  electric  field, 
from  the  power  density  value,  Pj,  displayed  by  the  meter. 

Figures  Ic  and  Id  show  a  simple  setup  to  measure  the  near-zone  electric  field  radiated  by 
the  antenna  in  a  plane  parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  antenna.  A  styrofoam  template  was  used  to 
position  the  probe  along  the  plane  at  pre-determined  locations.  The  horizontal  and  vertical 
resolution  of  the  template  is  1"  (2.54  cm)  and  1.5"  (3.81  cm)  respectively,  which  is  at  least 
A/158  at  50  MHz,  our  test  frequency.  Figure  Id  shows  the  distance  of  the  probe  tip  (1.5  cm) 
from  the  antenna  surface. 

Measurement  of  the  axial  variation  of  the  electric  field  was  performed  using  the  set  up  of 
Figure  la,  with  the  porbe  aligned  to  the  center  of  the  antenna  as  shown.  Figures  2a  and  2b  show 
the  coordinate  system  and  relative  position  of  the  probe  and  the  antenna  for  ffee-space  tests. 

Free-space  Test  Results 

Figure  3  shows  the  AMT  antenna  radiation  patterns,  a  plot  of  relative  power  density 
versus  angular  deviation  (0),  for  the  case  when  AMT  antenna  was  mounted  horizontally  and  the 
radiating  side  of  the  antenna  was  facing  the  probe.  Radiation  patterns  were  measured  at  50  MHz 
and  net  input  power  to  the  antenna  was  5W.  As  we  can  see  from  the  polar  plot,  the  maximum 
radiation  occurs  when  the  edges  of  the  antenna  face  the  probe  (0  =  0  or  180  degrees  ).  The 
distance  of  the  probe  from  the  surface  of  the  antenna  in  the  broadside  position  (0  =  90  degrees) 
was  10.5  cm.  The  angular  radiation  patterns  are  measured  with  the  same  radial  distance  from  the 
center  of  the  antenna  surface.  Thus,  at  0  =  0  or  180  degrees,  the  edges  of  the  antenna  were  about 
1 .0  cm  fi-om  the  probe.  A  large  power  density  (20  mW/cm^  per  watt  input  power)  at  the  edges  of 
the  antenna  is  indicative  of  the  complicated  nature  of  the  edge  diffracted  fields  and  that  the  edge 
diffracted  fields  add  in  phase  at  1.0  cm  from  the  edges  to  yield  a  high  measured  power  density, 
and  a  corresponding  high  electric  field. 


5 


The  radiation  pattern  with  the  antenna  mounted  horizontally,  but  the  back  of  the  antenna 
(side  which  is  supposed  to  be  towards  mounting  surface)  towards  the  probe,  is  shown  in  Figure  4, 
The  radiation  pattern  has  an  assymetry  in  the  radiation  from  the  edges  of  the  antenna  but  the 
maximum  power  density  is  still  occurs  at  the  edges. 

The  radiation  pattern  measurements  for  vertically  mounted  antenna  (not  shown)  under  the 
same  test  conditions,  show  a  pronounced  assymetry  in  power  density  measured  from  0  =  0  and 
180  degrees,  but  again  the  maximum  power  density  is  measured  from  one  of  the  edges.  Again, 
the  front  and  back  radiation  patterns  were  identical. 

Figure  5  shows  the  variation  of  the  power  density  and  the  electric  field  with  axial  distance, 
z.  The  maximum  electric  field  calculated  from  the  measured  power  density  is  at  z  =  1  to  2  cm 
from  the  antenna  surface.  The  maximum  electric  field  is  found  to  be  about  300  V/m,  which  is 
slightly  above  the  maximum  peak  field  allowed  for  partial  body  exposres.  The  results  for  the 
vertical  mounting  were  similar.  Notice  that  field  decays  rapidly  as  z  increases  and  is  only 
approximately  -15  dB  at  z  =  12.5  cm  from  the  antenna  surface. 

Figures  6  and  7  show  relative  electric  field  measured  in  a  plane  parrallel  to  the  antenna 
surface  and  at  a  distance  of  z  =  1.5  cm  from  the  antenna  surface.  The  field  plots  are  similar  with 
the  front  side  or  the  back  side  towards  the  probe,  though  there  are  slight  diffrences  in  the  exact 
field  distribution  in  the  two  cases.  The  contour  plots  show  exact  location  of  the  maximum  electric 
field.  It  is  seen  from  Figure  7  that  maximum  field  ocurrs  at  about  4.2  cm  up  and  2  cm  in  from  the 
lower  right  comer  of  the  antenna  (  x  =  10  cm,  and  y  =  -7  cm).  The  actual  electric  field  at  the  RF 
hot  spot  is  measured  to  be  450  V/m.  The  contour  plot  also  shows  that  the  field  pattern  has  a 
symmetry  about  x  =  0  cm  line. 

Thermographic  Measurements 

The  AMT  antenna  was  mounted  in  front  of  a  phantom  model  of  the  human  torso,  as 


6 


shown  in  Figure  8.  The  average  distance  of  the  antenna  from  the  phantom  model  was  about  2  cm. 
Infra  red  (IR)  thermographic  camera  was  used  to  record  sequence  of  pre-exposure,  exposure  and 
post-exposure  shots.  Pre-exposure  shots  were  taken  just  before  the  antenna  was  placed  in  front  of 
the  phantom  and  post  exposure  shots  were  taken  just  after  antenna  was  removed  from  in  front  of 
the  phantom,  which  was  right  after  the  RF  power  was  turned  off.  The  net  temperature  rise  on  the 
phantom  surface  is  then  calculated  by  subtracting  the  first  post-exposure  shot  from  the  last  pre¬ 
exposure  shot. 

The  measurements  were  made  at  50,  60,  70,  and  80  MHZ.  The  net  power  into  the 
antenna  was  52  W  at  50  MHZ  to  16  W  at  80  MHZ.  This  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  antenna  is  not 
well  matched  when  mounted  on  or  near  a  human  body  (phantom)  and  consequently  there  is  a 
large  reflected  power  which  varies  with  frequency  of  operation.  The  exposure  time  was  90  s  and 
60  sequential  recordings  were  made.  Typical  overall  average  temperature  on  the  antenna  surface 
was  23  "C  (at  60  MHZ)  and  on  the  phantom  surface  was  20.8  “C  (at  60  MHZ).  As  shown  in 
Figure  8b  and  Figure  8c,  there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  heat  generated  in  the  feed  cable  and  on 
the  feed  structure,  as  well  as  on  the  antenna  surface.  For  a  net  power  input  of  27  W  at  60  MHZ, 
the  maximum  temperature  on  the  cable  was  26.8  °C.  Figures  9  through  12  show  the  temperature 
rise  on  the  surface  of  the  phantom  at  various  frequencies  on  the  area  of  the  phantom  model  which 
was  directly  behind  the  antenna.  Note  that  the  temperature  difference  plots  in  Figures  9  - 12 
show  a  diffused  pattern  for  50  and  70  MHZ,  but  indicate  a  well  defined  thermal  hot  spots  in  the 
location  of  feed  cable,  feed  structure,  on  the  antenna  surface  and  antenna  mounts. 

Thus,  a  surface  heating  of  the  antenna  structure  tends  to  obscure  the  heat  actually 
generated  on  the  surface  of  the  phantom  model  at  least  at  some  frequencies.  Maximum 
temperature  difference  observed  on  the  surface  of  the  phantom  model  at  50  MHZ  and  at  70  MHZ 
is  about  0.4  to  0.6  “C,  while  at  60  and  80  MHZ  the  true  temperature  rise  is  masked  by  the 
excessive  heating  of  the  antenna  surface. 

SAR  Measurements  and  Results 

The  thermographic  measurements  could  not  reveal  any  thermal  hot  spots  due  to  heat 


7 


diffusion  on  the  surface  of  the  phantom  and,  at  some  frequencies,  due  to  excessive  surface  heating 
of  the  antenna  itself  The  temperature  rise  was  measured  at  24  separate  locations  around  the 
expected  RF  hot  spot  as  shown  in  Figure  7,  at  40,  50,  60,  70,  and  80  MHZ,  A  Luxtron  model 
3000  fluro-optic  thermometer  with  MAM-05  fluoro-optic  probes  were  embeded  approximately 
0.3  cm  into  the  phantom  model  as  shown  in  Figure  13.  Each  of  the  MAM-05  Luxtron  probe 
contains  an  array  of  four  sensors,  spaced  0.5  cm  apart.  The  probes  were  so  inserted  into  the 
phantom  that  the  first  sensor  (sensor  D,  Figure  13)  was  placed  at  1  cm  from  the  near  edge  of  the 
antenna.  Two  MAM-05  probes  were  used  at  the  same  time,  and  three  pairs  of  runs  were  made  at 
x=l  and  4  cm,  at  x=2  and  5  cm,  and  at  x=3  and  6  cm  from  the  lower  edge  of  the  antenna  and  at 
the  same  frequency  to  obtain  24  data  points.  Each  measurement  at  each  location  and  fi’equency 
was  repeated  three  times.  Each  run  was  for  3  minutes,  1  minute  pre-exposure,  I  minute  exposure 
(RF  ON)  and  1  minute  of  post-exposure  (RF  OFF). 

An  average  of  the  three  runs  at  each  point  and  each  frequency  was  taken  and  plotted 
against  time.  Th  data  obtained  was  modeled  by  three  separate  equations  (linear  regression), 
representing  the  three  line  segments  joined  at  their  end  points.  The  three  distinct  data  segments 
corresponded  to  the  pre-exposure,  exposure  and  the  post-  exposure  regimes.  Then  the  slope  of 
the  exposure  region  was  adjusted  by  a  baseline  obtained  fi'om  the  average  slope  of  the  pre-  and 
post-exposure  data  (3).  SAR  was  calculated  from  the  measured  temperature  rise  as  given  by  the 
following  equation: 


SAR  (mkg) 


C  {Mg  °C) 


i^ds) 


(2) 


where  C  is  the  specific  heat  capacity  of  the  human  muscle  phantom  and  is  equal  to  3767,4  J/kg®C. 

The  results  are  shown  in  the  tabulated  form  in  Tables  1-5  and  in  graphical  form  in  Figures 
14  through  18. 


8 


SAR  Table  No.  1 

(Normalized  SAR  in  W/kg  per  watt  input) 

Luxtron  Probes  Used;  MAM-05  -  two  probes  were  used  at  a  time. 

Total  number  of  runs  (n)  =  9;  three  runs  for  every  set  of  probe  locations. 
Probe  depth  (penetration)  into  the  phantom  =  0.3  cm 
Total  number  of  Data  Points  :  N  =  24 

RF  Parameters: 

Frequency  =  40  MHZ 

Net  Input  Power  (mean  ±sd)  =  22.45  ±  1.4  W  (N  =  24) 

Phantom  Characteristics  (@  70  MHZ); 

Conductivity  (a)  =  0.76  S/m 
Relative  Permittivity  (e^)  =  84.7 


Coordinate 

yi 

y2 

y3 

y4 

y5  ■ 

y6 

xl 

unmeas. 

0.043 

0.16 

0.521 

0.13 

0.14 

x2 

unmeas. 

unmeas. 

unmeas. 

0.483 

0.11 

0.094 

x3 

0.16 

0.00065 

0.300 

0  096 

0.12 

x4 

unmeas. 

unmeas. 

0.11 

0.375 

0.25 

0.06 

9 


SAR  Table  No.  2 

(Normalized  SAR  in  W/kg  per  watt  input) 

Luxtron  Probes  Used:  MAM-05  -  two  probes  were  used  at  a  time. 

Total  number  of  runs  (n)  =  9;  three  runs  for  every  set  of  probe  locations. 
Probe  depth  (penetration)  into  the  phantom  =  0.3  cm 
Total  number  of  data  points;  N  =  24 

RF  Parameters: 

Frequency  =  50  MHZ 

Net  Input  Power  (mean  ±  sd)  =  3 1 .56  ±  2.74  W  (N  =  24) 

Phantom  Characteristics  (@  70  MHZ): 

Conductivity  (o)  =  0.76  S/m 
Relative  Permittivity  (e^)  =  84.7 


Coordinate 

yi 

y2 

y3 

y4 

y5 

y6 

xl 

unmeas. 

0.18 

0.21 

0.72 

0.375 

0.18 

x2 

0.049 

0.27 

0.26 

0.54 

0.23 

0.26 

x3 

0.05 

0.11 

0.205 

0.52 

0.308 

0.26 

x4 

0.081 

0.099 

0.19 

0.41 

0.31 

0.32 

10 


SAR  Table  No.  3 

(Normalized  SAR  in  W/kg  per  watt  input) 


Luxtron  Probes  Used;  MAM-05  -  two  probes  were  used  at  a  time. 

Total  number  of  runs  (n)  =  9;  three  runs  for  every  set  of  probe  locations. 
Probe  depth  (penetration)  into  the  phantom  =  0.3  cm 
Total  number  of  data  points:  N  =  24 

RF  Parameters: 

Frequency  =  60  NfflZ 

Mean  Net  Input  Power  =  42. 1 1  ±  9.24  W  (N  =  24) 


Phantom  Characteristics  (@  70  MHZ): 
Conductivity  (a)  =  0.76S/m 
Relative  Permittivity  (e^)  =  84.7 


Coordinate 

yi 

y2 

y3 

y4 

y5 

y6 

xl 

0.016 

0.053 

0.0075 

0.433 

0,019 

0.027 

x2 

0.00 

0.06 

unmeas. 

0.305 

0.048 

0.068 

x3 

0.095 

0,05 

0.012 

0.245 

unmeas. 

0.06 

x4 

0.049 

unmeas. 

0.07 

0.176 

unmeas. 

unmeas. 

11 


SAR  Table  No.  4 

(Normalized  SAR  in  W/kg  per  watt  input) 

Luxtron  Probes  Used:  MAM-05  -  two  probes  were  used  at  a  time. 

Total  number  of  runs  (n)  =  9;  three  runs  for  every  set  of  probe  locations. 
Probe  depth  (penetration)  into  the  phantom  =  0.3  cm 
Total  number  of  data  points;  N  =  24 

RF  Parameters: 

Frequency  =  70  MHZ 

Mean  Net  Input  Power  =  28.89  ±  1 .61  W  (N  =  24) 

Phantom  Characteristics  (@  70  MHZ): 

Conductivity  (a)  =  0.76  S/m 
Relative  Permittivity  (ej  =  84.7 


Coordinate 

yi 

y2 

y3 

y4 

y5 

y6 

xl 

unmeas. 

0.051 

0.0016 

0.33 

0.15 

0.14 

x2 

0.075 

0.122 

0.084 

0.31 

0.23 

0.287 

x3 

0.094 

0.296 

0.097 

0.32 

0.21 

0.14 

x4 

0.040 

0.135 

0.097 

0.29 

0.20 

0.103 

SAR  Table  No.  5 

(Normalized  SAR  in  W/kg  per  watt  input) 

Luxtron  Probes  Used:  MAM-05  -  two  probes  were  used  at  a  time. 

Total  number  of  runs  (n)  =  9;  three  runs  for  every  set  of  probe  locations. 
Probe  depth  (penetration)  into  the  phantom  =  0.3  cm 
Total  number  of  data  points:  N  =  24 

RF  Parameters: 

Frequency  =  80  MHZ 

Mean  Net  Input  Power  =  23.44  ±  0.58  W  (N  =  24) 

Phantom  Characteristics  (@  70  MHZ): 

Conductivity  (a)  =  0.76  S/m 
Relative  Permittivity  (e^)  =  84.7 


Coordinate 

yi 

y2 

^  y3 

y4 

y5 

y6 

xl 

unmeas. 

0.094 

unmeas. 

0.24 

0.21 

0.19 

x2 

0.005 

0.076 

unmeas. 

0.16 

0.09 

0.205 

x3 

0.002 

0.006 

0.001 

0.21 

0.15 

0.165 

x4 

unmeas. 

unmeas. 

0.005 

0.22 

0.21 

unmeas. 

.Discussion  of  SAR  Results 

As  the  results  presented  in  the  SAR  tables  indicate,  maximum  normalized  SAR  is  0.72 
W/kg  per  watt  net  power  input  to  the  antenna,  at  50  MHZ.  Net  power  input  means  the  forward 
power  minus  the  reverse  power  as  measured  by  Bird  wattmeter.  A  local  SAR  of  0.72  W/kg  per 
watt  means  that  one  can  operate  up  to  1 1 . 1  W  net  input  power  and  be  still  with  in  the  8  W/kg 


13 


limit  for  the  local  SAR.  Unmeas.  Indicates  that  the  temperature  rise  was  unmeasurable  The  bold 
face  entry  in  Tables  1  -5  indicates  the  SAR  at  the  location  of  the  RF  hot  spot.  Note  that  Rf  hot 
spot  location  is  not  the  thermal  hot  spot  location.  The  thermal  hot  spot  appears  1  cm  to  the  right 
of  the  RF  hot  spot.  This  is  expected  as  thermal  diffusion  would  change  the  location  of  thermal 
hot  spot  relative  to  the  location  of  the  maximum  field  point  (RF  hot  spot). 

Figures  14-18  show  spatial  distribution  of  the  local  SAR  at  fi’equencies  from  40  to  80 
MHz.  Relevant  statistics  is  also  included  in  the  figures.  The  XY  plane  shown  in  Figures  14-18 
is  the  area  covered  under  lower  right  quarter  of  the  antenna.  Figures  14-18  show  that  even 
though  the  location  of  the  maximum  SAR  is  the  same  for  all  frequencies,  the  distribution  is  quite 
different  as  a  function  of  the  frequency.  This  is  not  surprising  given  the  results  seen  in  the 
thermographic  measurements. 


Induced  Current  Measurements 

Holaday  ankle  current  coil  and  meter  was  used  to  measure  induced  currents  in  the  ankle 
and  wrist  of  four  human  volunteers,  three  male  and  one  female,  standing  on  a  cement  floor 
wearing  rubber  soled  shoes  (free-standing  individuals).  Induced  ankle  current  was  found  to  be  a 
function  of  frequency.  Maximum  ankle  current  recorded  was  33.6  mA  at  30  MHz  in  the  female 
volunteer,  far  below  the  100  mA  per  foot  limit.  Table  6  summarizes  the  data  concerning  the 
volunteers.  Figure  19  shows  a  plot  of  mean  induced  ankle  current  normalized  to  net  input  power, 
at  each  frequency.  The  scatter  data  points  refer  to  each  volunteer.  Best  result  is  obtained  at  60 
MHz  where  the  mean  is  about  1  mA  per  watt  and  the  worst  case  is  at  30  MHz  with  a  mean  of  1 1 
mA  per  watt  and  a  worst  case  of  14  mA  per  watt.  This  means  that  a  maximum  power  input  of 
7.14  W  (100/14)  can  be  allowed  before  the  induced  current  limit  of  100  mA  per  foot  will  be 
violated.  The  maximum  wrist  current  measured  was  0.82  mA  per  watt. 


14 


Table  6  :  Induced  Ankle  Current  Measurement  Data 


Volunteer  # 

Sex 

Weight  (kg) 

Height  (m) 

Max.  Ankel  Current  (mA) 

Wrist  current  (mA) 

1 

M 

83.9 

1.73 

33.0* 

6.0  @  30  Mhz 

2 

M 

79,4 

1.78 

31.3 

0.62  @  80  MHz 

3 

F 

68.5 

1.58 

33.6 

1. 14  @  30  MHz 

4 

M 

83.9 

1.85 

24.0 

4.89  @80  MHz 

*  at  50  MHz.  All  other  maximum  ankel  currents  are  at  30  MHz. 


The  results  for  induced  currents  do  not  reflect  what  the  situation  would  be  if  the  individual 
is  standing  on  a  metallic  surface  or  is  in  contact  with  a  metallic  object.  For  conditions  of  possible 
contact  with  metallic  bodies  the  IEEE/ ANSI  standards  limit  the  contact  current  (as  measured  by 
contact  current  meter)  to  45  mA  through  each  foot  from  0. 1  to  100  MHz.  We  have  not  measured 
the  contact  current,  since  such  a  scenario  is  not  envisioned  in  the  intended  use  of  the  AMT 
antenna.  Use  of  protective  gloves  and  clothing  will  limit  the  contact  current  to  maximum 
allowable  limit  and  will  prevent  possible  contact/shock  bums. 

As  a  byproduct  of  the  induced  current  measurements,  data  on  voltage  standing  wave  ratio 
(VSWR)  versus  frequency  was  obtained.  Figure  20  shows  the  result.  VSWR  is  a  measure  of 
how  well  the  antenna  is  matched  to  the  load,  in  this  case  load  is  the  antenna  mounted  on  the  backs 
of  human  volunteers.  A  VSWR  of  17  was  obtained  at  30  MHz,  while  a  VSWR  of  4  was  obtained 
at  80  MHz.  An  ideal  VSWR  of  1 .0  means  100%  power  input  to  the  antenna  is  transmitted  (no 
reflection  at  the  antenna  input  terminals).  Correspondingly,  a  VSWR  of  17.0  means  that  only 
21%  of  the  input  power  is  transmitted,  while  a  VSWR  of  4.0  implies  a  64%  power  transmission. 

It  is  clear  that  a  better  match  needs  to  be  obtained  at  all  frequencies,  but  especially  at  30  MHz.  A 
VSWR  of  say  less  than  2.0,  will  ensure  that  there  is  no  excessive  heating  of  the  feed  cable  as  well 
as  antenna  surface  itself  An  almost  80%  reflection  of  power  is  likely  to  impact  adversly  on  the 
operation  of  the  source  connected  to  the  antenna. 


15 


Conclusions  and  recommendations 

The  AMT  device,  as  it  is  intended  to  be  used,  was  found  to  produce  local  SAR  of  less 
than  8  W/kg.  Induced  currents  for  free-standing  individuals  were  well  within  the  maximum 
persible  limits.  No  tests  were  conducted  on  individuals  standing  on  a  metallic  ground  or  in 
contact  with  metallic  surfaces.  Use  of  protective  clothing  and/or  gloves  is :  recommended. 

Based  on  SAR  and  induced  current  measurements,  it  is  determined  that  AMT  can  not  be 
operated  safely  at  net  input  powers  of  more  than  7.0  W.  All  these  tests  were  performed  assuming 
continuous  operation  in  the  transmitting  mode.  For  a  9  to  1  duty  cycle  (9  minutes  receive  and  1 
minute  transmit),  it  is  unlikely  to  cause  any  discomfort  to  the  soldier  at  the  intended  power  levels. 

The  AMT  device  is  poorly  matched  when  mounted  on  the  human  body.  It  is  highly 
recommended  that  a  braodband  matching  network  be  incorporated  at  the  input  end  of  the  AMT 
antenna.  As  it  is,  a  large  VSWR  especially  at  the  lower  end  of  the  frequency  band  is  likely  to 
effect  the  operation  of  the  transmitting  source. 


16 


References 


(1)  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineers  (IEEE)  C95. 1-1991,  “  IEEE  Standard  for 

Safety  Levels  with  respect  to  Human  Exposure  to  Radiofrequency  Electromagnetic  Fields, 
3  kHz  to  300  GHz”,  IEEE  Press,  April  27,  1992. 

(2)  Carl  H.  Durney,  Massoudi,  H,  and  Iskander  M.  “  Radiofrequency  Radiation  Dosimetry 

Handbook  (Fourth  Edition)”  prepared  for  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine, 
Aerospace  Medical  Division  (AFSC),  Brooks  AFB,  TX  78235,  October  1966. 

(3)  Gambrill,  C.  S.,  DeAngelis,  M.  L.,  Lu,  S.  T.  “Error  Analysis  of  a  Thermometric  Microwave- 

dosimetry  Procedure”.  In  Blank,  M.,  ed.  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and 
Medicine.  San  Francisco;  San  Francisco  Press;  1993:593  -  595. 

(4)  Holaday  Industries  Application  Note,  “  Units  for  RF  Hazard  Measurements”,  web  site  http;// 

WWW. holadayinc.com/pagel2.html.  April  14  1998. 


17 


Acknowledgments 


Authors  gratefully  acknowledge  the  all  the  technical  help  and  cooperation  extended  to  us 
by  Dr.  John  A.  D’ Andrea  and  his  staff,  Naval  Medical  Research  Institute  Detachment  at  Brooks 
Air  Force  Base,  Texas  78235.  Authors  would  like  to  thank  Mr.  David  D.  Cox,  McKesson 
BioServices,  for  design  and  fabrication  of  AMT  antenna  positioner  and  his  technical  support 
throughout  this  work.  We  would  also  like  to  thank  Mr.  Don  Hatcher  and  Mr.  Michael  Belt  for 
their  help  with  thermographic  measurements. 


(b)  Hortzontal  mountlnsj  {antenna  2D  dag.  to  |>roba),  (c)  Planar  scan  s« 
and  styrofoam  tamplatsj  (d)  Planar  scan  setup  showing  probe  tip  an< 


Feed  Cable 


Power  density  (dB  or  mW/cm 


O  theta  (deg)  vs  Pd  (dB) 
•  theta  (deg)  vs  Pd^ 


15 

o 

^  10 
E 

o  5 

•• 

S  0 
>» 

i  -5 

C 

a> 

^  -10 

o  0  ” 

:  O  O  0  O  j 

:  °o  .  .-o  - 

r  °  o  o  „  ^  o  o  ^  ° "  - 

:  °  °  °  O  o  o  0  O  O  O  O  O  0  O  O  O  °  : 

1  -15 

7  ^ 

ai  -20 
01 

-25 

”  ,  .  ,  1  .  ,  ,  ,  1  1  1  .  1  1  1  1  t  1 _ 1 _ 1  ..i _ 1 _ 1 _ 1 _ 1 _ i - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - 1 - • - < - ^ 1 - • - • - • - ' - 1 - • - ' - ^ 

. .  1  ,  ,  ,  .  I  I  I  t _ I _ I - 1 - 1 — I — I - 1 - 1 — J — 1 — i—J - 1 - 1 — I - 1 — I — J — I - 1 — « - ' — » — ' — ' — ' - ^ 

-80  -60  -40  -20  0  20  40  60  80 


Theta  (deg) 


Figure  3.  AMT  Antenna  Radiation  Pattern  (Front):  50  MHz,  R  =  10.5  cm 
(Antenna  Mounted  Horizontally) 


Figure  9:  (Post-Pre)  Exposure  :  50  MHz 


Figure  10:  (Post-Pre)  Exposure  :  60  MHz 


CD  m  CO  CM  ^ 

CD  d  <D  CD  O  T-  V  ! 

f  I  I  I  *  T—  CM 

IO^COCMt-CD  ^^ 

dddddoTi 

nmmmnDmm 


Temp.  Diff.  (deg.  C)  Figure  1 1 :  (Post-Pre)  Exposure  :  70  MHz 


00  CD  00  CD 

YT^TyCNiT^OCpOCN 

T-’r-^T-^T-CDCDOCOci 

n  m  m  D  m  m  m  D  n 


CN| 


CD  O 

I  I 

■  m 


o 


«: 

O 


Figure  12:  (Post-Pre)  Exposure  :  80  MHz 


Feed  Cab 


Figure  13  :  Geometry  for  SAR  Measurements  ;  AMT  Antenna 
mounted  on  a  70  MHz  Human  Muscle  Phantom. 


'”*11^^11111 


. . 

■  x???<?2J5.jjj:J  S5»5>>??;  ????>???:  ??j1 


Number  of  data  points  (N)  =  24 
Net  Input  Power  (WJ  =  22.45  +/- 1.4  W 

Max.  Norm.  SAR  =  0.521  W/kg  per  W^  @  (-1,4) 

Norm.  SAR  (mean  +/-  sd)  =  0.108  +/-  0.18  W/kg  per  W, 


’4s;*>ss;»\v  ssjiSSNSN  ••  •■  I 

IswiwmI 


Figure  14:  Normalized  SAR  Distribuiton  :  40  MHz 


Number  of  data  points  (N)  =  24 

Net  Input  Power  (Wj)(mean  +/-  sd)  =  31.56  +/-  2.74  W 

Max.  Norm.  SAR  =  0.72  W/kg  per  W,  @  (-1,4) 

Norm.  SAR  (mean  +/-  sd)  =  0.255  +/-  0.17  W/kg  per  \N^ 


Figure  15:  Normalized  SAR  Distribution  :  50  MHz 


NormalteedSAR(W;kgp6rW,) 


'S'* 


V 


$  •«  ^sS 


\ 


"'f 


.••sr;sL 


Number  of  data  points  (N)  =  24 

Net  Input  Power  (W^Kmean  +/-  sd)  =  42,11  +/-  2.74  W 

Max.  Norm.  SAR  =  0.433  W/kg  per  W,  @  (-1,4) 

Norm.  SAR  (mean  +/-  sd)  =  0.066  +/-  0.12  W/kg  per  W 


Figure  16:  Normalized  SAR  Distribution  :  60  MHz 


Normalized  SARIW/Kgpe'-W.) 


$ 


'4' 


::jl  .  f 

-  ^  '  ''To;:" 

'isiisk 


|ss  ^  A.  ^•:■.  <.  SS  _ 


Number  of  data  points  (N)  =  24 

Net  Input  Power  (Wj){mean  +/-  sd)  =  28.89  +/- 1.605  W 
Max.  Norm.  SAR  =  0.33  W/kg  per  \N^  @  (-1,4) 

Norm.  SAR  (mean  +/-  sd)  =  0.157  +/-  0.105  W/kg  per  \N^ 


X  (cm) 


Figure  17:  Normalized  SAR  Distribution  :  70  MHz 


Normalized  SAR(W/k9  per  W.) 


I 


Number  of  data  points  (N)  =  24 

Net  Input  Power  (Wj)(mean  +/-  sd)  =  23.44  +/-  0.579  W 

Max.  Norm.  SAR  =  0.244  W/kg  per  \N^  @  (-1,4) 

Norm.  SAR  (mean  +/-  sd)  =  0.076  +/-  0.134  W/kg  per 


X(cm) 


Figure  18:  Normalized  SAR  Distribuiton  :  80  MHz 


Figure  19:  Mean  Induced  Ankle  Current 


dMSA  UBa|/\i 


Figure  20:  Mean  VSWR  vs  Frequency 


Appendix  I 


List  of  Equipment 

1.  Advanced  Membrane  Transducer  Antenna,  Model  #  Px-AMT-2-28XD-LIGHT  EPPM,  S/N 
050497-USArmy-X  I- 1 

2.  Synthesized  RF  Generator,  Fluke  Model  #  6062A,  S/N  452405, 

3.  RF  Amplifier,  Amplifier  Research,  Model  50W 1000,  S/N  5163. 

4.  Thruline  Power  Meter,  Bird  Electronic  Corporation,  Model  43  S/N  267389. 

5.  Power  SensorsToO  W(25  -  60  MHZ)  and  (50  -  100  MHZ),  Bird  Electronics  Corporation, 
Model  #  lOOA  and  lOOB. 

6.  Broadband  Exposure  Meter,  Holaday  Industries,  Model  HI  3003,  S/N  39453. 

7.  Electric  Field  Probe,  Holaday  Industries,  Model  IME,  S/N  013. 

8.  Amber  Thermograsphic  Camera  System,  Model  #  Radiance  -1. 

9.  Flurooptic  Thermometer,  Model  Luxtron  3000,  S/N  30225. 

10.  Luxtron  probes  (2  nos.).  Model  #  MAM-05. 

1 1 .  Ankle  Current  Coil  Meter  and  Coil,  Holaday  Industries,  Model  #  HI-4416. 

12.  AMT  Antenna  Stand  and  Positioner,  designed  and  fabricated  in- house, 

13.  Styrofoam  Template  for  Planar  Field  Measurements,  fabricated  in-house. 

14.  Muscle  Equivalent  Phantom  Model  of  Human  Torso  at  70  MHZ,  fabricatediln-house 


19 


