♦  J 


AD-A268  392 


I 


TECHNICAL  REPORT 
Number:  001-92 


THE  BEHAVIORAL  TOXICOLOGY  OF 
HIGH-PEAK,  LOW  AVERAGE  POWER,  PULSED 
MICROWAVE  IRRADIATION 


DTIC 


ELECTE 

AUG241993 


Department  of  Microwave  Research 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.C.  20307-5100 


Qo. 


25  January  1993 


TfflS  DOCUMENT  IS  BEST 

I- 

QUALITY  AVAILABLE.  THE  COPY 
FURNISHED  TO  DTIC  CONTAINED 
A  SIGNIHCANT  NUMBER  OF 
PAGES  WHICH  DO  NOT 
REPRODUCE  LEGIBLY. 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


form  Aperavtd 
0M>  Ma  OTOd^m 


immn  for  mn  coMtcDon  o«  iw*or^>oa«*  •%  to  <>ono>  '  om  •mmomm.  >««aijoi«%^  ttmm  'or  twrmuunt.  Korcwwm  «M  loiwok 

ijeoiw^  "oriMntfi^fTx  iiTi  T  'I  ti»«<«tomoAor  i«Motin«eOM  Wn«  <ofVMwiti  rourou*^  tfho  outoom  •uhmco  or  «««  otftor  mdocio*  tlM 

<«iocoan  o*  iifoummiii  mm^rn  iwiyiiion  for  *oouai«^  ottrmn  to  'Mow^iMqtor^  n«>oo>tawn  Oirvciororo  /or  mronwoow  Oporipow  «rto  BoDorr^  U tS  ioftoroor* 

0— Hwyy.^BO  1200.  Ar«Of««0M.VA  2JiO2-Ol02.  ooo  to  cw  OW»co  o»  4W  lyqoc  »BOTw  oro  Oooyrtiow  ^Otoq(0;00"4««tt.  iWomwrfWw.  OC  20M1. 


1.  AC<NCY  USE  ONLY  (E«4V«  OUnKi  I  2.  REPOKT  DATE 

I  25  January  1993 


4.  TITU  AMO  SUSTITU 


3.  REPORT  TYPE  AMO  OATES  COVERED 

Interim;  20  Oct  89  -  31  Dec  92 


S.  aiNOING  NUMBERS 


The  Behavioral  Toxicology  of  High-Peak,  Low  Average 
Power,  Pulsed  Microwave  Irradiation. 


t.  AUTHORIS) 


T.  G.  Raslear,  Y.  Akyel,  F.  Bates,  S,-T.  Lu, 
E.  C.  Elson,  B.  Akyel,  S.  P.  Mathur 


PE:  ri2787A 
PR:  3M162787A878 
TA:  BB 
WU:  042 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANUAnON  NAME<SJ  AMO  AOORESSIES) 

Department  of  Microwave  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20307-5100 


S.  SPONSORING!  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  ANO  AOORESS(ES> 

U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  &  Development  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Frederick,  MD  21702-5012 


a.  PERFORMING  ORCANIZAnON 
UPORT  NUMBER 

001-92 


10.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


12a.  OISTRIRUTIQN/ AVAIVABIUTY  STATEMENT 

APPROVED  FOR  PUBLIC  RET.EAE'; 
distributiir:  uut.;mi  nu) 


13.  ABSTRACT  {MAJimum  200  «Kirail 


The  TEMPO  microwave  bioettecis  exposure  platform  at  the  Department  of  Microwave 
Research,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Re.search,  produces  an  80  ns,  3  GHz  microwave  pulse 
with  a  peak  power  of  700  .MW.  The  energy  transmitted  is  approximately  16  J.  so  that  tit  a  pulse 
repetition  rate  of  0.125  Hz,  the  duty  fact^or  is  lO**  and  the  average  power  is  2  W.  The  time- 
averaged  SAR  for  TEMPO  exposures  at  full  power  is  0.072  W/kg,  a  value  well-below  suggested 
exposure  limits.  Five  behavioral  tasks  were  used  to  determine  if  exposure  affected  subsequent 
task  performance;  temporal  bisection,  Y-maze,  treadmill  running,  food  motivation  (behavioral 
economics),  and  Persolt  swim  test.  Reliable  effects  were  found  with  the  temporal  bisection,  Y- 
maze,  treadmill,  and  behavioral  economics  tasks.  The  pattern  of  result, s  suggests  at  least  two 
effects  of  high-power  pulsed  microwaves:  memory  impairment  and  decreased  physical  endurance. 
It  was  suggested  that  research  be  expanded  in  this  area,  and  that  tasks  which  are  specifically 
sensitive  to  memory  function  and  physical  endurance  receive  especial  attention. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS 


1S.  NUMBER  OF  AAGES 


Microwave  Bioeffects,  Motiv.ation, 

High  Power  Microwave,  Behavior,  Rats,  time  perception,  time  96 

discrimination,  Decision-making,  memory,  endurance,  depression  i*.  CODE 


17.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  REPORT 

UNCLASSIFIED 


MSN  7S.i0^-.. -30-5500 


IB.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICAHON  19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION 
OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  abstract 

UNCLASSIFIED  UNCLASSIFIED 


20.  UMITATION  OF  ABSTRACT 

UNLIMITED 


StjiHQjfO  *98  ^‘891 

mm  m  Sis  UV'I 


f 


THE  BEHAVIORAL  TOXICOLOGY  OF 
HIGH-PEAK,  LOW-AVERAGE  POWER,  PULSED 
MICROWAVE  IRRADIATION 

‘Thomas  G.  Raslear,  Ph.D. 

^Yahya  Akyel,  Ph.D, 

^Frank  Bates,  B.S.E.E. 

^Shin-Tsu  Lu,  Ph.D. 

‘Edward  C.  Elson,  M.D.,  COL,  MC 
^Buket  Akyel,  Ph.D. 

^Satnam  P.  Mathur,  Ph.D. 

'Department  of  Microwave  Research 

Division  of  Neuropsychiatry  DTIC  QUALITF  INSPECTED  3 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington.  DC  20307-5100 

HDGDEN  BioServices  Corporation 
Gaithersburg,  MD  20879 


Tel:  (301)  427-5125 


ABSTRACT 


The  TEMPO  microwave  bioeffects  exposure  platform  at  the  Department  of  Microwave  Research, 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  produces  an  80  ns,  3  GHz  microwave  pulse  with  a  peak 
power  of  700  MW.  The  energy  transmitted  is  approximately  16  J,  so  that  at  a  pulse  repetition 
rate  of  0.125  Hz,  the  duty  factor  is  lO"*  and  thr  average  power  is  2  W.  The  time-averaged  SAR 
for  TEMPO  exposures  at  full  power  is  0.072  W/kg,  a  value  well-below  suggested  exposure  limits. 
Five  behavioral  tasks  were  used  to  determine  if  exposure  affected  subsequent  task  performance: 
temporal  bisection,  Y-maze,  treadmill  running,  food  motivation  (behavioral  economics),  and 
Porsolt  swim  test  Reliable  effects  were  found  with  the  temporal  bisection,  Y-mazc,  treadmill, 
and  behavioral  economics  tasks.  The  pattern  of  results  suggests  at  least  two  effects  of  high- 
power  pulsed  microwaves:  memory  impairment  and  decreased  physical  endurance.  It  was 
suggested  that  research  be  expanded  in  this  area,  and  that  tasks  which  are  specifically  sensitive 
to  memory  function  and  physical  endurance  receive  special  attention. 

\ 


111 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


IV 


FOREWORD 


This  paper  is  one  of  a  series  of  occasional,  informal  accounts  of  work  in  the  Department 
of  Microwave  Research  (DMR)  at  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research.  The  reports 
generally  address  topics  in  the  safety  of  electromagnetic  radiation  and  are  intended  to  inform 
Department  of  Defense  audiences  with  an  interest  in  such  issues.  Although  their  contents  may 
overlap  partly  with  our  publications  in  the  scientific  literature,  most  papers  are  based  on  in-hou.se 
research  and  are  intended  to  be  more  accessible  to  a  wide  audience  of  readers  with  various 
technical  backgrounds.  The  'materials  are  the  author’s  personal  views  and  not  the  official 
positions  of  the  Army  or  the  WRAIR.  Comments  to  the  senior  author  are  welcome. 

This  work  was  supported  by  Research  Area  III,  Health  Hazards  of  Military  Systems,  of 
the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development  Command;  MG  Travis,  Commanding. 

The  research  described  in  this  report  was  conducted  in  compliance  with  the  Animal 
Welfare  Act  and  other  Federal  statutes  and  regulations  relating  to  animals  and  experiments 
involving  animals  and  adheres  to  the  principles  stated  in  the  Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of 
Laboratory  Animals,  NIH  publication  85-23. 

The  views  of  the  author(s)  do  not  purport  to  reflect  the  position  of  the  Department  of  the 
Army  or  the  Department  of  Defense,  (para  4-3,  AR  360-5). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


V 


PREFACE 


THE  PURPOSE  OF  WRAIR’S  RADIOFREQUENCY  BIOLOGY  PROGRAM 

The  historic  focus  of  WRAIR’sfadiofrequency  biology  program  has  been  to  perform  basic 
research  on  personnel  hazards  associated  with  non-ionizing  radiation  in  military  settings.  The 
formulation  of  specific  goals  has  been  guided  by  the  technical  assessments  of  the  Army  systems 
development  community,  and  so  a  long-term  close  collaboration  has  existed  with  relevant  Anuy 
Materiel  Command  communitres. 

The  chapters  presented  in  this  report  focus  on  biological  effects  produced  by  one  high 
peak  power  pulsed  microwave  source  operating  at  a  center  frequency  of  3  Ghz.  With  this  source 
and  another  HPPM  source  working  at  1300  MHz  a  large  number  of  conditions  in  the  operating 
parameter  space  of  interest  to  the  Army  has  been  explored.  As  the  technical  details  of  directed 
energy  technologies  become  better  defined  with  the  evolution  of  deployable  directed  energy 
systems,  the  biology  research  is  adjusted  to  become  increasingly  relevant.  A  convergence  of 
generic  research  and  specific  technical  requirements  is  occurring.  Even  though  the  experimental 
data  reported  in  this  publication  were  derived  from  a  laboratory  HPPM  source,  the  relevance  to 
weapons  systems  under  consideration  is  fairly  high. 

The  purpose  of  this  research  is  to  confer  to  the  systems  development  community  a 
carefully  and  rigorously  derived  data  base  from  which  assessments  on  safety  and  integrity  of  task 
performance  can  be  made.  Seldom  does  the  information  make  a  clean  separation  between 
hazards  and  nun-hazards  and  interpretation  ir.  often  necessary.  Extrapolations  from  animal  data 
are  always  in  question.  Whether  an  "effect"  represents  a  hazard  or  non-hazard  is  frequently 
intricate.  The  biomedical  community  cannot  merely  hand  over  a  self-contained  data  base  to  the 
engineering  community  without  continuing  dialogue  between  the  two  communities  as  systems 
are  integrated  into  the  force  structure. 

The  information  yield  in  this  report  is  illustrative.  The  observation  that  very  high  peak  - 
but  low  average  -  power,  which  would  be  considered  permissible  by  some  safety  standards, 
produces  a  degradation  of  performance  in  animals  leads  immediately  to  the  issue  of  extrapolation 
to  humans.  If  the  extrapolation  can  be  made,  do  we  need  to  protect  from  such  effects?  Are  the 
effects  tolerable?  Are  they  tolerable  in  some  situations  and  not  others?  To  address  these  and 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  vii 


other  questions  more  fully,  we  need  a  more  encompassing  picture  of  an  individual  in  a  military 
directed  energy  environment.  As  that  picture  emerges  piecemeal  the  biomedical  community  must 
remain  engaged  in  the  tech  development  process. 

The  biomedical  data  base  must  be  continually  refined  through  a  vigorous  research 
program.  Scientists  must  be  willing  to  abandon  doctrinaire,  preconceived  notions  as  new 
information  comes  to  light.  There  is  a  controversy  in  the  scientific  community  as  to  the  reality 
of  so-called  non-thermal  effects,  such  as  mentioned  above.  Vigorous  debate  and  alternate 
approaches  should  be  encouraged,- although  Project  Reliance  may  have  dealt  such  a  process  a 
major  blow. 

Lastly,  the  latest  revision  of  the  ANSI  standard  for  non-ionizing  radiation  has  taken  some 
cognizance  of  the  possible  hazards  of  peak  power  by  imposing  a  100  kV/m  peak  on  narrow  RF 
pulses.  The  work  cited  in  this  report  used  peaks  in  excess  of  100  kV/m.  This  has  reinforced  the 
conviction  of  staff  scientists  at  Walter  Reed  that  "lower"  high  peak  pulses  at  faster  repetition 
rates,  such  that  the  average  energy  would  allow  such  exposures  under  the  new  rules,  should  be 
studied.  In  all  cases  constant  technical  guidance  from  the  weapons  development  community  is 
needed  to  maintain  maximum  relevance  to  the  needs  of  the  Army. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


VIII 


ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 


Research  in  the  area  of  bioeffects  subsequent  to  electromagnetic  radiation  is  highly 
interdisciplinary,  as  evidenced  by  the  list  of  authors  of  this  report.  However,  many  other 
individuals  also  contributed  to  and  ensured  the  success  of  the  experiments  detailed  below.  The 
principal  investigators  take  special  pride  in  acknowledging  the  real  reason  for  their  success. 

Engineering  support  in  the  form  of  maintenance  and  operation  of  TEMPO  was  provided 
by  Mike  Belt.  He  was  often  assisted  by  Dave  Varle  in  this  crucial  job.  Without  them,  none  of 
the  experiments  would  have  been  performed.  Bill  York  also  provided  crucial  support  to  this 
project  in  numerous  ways.  Environmental  control  of  the  anechoic  chamber  for  TEMPO  and  of 
the  housing  of  the  equipment  was  his  primary  responsibility  and  headache.  Experimental  sessions 
had  perfect  temperature  and  humidity  for  machine,  man,  and  animal  through  his  efforts.  Mr. 
York  also  was  responsible  for  the  fabrication  of  the  animal  restraints  which  were  used  during 
exposures.  Rcb  Serafini  and  Michelle  DeAngelis  were  responsible  for  animal  care  and  handling, 
and  performed  data  collection  in  several  of  the  experiments.  Their  excellent  attention  to  detail 
and  efficiency  in  scheduling  substantially  contributed  to  the  projects.  Finally,  Chris  Klein 
handled  many  thorny  administrative  and  management  problems  associated  with  this  project.  His 
effons  are  a  fine  example  of  what  effective  management  can  actually  accomplish. 

High  quality  research  can  only  be  accomplished  by  high  quality  people  performing  at  their 
highest  level  of  effort.  The  quality  and  quantity  of  the  research  reported  here  are  a  testament  to 
the  effons  of  all  of  the  team  at  the  Department  of  Microwave  Research. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


ix 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


1.0 

INTRODUCTION 

1 

2.0 

METHODS  and  MATERIALS 

7 

2.1 

The  TEMPO  E.xposure  System 

7 

2.2 

Dosimetry 

9 

2.2.1 

Calorimetry  Procedures 

9 

2.2.2 

Calorimetry  Results 

10 

2.2.3 

Thermometry  Procedures 

10 

2.2.4 

Thermometry  Results 

11 

2.3 

Subjects 

12 

2.4 

Exposure  Procedures 

12 

3.0 

TEMPORAL  BISECTION 

15 

3.1 

Background 

15 

3.2 

Task  Description 

16 

3.3 

Methods  and  Materials 

20 

3.3.1 

Behavioral  Methods 

20 

3.3.1. 1 

Subjects 

20 

3.3.1.2 

Apparatus 

20 

3.3.1.3 

Procedures 

20 

3.3. 1.4 

Behavioral  Data  Analysis 

22 

3.4 

Results 

23 

3.4.1 

Psychometric  Functions 

23 

3.4.2 

Bisection  Point 

23 

3.4.3 

Response  Bias 

24 

3.4.4 

Discriminability 

25 

3.4.5 

General  Task  Performance 

25 

3.4.6 

Null  Response 

26 

3.4.6. 1 

Null  Responses  and  Decision  Confidence 

26 

3.4.7 

Ionizing  Radiation  and  Acoustic  Noise  Effects 

28 

3.5 

Discussion 

29 

4.0 

MEMORY  CONSOLIDATION  (Y-Maze) 

31 

4.1 

Background 

31 

4.1.1 

Memory  Consolidation 

31 

4.2 

Task  Description 

34 

4.3 

Methods  and  Materials 

35 

4.3.1 

Subjects 

35 

4.3.2 

Apparatus 

35 

4.3.3 

Behavioral  Testing 

36 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


xi 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS  (continued) 


4.4 

Results 

36 

4.5 

Discussion 

37 

5.0 

TREADMILL  RUNNING  ENDURANCE 

39 

5.1 

Background 

39 

5.2 

Task  Description 

39 

5.3 

Methods  and  Materials 

41 

5.3.1 

Subjects 

41 

5.3.2 

Apparatus 

41 

5.3.3 

Behavioral  Testing 

41 

5.4 

Results 

42 

5.5 

Discussion 

42 

6.0 

MOTIVATION  FOR  FOOD  (BEHAVIORAL  ECONOMICS)  43 
and  CIRCADIAN  RHYTHMICITY 

6.1 

Background 

43 

6.2 

Task  Description 

44 

6.2.1 

Behavioral  Assay 

44 

6.3 

Methods  and  Materials 

46 

6.3.1 

Subjects 

46 

6.3.2 

Apparatus 

47 

6.3.3 

Behavioral  Testing 

47 

6.4 

Results 

48 

6.5 

Discussion 

49 

7.0 

PORSOLT  SWIM  TEST  (BEHAVIORAL  DESPAIR) 

51 

7.1 

Background 

51 

7.2 

Task  Description 

52 

7.3 

Methods  and  Materials 

53 

7.3.1 

Subjects 

53 

7.3.2 

Apparatus 

53 

7.3.3 

Behavioral  Testing 

54 

7.4 

Results 

54 

7.5 

Discussion 

55 

8.0 

SUMMARY,  CONCLUSIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS  57 

8.1 

Summary  of  Results 

57 

8.2 

Safety  Standards 

60 

9.0 

FUTURE  DIRECTIONS  FOR  RESEARCH 

61 

10.0 

BIBLIOGRAPHY 

63 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


LIST  OF  TABLES 


Table  1 

Table  2 

Table  3 

Table  4 
Table  5 


Constancy  of  Time-averaged  SAR  for  Various 
Values  of  Peak  SAR. 

Ionizing  Radiation  Dose  (mREM  +/-  SD)  For 
Each  Microwave  Power  Attenuation  Condition. 

Noise  Levels  (dBA)  For  Each  Microwave  Power 
Attenuation  Condition. 

Temperature  Changes  Induced  by  200  TEMPO  Pulses. 

Correlation  Coefficients  (r),  T-test  Statistics  (t), 
and  Probability  Levels  (p),  for  Covariations  Between 
Noise  and  X-Ray  Exposures  and  Those  Behaviors 
Affected  by  Microwave  Exposures. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


xiii 


LIST  OF  FIGURES 


Figure  1 

Waveform  envelope  of  a  single  TEMPO  pulse. 

7 

Figure  2 

Thermometry  results  for  TEMPO  exposures  in  the  rat 

11 

Figure  3 

Psychometric  function  relating  relative  frequency  of 
the  response,  "This  is  stimulus  A",  as  a  function  of 
the  stimulus  value. 

17 

Figure  4 

Heuristic  model  of  the  circadian  and  short  duration 
event  timing  systems. 

18 

Figure  5 

Probability  of  "long"  responses  as  a  function  of  log 
stimulus  duration  and  exposure  condition. 

23 

Figure  6 

The  bisection  point  as  a  function  of  exposure 
condition. 

24 

Figure  7 

Response  bias  (B")  as  a  function  of  exposure 
condition. 

24 

Figure  8 

Discriminability  or  sensitivity  (A’)  as  a 
function  of  exposure  condition. 

25 

Figure  9 

Session  time  as  a  function  of  exposure  condition. 

26 

Figure  10 

Null  responses  as  a  function  of  exposure  condition. 

26 

Figure  11 

Null  responses  as  a  function  of  stimulus  duration 
and  exposure  condition. 

27 

Figure  12 

Cumulative  null  responses  as  a  function  of  stimulus 
duration  and  exposure  condition. 

27 

Figure  13 

Errors  in  24-h  retention  test  in  Y-maze  for  each 
treatment  condition. 

36 

Figure  14 

Mean  errors  as  a  function  of  mean  energy  (J)  per 
pulse. 

37 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  xiv 


LIST  OF  FIGURES  (continued) 


Figure  15  Relationship  between  running  endurance  and  treadmill  40 

speed  for  saline  and  amphetamine.  Data  from 
Gerald.  1978. 

Figure  16  Mean  running  durations  for  microwave-exposed,  42 

sham-exposed,  and  cage-control  rats. 

Figure  17  Log  pellets  earned  as  a  function  of  log  price.  45 

Figure  1 8  Mean  dark/light  ratio  of  rats  treated  with  various  46 

doses  of  DFP,  an  anticholinesterase  drug. 

Figure  19  Left  Panel:  Mean  pellets  consumed  as  a  function  48 

of  cost  (fixed  ratio)  and  exposure  condition.  Right 
Panel:  Mean  proportion  of  pellets  consumed  during 
the  dark  cycle. 

Figure  20  Immobility  durations  for  exposed  and  sham  animals  54 

in  the  Porsolt  Swim  Test. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


XV 


'The  only  way  to  is  to 

eat  what  you  dont  want  drink  what  you 
don't  like,  and  do  what  you'd  rather  not'' 


Mark  Twain 


"A  memorandum  is  written  not  to  inform 
the  reader  but  to  protect  the  writer," 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


xvii 


SECTION  1:  INTRODUCTION 


Current  microwave  occupational  safety  standards  (ANSI,  1992;  NRCP,  1986)  are  primarily 
designed  to  avoid  tissue  damage  through  heating.  As  a  result,  they  do  not  address  the  issue  of 
the  maximum  peak  power  allowed  during  exposure  to  high-peak  power  pulsed  microwave 
(HPPM)  fields.  While  current  standards  suggest  that  whole-body  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR) 
exposures  be  limited  to  0.4  WAg  and/or  a  local  SAR  of  8  WAg,  there  is  no  limit  on  the  peak 
power  that  can  be  used  to.  achieve  these  doses.  For  instance,  all  the  time-averaged  whole-body 
exposures  in  Table  1  would  be  within  the  suggested  safety  limit  even  though  the  peak  SARs  vary 
over  several  orders  of  magnitude. 


Table  1:  Constancy  of  Time-averaged  SAR  For  Various  Values  of  Peak  SAR 

Time-averaged 
SAR  (W/kg) 

Peak  SAR 

(W/kg) 

Exposure  Duration 

(s) 

Specific 

Absorption  (J/kg) 

0.4 

0.4 

360 

144 

0.4 

4.8 

30 

144 

0.4 

1.44  X  10^ 

10‘ 

144 

0.4 

1.44  X  10’ 

10-® 

144 

0.4 

1.44  X  10" 

lO-io 

144 

0.4 

1.44  X  10‘* 

10"'* 

144 

To  date,  research  on  the  behavioral  effects  of  microwaves  has  focused  on  low  power, 
continuous  wave  (CW)  microwave  radiation  which  places  little  or  no  thermal  burden  on  the 
organism  (see  reviews  by  Adey,  1981;  Gage,  1984;  Michaelson,  1986).  Fewer  studies  have 
employed  pulsed  microwaves  (Bermant,  Reeves,  Levinson,  and  Justesen,  1979;  Carroll,  Levinson, 
Justesen,  and  Clarke,  1980;  D’Andrea,  Cobb,  and  deLorge,  1989;  deLorge,  1979a,  b;  deLorge  and 
Ezell,  1980;  Frey,  Feld,  and  Frey,  1975;  Hjeresen,  Doctor,  and  Skeldon,  1979;  Hunt,  King,  and 
Phillips,  1975;  Johnson,  Meyers,  Guy,  Lovely,  and  Galambos,  1976;  King,  Justesen,  and  Clarke, 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


1 


1971;  Lebovitz,  1983;  Roberti,  Heebels,  Hendricx,  deGreef,  and  Wolthuis,  1975;  Schrot,  Thomas, 
and  Banvard,  1980;  Thomas,  Burch,  and  Yeandle,  1979;  Thomas,  Finch,  Fulk,  and  Burch,  1975; 
Thomas,  Schrot,  and  Banvard,  1980,  1982).  The  power  density  in  these  studies  is  quite  low, 
often  because  tne  pulse  repetition  rates  are  very  high  (up  to  I  kHz).  An  even  smaller  number 
of  these  studies  have  compared  pulsed  and  CW  radiation  at  the  same  average  power  density 
(Cain  and  Rissman,  1978;  Frey,  Feld,  and  Frey,  1975;  Kholodov,  1975;  Lebovitz,  1983;  Roberti, 
Heebels,  Hendricx,  deGreef,  and  Wolthuis,  1975;  Thomas,  Finch,  Fulk,  and  Burch,  1975; 
Thomas,  Schort,  and  Banvard,  1982).  Five  of  the  seven  studies  above  found  a  greater  effect  on 
behavior  with  pulsed  microwave  radiation.  Although  this  suggests  that  pulsed  microwaves 
interact  differently  with  biological  systems  than  CW,  it  must  be  emphasized  that  none  of  these 
studies  used  high  levels  of  peak  power  in  their  exposures. 

The  experiments,  in  this  report,  are  focused  on  the  safety  of  pulsed,  high  power 
microwaves  which  may  be  encountered  by  personnel  during  military  operations.  The  military 
use  of  directed  energy,  for  instance,  results  in  the  production  of  radiofrequency  fields  of  very 
high  peak  power  density  for  very  short  periods  of  time.  Under  these  conditions,  the  average 
power  density  to  which  personnel  is  exposed  is  quite  low,  although  the  peak  power  density  is 
enormous.  To  illustrate,  suppose  that  a  microwave  generator  operating  at  3  GHz  is  producing 
40  ns  pulses  at  500  MW  with  a  0.2  Hz  repetition  rate  (one  pulse/5  s).  In  the  far  field  only  a 
fraction  of  that  power  impinges  on  an  absorbing  surface.  Suppose  the  power  density  at  some 
point  in  the  far  field  is  0.8  mW/cm^  per  Watt  of  radiated  power.  Then  at  an  output  of  500  MW 
the  power  density  exposure  of  personnel  at  that  point  would  be  400  x  10*  mW/cm^.  Since  this 
power  density  is  only  realized  for  40  ns  periods,  the  average  power  density  (measured  over  a 
standard  six  min  period)  would,  of  course,  be  lower  than  the  exposure  limit  of  10  mW/cm^  which 
is  recommended  by  ANSI  (Polk  and  Postow,  1982).  For  example,  if  we  sample  power  every  40 
nanoseconds,  there  would  be  72  periods  with  power  at  400  x  10*  mW/cm^  and  8.99  x  10’  periods 
with  power  at  0  mW/cm*  in  a  6  min  period.  This  averages  out  to  3.2  mW/cm‘  for  the  6  min 
measurement  period.  By  contrast,  the  typical  peak  power  density  in  the  studies  cited  above  is 
on  the  order  of  1  x  10^  W/cm^  with  a  typical  average  power  density  of  10  mW/cm*. 

Thus  there  is  reasonable  concern  that  adverse  effects  may  result  from  extremely  short- 
duration  microwave  exposures  of  extremely  high  peak-power.  The  question,  then,  is  "Can  a  very 
brief,  high  power  pulse  of  energy  cause  an  injury?".  At  the  time  that  the  series  of  experiments 
reported  here  was  initiated,  there  were  very  few  behavioral  studies  which  addressed  that  question. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


2 


As  noted  above,  there  was  some  indication  that  low-power  pulsed  microwave  radiation  has 
greater  behavioral  effects  than  equivalent  (power  density)  CW  radiation.  Subsequently 
researchers  at  the  USAF  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine  (Cordts,  Merritt,  Erwin,  Hardy,  and 
Yochmowitz,  1988;  Klauenberg,  Merritt,  and  Erwin,  1988)  began  to  explore  peak  power  densities 
in  the  kW/cm“  range. 

Cordts  et  al.  (1988)  exposed  rats  to  a  Cober  peak  power  simulator  operating  at  2.066  GHz 
with  a  250  ms  pulse  width  and  a  Gypsy  Vircator  operating  at  1.64  GHz  with  a  140  ns  pulse 
width.  For  the  Cober  source  the  maximum  reported  power  density  was  approximately  30  W/cm‘, 
while  for  the  Gypsy  source  the  maximum  power  density  was  approximately  8  kW/cm*.  Three 
behavioral  tasks,  one-trial  avoidance  (of  microwaves),  drinking,  and  rotarod  performance,  were 
used  to  evaluate  the  effects  of  these  two  types  of  exposures.  Only  the  drinking  test  (time  spent 
drinking)  was  reliably  affected  by  either  source,  but  similar  effects  were  seen  for  both  sources 
despite  the  large  difference  in  incident  power  density.  Cordts  et  al.  (1988)  argue  that  the 
reduction  in  drinking  time  which  was  observed  in  both  groups  was,  potentially,  caused  by 
different  mechanisms.  They  estimated  that  a  0.7  °C  increase  in  body  temperature  was  caused  by 
the  Cober  exposure,  while  the  Gypsy  exposure  caused  only  a  0.0084  °C  increase.  This  suggests 
that  the  effect  of  the  Gypsy  exposure  was  not  thermal,  but  was  due  to  some  other,  unspecified, 
direct  effect  of  the  exposure. 

Klauenberg  et  al.  (1988)  exposed  rats  to  a  TEMPO  vircator  operating  at  1.26  GHz  with 
a  85  ns  pulse  width  and  a  power  density  of  0.5  kW/cm^.  Startle  responses  (following  single  and 
multiple  microwave  pulses)  and  rotarod  performance  were  used  to  behaviorally  assess  the  effects 
of  exposure  to  this  system.  Reliably  more  animals  in  the  exposure  group  startled  relative  to  the 
sham-exposure  group  when  single  pulses  were  used,  but  no  differences  between  groups  occurred 
during  multiple  pulse  exposures.  More  exposed  animals  failed  to  complete  the  rotarod  task  than 
sham-exposed  animals,  but  this  difference  was  not  reliable. 

Both  of  these  studies  suggest  that  high-power,  pulsed  microwaves  may  be  effective  in 
altering  behavior,  but  neither  study  adequately  documents  a  relationship  between  an  absorbed 
dose  of  power  and  a  change  in  behavior.  Specific  absorption  rates  (SARs)  were  calculated  rather 
than  measured,  and  power  density  was  highly  variable  (58%  uncertainty  noted  by  Klauenberg  et 
al.,  1988).  While  both  studies  are  commendable  for  their  groundbreaking  efforts,  it  is  clear  that 
much  remains  to  be  done. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


3 


For  instance,  none  of  the  experiments  described  above  examined  the  effects  of  HPPM  on 
cognitive  function  or  sensory  information  processing.  The  series  of  experiments  described  below 
examines  the  effect  of  high-peak,  but  low-average,  power  microwave  fields  on  a  variety  of 
behavioral  tasks  in  rats.  These  tasks  are  designed  to  provide  the  knowledgeable  practitioner  of 
behavioral  psychology  with  information  concerning  a  variety  of  psychological  processes  in  animal 
subjects,  including  sensation,  perception,  cognition  (memory  and  decision-making),  motivation, 
mood,  and  physical  endurance.  Because  of  the  interdisciplinary  nature  of  this  field,  reports  of 
this  work  in  the  scientific  literature  may  not  adequately  communicate  with  specialists  outside  of 
psychology.  A  major  objective  of.  the  present  report  is  to  communicate  our  findings,  many  of 
which  can  be  found  in  the  scientific  literature,  to  those  non-psychologists  who  may  find  them 
relevant  to  their  own  work. 

The  approach  which  was  utilized  in  examining  the  effects  of  HPPM  exposure  is  often 
used  in  behavioral  toxicology:  subjects  were  given  a  non-lethal  acute  exposure  to  the  suspected 
toxicant  and  were  subsequently  tested  for  an  effect  This,  however,  is  not  the  only  possible 
approach.  For  this  reason  the  reader  should  bear  in  mind  that  every  method  for  studying  a 
problem  has  both  advantages  and  limitations.  We  will  highlight  the  limitations  of  our  choice  to 
aid  the  reader’s  critical  evaluation  of  our  results. 

Because  of  the  difficulty  of  instrumenting  experiments  in  a  HPPM  field,  all  of  our 
experiments  studied  post-exposure  effects  of  HPPM  radiation.  The  lack  of  an  effect  in  this  type 
of  design  does  not  preclude  effects  which  occur  prior  to  or  after  the  observation  period.  Thus 
there  may  be  behavioral  effects  during  the  exposure,  or  more  immediately  after  the  exposure  that 
could  not  be  measured  by  our  methods.  Moreover,  in  most  instances,  tise  observations  we  made 
were  only  a  "snap-shot"  of  the  behavior  in  time.  The  duration  of  behavioral  effects  (or  lack 
thereof)  are  not  addressed  by  experiments  which  make  only  one  observation  following  exposure. 

The  decision  to  use  behavior  as  an  end-point  was  dictated  by  the  training  of  two  of  the 
principal  investigators  (TGR  and  YA)  and  by  the  fact  that,  in  this  field,  behavior  is  widely 
believed  to  be  the  most  sensitive  indicant  available  (Gage,  1984).  We  again  caution  the  reader, 
that  methods  often  determine  (in  part)  results.  In  other  areas  (for  instance,  behavioral 
pharmacology)  it  is  as  well-established  that  behavior  can  be  extremely  insensitive  to 
manipulations  which  have  profound  effects  on  other  measures.  The  lack  of  behavioral  effects 
does  not  preclude  physiological  or  toxicological  effects  of  HPPM,  and  a  behavioral  effect  does 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


4 


not  guarantee  a  lesion  in  the  central  nervous  system  that  can  be  detected  with  current  methods. 
At  present,  the  correlation  of  behavior  with  anatomy  and  physiology  is  far  from  perfect. 

With  the  exception  of  the  bisection  experiment,  all  exposures  were  acute  rather  than 
chronic.  Questions  concerning  cumulative  effects,  as  with  the  duration  of  effects,  must  await 
future  re.search  in  this  area.  Due  to  time  and  equipment  limitations,  certain  questions  which 
naturally  flow  from  an  examination  of  the  trade-off  between  dose,  dose-rate  and  exposure 
duration  have  also  not  been  examined. 

To  facilitate  the  readability  of  this  report,  the  experiments,  which  each  utilize  similar 
microwave  exposure  methods  but  different  behavioral  methods,  are  described  individually 
following  a  description  of  the  microwave  exposure  system  (TEMPO)  and  the  methods  that  were 
used  to  determine  the  SAR  of  the  exposures.  The  descriptions  of  the  behavioral  experiments  can 
be  read  (or  skipped)  in  any  order  without  (we  hope)  detriment  to  the  understanding  of  the 
material.  Background  information  and  references  concerning  the  behavioral  methods  used  are 
provided  for  the  interested  reader. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


5 


SECTION  2:  METHODS  AND  MATERIALS 


2.1  The  TEMPO  Exposure  System 

All  exposures  took  place  in  a  Keene  Corporation  Ray  Proof  anechoic  chamber  (16  ft.  by  16  ft. 
by  12  ft.)  at  WRAIR’s  Department  of  Microwave  Research  laboratories.  The  TEMPO  transmitter 
produces  an  80  ns,  3000  MHz  RF  pulse.  TTie  transmitted  power  varies,  a  characteristic  inherent 
in  virtual  cathode  oscillators,  from  <  100  to  =700  MW,  within  the  80  ns  pulse  duration.  In  terms 
of  energy  transmitted  (=16  J),  the  irregular  TEMPO  pulse  may  be  represented  as  a  rectangular 
pulse  of  200  MW  for  80  ns  (see  Figure  1).  At  a  repetition  rate  of  0.125  Hz,  the  duty  factor  is 
10  *  and  the  average  power  is  2  W. 


The  TEMPO  antenna  is  a 
longitudinally  slotted  circular  waveguide 
which  radiates  a  fan-shaped  (narrow 
horizontal,  wide  vertical)  horizontally 
polarized  beam.  Subjects  are  exposed  in  a 
dual  comer  reflector  assembly,  2.25  m  from 
the  antenna,  that  allows  simultaneous 
exposure  of  two  animals.  The  comer 
reflectors  focus  the  radiated  energy  and 
provide  a  10  dB  enhancement  of  the  field 
with  respect  to  the  free-field  power  density  of 
0.1  mW/cm^  per  watt  transmitted.  Thus,  at 
maximum  transmitted  power  (700  MW),  TEMPO  achieves  a  power  density  of  700  kW/cm*  and 
a  field  strength  of  1 .5  MV/m.  Each  animal  was  restrained  in  a  cylindrical  plastic  enclosure  and 
positioned  on  an  RF  transparent  platform  in  the  reflector. 


Figure  1.  Waveform  envelope  of  a  single 
TEMPO  pulse. 


Wire  screens  of  varying  mesh  densities  were  placed  over  the  antenna  aperture  to  attenuate 
the  output  power  of  the  system.  Relative  to  the  unattenuated  output  of  the  system,  these  screens 
produced  power  outputs  of  -20,  -30,  -40  and  -50  dB. 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  7 


In  addition  to  microwaves,  TEMPO  produces  soft  X-rays.  Ionizing  radiation  exposures 
for  each  condition  are  presented  in  Table  2.  With  the  exception  of  the  -50  dB  power  condition, 
the  doses  are  fairly  homogeneous  across  power  levels.  All  doses  are  well  below  the  level  at 
which  any  behavioral  sequela  have  been  observed  in  rats  (Fields,  1957;  Mele,  Franz,  and 
Harrisson,  1988,  1990). 


Table  2:  Ionizing  Radiation  Dose  (mREM  ±  SD)  For  Each  Microwave  Power 

Attenuation  Condition 

0  dB 

■20  dB 

-30  dB 

-40  dB 

-50  dB 

Sham 

Cage 

281.25 

±  12.60 

295.71 

±  32.50 

288.57 

±  57.21 

47.5 

±  30.92 

♦ 

♦ 

*  Not  measurable 

Sound  pressure  levels  (SPLs)  for  each  exposure  condition  are  presented  in  Table  3.  The 
SPL  for  the  full  power  (0  dB  attenuation)  condition  was  65.69  dB,  and  the  sound  levels  for  all 
other  power  levels  were  approximately  20  dB  higher.  The  peak  SPL  was  approximately  88  dB 
with  a  majority  of  the  acoustic  energy  in  the  frequency  range  between  2  and  6  kHz.  In  quiet 
conditions  (sham  exposures)  the  ambient  SPL  in  the  chamber  was  56.55  dB.  There  are  no  known 
long-term  psychological  effects  in  rats  from  exposure  to  noise  with  these  characteristics  (Cure 
and  Rolinat,  1992;  Lai,  1987,  1988;  Lai,  Carina,  Horita,  and  Guy,  1989). 


Table  3;  Noise  Levels  (dBA)  for  Each  Microwave  Power  Attenuation  Condition 

mm 

-20  dB 

-30  dB 

-40  dB 

-50  dB 

SHAM 

CAGE 

65.69 

88.64 

88.00 

88.64 

88.21 

56.55 

65.00 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


8 


2.2  Dosimetry 


The  specific  absorption  rate  (SAR)  may  be  used  to  describe  the  rate  of  energy  deposition 
within  the  entire  biological  specimen  or  at  specific  locations  in  the  subject.  In  support  of  this 
series  of  experiments,  calorimetric 'and  thermometric  techniques  were  used  to  evaluate  both 
whole-body  and  spatially  localized  SARs  in  cadavers. 

For  both  calorimetry  and  thermometry,  a  1000  watt  CW  source  was  connected  to  the 
system  in  place  of  the  TEMPO  vircator.  Whole-body  SAR  was  determined  using  the  single-well 
calorimetry  techniques  of  Mathur,  Akyel,  and  Lu  (1992).  Local  SARs  were  determined  using 
implantable,  RF  transparent  Luxtron  temperature  probes.  Euthanasia  of  the  animals  was 
accomplished  by  carbon  dioxide  inhalation. 


2.2.1  Calorimetry  Procedures 

In  behavioral  experiments,  animals  are  not  anesthetized  and  are  often  minimally  restrained 
to  reduce  stress.  As  a  result,  the  animal  does  not  stay  in  one  position  in  the  exposure  area.  For 
this  reason,  whole-body  free-field  exposures  are  performed,  and,  under  such  exposure  conditions, 
knowledge  of  whole-body  dose  (SAR)  is  often  thought  to  be  more  useful  than  localized  dose  in 
relating  absorbed  dose  to  the  observed  behavior.  A  detailed  description  of  the  calorimetry 
procedures  can  be  found  in  Mathur  et  al.  (1992). 

The  calorimetry  performed  for  this  series  of  experiments  utilized  a  gradient  layer  Seebeck 
Envelope  Calorimeter  (SEC;  Thermonetics  Corp.,  Model  SEC-A-1202,  Serial  Number  104, 
calibrated  on  7/19/90).  The  SEC  is  used  to  determine  the  net  heat  load  of  the  exposed  animal. 
The  SAR  is  then  computed  by  dividing  the  net  heat  load  by  the  duration  of  the  exposure.  In  a 
SEC,  the  small  temperature  difference  across  the  gradient  layer  is  sensed  by  a  multi-junction 
thermopile.  The  output  of  the  thermopile  is  a  direct  measure  of  the  heat  flow  rather  than  of 
temperature.  The  calorimeter  output  signal  varies  linearly  with  heat  flow  rate.  The  SEC 
principle  has  advantages  over  other  calorimetry  methods  in  that  it  is  only  necessary  to  measure 
heat  flow  rather  than  to  contain  or  direct  it.  This  avoids  errors  due  to  heat  loss  with  variations 
in  time  and  temperature. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


9 


Rat  carcasses  were  put  in  a  plastic  bag  and  immersed  in  a  water  bath  until  the  colonic- 
temperature  of  the  carcass  reached  25  *C.  This  took  75  min  on  the  average.  The  carcass  was 
then  transferred  to  a  styrofoam  box  (to  avoid  heat  loss)  and  was  placed  in  the  comer  reflector 
for  the  exposure.  Following  the  exposure,  the  carcass  (in  the  box)  was  transported  to  the 
calorimeter  and  the  carcass  (without  the  box)  was  put  into  the  calorimeter. 

Data  acquisition  from  the  calorimeter  was  begun  one  hour  prior  to  introduction  of  the  rat 
carcass  to  determine  a  baseline  value  and  was  continued  until  the  calorimeter  output 
approximated  the  baseline  value.  This  procedure  took  3  to  4  h  on  the  average.  Sham-exposed 
carcasses  were  handled  in  a  similar  fashion  except  that  they  were  not  exposed  to  RF.  Data 
acquisition  software  recorded  the  calorimeter  output  in  volts. 

2.2.2  Calorimetry  Results 

The  results  of  the  calorimetry  indicated  a  whole-body  SAR  of  0.036  W/kg  per  watt 
transmitted.  As  noted  above,  the  peak  output  of  TEMPO  is  approximately  700  MW.  Thus  the 
peak  SAR  is  25.2  MW/kg.  However,  as  noted  above,  the  average  output  power  of  TEMPO  is 
only  2  W.  Thus  the  time-averaged  whole-body  SAR  is  0.072  W/kg  at  full  power.  Exposures 
below  full  power  would  have  appropriately  adjusted  SARs. 

2.2.3  Thermometry  Procedures 

A  more  detailed  description  of  the  thermometry  procedures  can  be  found  in  Gambrill, 
DeAngelis,  and  Lu  (1992)  and  in  Lu,  DeAngelis,  and  Gambrill  (1992).  Briefly,  temperatures 
were  monitored  using  a  Luxtron  Fluoroptic  Optic  Thermometric  System  (Model  3000  and 
MAM05  probes).  Temperature  data  was  recorded  using  a  computer  data  acquisition  system 
operating  at  10  samples  per  second  and  was  smoothed  by  a  1  Hz  low  pass  filter.  The  raw 
temperature  data  was  divided  into  pre-exposure,  exposure,  and  post-exposure  sections.  For  each 
section  the  relationship  between  temperature  and  time  was  determined  using  the  linear  curve 
fitting  routine.  The  three  sections  were  adjusted  until  the  end  points  of  the  linear  approximations 
intersected.  The  SAR  was  calculated  using  the  information  provided  by  the  slopes  of  the  three 
sections  (aT/aO.  Specifically,  the  SAR  was  then  calculated  as  the  exposure  absorption  rate  less 
the  average  of  the  pre-  and  post-exposure  rates. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


10 


2.2.4  Thermometry  Results 


Local  SARs  from  CW  exposures  are  presented  in  Figure  2.  Twenty  four  different 
locations,  including  the  brain,  skin,  and  colon,  were  measured.  The  tip  of  the  nose  and  the  base 
of  the  tail  had  the  highest  SARs.  SARs  for  the  brain  ranged  from  .057  to  .087  W/kg  per  watt 
transmitted. 


Rat's  SAR  in  a  Tempo  RF  field 


Figure  2.  Thermometry  results  for  TEMPO  exposures  in  the  rat. 


SARs  were  determined  using  a  CW  source  instead  of  the  TEMPO  source  to  avoid  errors 
arising  from  the  duration  of  TEMPO  exposures  (Stuchly  and  Stuchly,  1986).  Keeping  in  mind 
that  TEMPO  exposures  require  approximately  25  min  (see  Section  2.3.1),  we  repeated  our 
thermometry  measurements  following  a  TEMPO  exposure  to  determine  whether  the  very  high 
peak-power  emitted  by  TEMPO  produces  any  measureable  heating.  The  results  of  thermometry 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  11 


conducted  following  200  TEMPO  pulses  is  shown  in  Table  4.  The  heating  of  the  skin  on  the 
nose  (which  had  the  highest  SARs  following  CW  exposure)  was  only  0.41  *C,  which  is 
consistent  with  the  calorimetry  results. 


Table  4:  Temperature  Changes  Induced  by  200  TEMPO  Pulses 

Position  of  Sensor 

Temperature  Changes  (°C) 

Subcutaneous,  0.5  cm  from  nose  tip 

0.31 

Subcutaneous,  1.0  cm  form  nose  tip 

0.41 

Subcutaneous,  1.5  cm  from  nose  tip 

0.37 

Subcutaneous,  2.0  cm  from  nose  tip 

0.32 

Cerebrum 

0.09 

Anterior  Cerebrum 

0.09 

Mid  Cerebrum 

-0.07 

Rhinecephalon 

-0.09 

2.3  Subjects 

Male,  albino  Sprague -Da wley  rats,  90-110  days  old  at  the  start  of  each  experiment  served. 
All  rats  were  allowed  a  short  period  of  adaptation  to  the  laboratory  and  individual  housing.  A 
12  hr  light:  12  hr  dark  cycle  (lights  on  at  0600)  was  maintained  throughout  each  experiment. 
Details  concerning  numbers  of  animals  and  special  treatment  (food  and  water  deprivation)  are 
detailed  for  each  experiment. 

2.4  Exposure  Procedures 

To  maintain  consistent  exposure  orientation  and  location  within  the  microwave  field, 
animals  were  placed  into  cylindrical  plastic  tubes  during  exposures.  The  tubes  provided  nvinimal 
restraint  in  that  the  animals  could  move  legs  and  head  but  could  not  turn  around.  This  ensured 
that  the  polarization  of  the  animal  in  the  field  was  maintained  parallel  with  the  E-field  at  all 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  12 


times.  Becau.se  even  minimal  restraint  is  capable  of  producing  stress,  the  animals  were  adapted 
to  the  plastic  tubes  and  placement  in  the  anechoic  chamber  over  a  period  of  a  week  prior  to 
actual  exposures.  Sham-exposed  animals  received  similar  treatment. 


Two  animals  in  separate  restraining  enclosures  could  be  placed  in  the  dual  comer  reflector 
at  once,  depending  on  the  requirements  of  the  experiment.  Each  exposure  (with  the  exception 
of  the  motivation  study,  see  below)  consisted  of  200  pulses  at  a  pulse  repetition  rate  of  0.125  Hz. 
The  duration  of  sham  exposures  was  approximately  25  min.,  which  was  the  normal  duration  of 
actual  exposures.  During  sham  exposures  the  transmitter  was  not  operated.  Animals  were 
immediately  placed  in  the  appropriate  apparatus  following  exposures  for  behavioral  testing.  For 
cage  control  conditions,  animals  were  simply  taken  from  their  home  cages  and  placed  directly 
into  the  apparatus  for  testing. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


13 


■ 


14 


SECTION  3:  TEMPORAL  BISECTION  ‘ 


As  was  noted  above,  previous  experimental  studies  of  HPPM  effects  on  behavior  have 
only  scratched  the  surface  with  regard  to  the  types  of  behaviors  which  might  be  affected  by 
electromagnetic  radiation.  Since  we  are  primarily  interested  in  determining  that  HPPM  does  not 
affect  human  behavior,  it  is  sensible  and  prudent  to  examine  behaviors  in  animal  subjects  which 
have  a  functional  similarity  to  human  behaviors.  By  functional  similarity  it  is  meant  that 
although  the  form  of  a  task  used  with  animals  may  not  bear  a  physical  or  formal  resemblance 
to  the  human  task,  the  same  psychological  functions  are  required  to  perform  the  task.  Thus,  there 
are  memory  tasks  for  use  with  humans  and  memory  tasks  for  use  with  animals,  but  there  are, 
rarely  if  ever,  tasks  which  appear  the  same.  For  example,  a  human  test  of  memory  would  be 
verbal  and  might  require  reading  instructions  to  the  subject,  following  which  the  subject  would 
be  required  to  view  a  list  of  words  and  repeat  those  words  (in  order)  after  varying  periods  of 
time.  An  animal  test  of  memory  would  not  be  verbal.  It  would  involve  training  the  animal  to 
perform  a  task  (instead  of  reading  instructions),  and  the  animal  might  be  required  to  remember 
the  location  of  a  reward  a  short  period  of  time  after  it  was  shown  where  it  was  hidden.  Both 
tasks  can  be  used  to  measure  memory  function,  although  they  are  very  different  in  form. 

In  this  section,  we  describe  an  experimental  task  which  allowed  us  to  examine  several 
psychological  functions  in  animals  that  are  used  everyday  by  humans.  These  included  sensory 
information  processing,  memory,  attention,  and  decision  confidence. 

3.1  Background 

The  simplest  form  of  sensory  information  processing  which  can  be  studied  is  concerned 
with  the  relationship  between  physical  stimulus  magnitudes  and  perceived  or  psychological 
magnitudes  (i.e.,  psychophysical  scales).  In  humans,  it  is  fairly  easy  to  determine  what  the 
relationship  is  between  physical  stimulus  magnitudes  and  perceived  magnitudes:  one  can  simply 


‘  Portions  of  this  work  have  been  presented  at  the  63'"*  annual  meetings  of  the  Eastern 
Psychological  Association  in  Boston,  MA  (Raslear  and  Akyel,  1992)  and  at  the  First  World 
Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine  in  Lake  Buena  Vista,  FL 
(Raslear,  Akyel,  Bates  and  Belt,  1992). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


15 


ask  how  bright,  how  loud,  etc.,  a  physical  stimulus  is  (Stevens,  1975).  For  humans,  it  is  known 
that  there  is  not  a  one-to-one  relationship  between  perceived  and  physical  magnitudes.  For 
instance,  equal  changes  in  sound  pressure  are  well-known  not  to  result  in  equal  changes  in 
loudness.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  the  decibel  scale  was  brought  into  use  many  years  ago  by 
audio  engineers:  equal  changes  in  decibels  more  nearly  approximate  equal  changes  in  the 
perception  of  loudness.  A  similar  situation  holds  true  for  the  perception  of  brightness,  and  can 
be  easily  demonstrated  with  the  use  of  a  standard  3-way  light  bulb  which  has  equally  spaced 
wattages*.  The  difference  in  brightness  between  the  50- watt  and  75- watt  outputs  is  much  greater 
than  the  difference  in  brightness  between  the  75- watt  and  100- watt  outputs. 

There  are,  currently,  few  behavioral  techniques  that  can  be  used  for  determining 
psychophysical  scales  in  animals  (Raslear,  1991).  Among  these  is  the  bisection  technique  which 
was  first  described  by  Boakes  (1969)  and  subsequently  employed  by  Raslear  (1975,  1983,  1985) 
and  Church’s  group  (Church  and  Deluty,  1977;  Meek,  1983;  Maricq  and  Church,  1983;  Maricq, 
Roberts,  and  Church,  1981).  Recent  theoretical  and  methodological  advances  (Raslear,  1982, 
1983,  1985)  have  allowed  the  use  of  this  method  in  behavioral  toxicology  (Raslear,  Bauman, 
Hursh,  Shurtleff,  and  Simmons,  1988)  and  behavioral  pharmacology  (Shurtleff,  Raslear, 
Genovese,  and  Simmons,  1992)  studies.  Animal  subjects  can  be  exposed  to  various  treatments 
or  putative  environmental  hazards  and  be  subsequently  tested  for  changes  in  cognitive/perceptual 
function.  The  animal  bisection  method  is  ideally  suited  for  this  use  because  it  has  been 
demonstrated  that  the  animal  version  of  the  task  is  the  functional  equivalent  of  the  human  task 
(Fagot  and  Stewart,  1970;  Raslear,  1983;  Raslear,  Shurtleff,  and  Simmons,  in  press).  The  present 
experiment  uses  the  temporal  bisection  technique  to  evaluate  the  perceptual  and  cognitive  effects 
of  exposure  to  high  peak-power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation. 

3.2  Task  Description 

The  bisection  technique  is  designed  to  determine  the  psychological  middle  point  of  a 
sensory  distance  (bisection  point  or  BP),  and  thus  allows  for  the  determination  of  equal  sensory 
distances  from  which  a  psychophysical  scale  may  be  derived  (see  Raslear,  1982,  1983  for 


^  Strictly  speaking  the  wattage  of  a  light  bulb  is  not  a  proper  measure  of  light  intensity,  but 
it  is  close  enough  to  use  as  an  illustrative  experiment  that  anyone  can  perform  at  home  to  see 
that  our  sensory  systems  actively  transform  and  code  the  physical  energy  which  impinges  on  us. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


16 


details).  For  instance,  if  the  BP  is  physically  half-way  between  the  physical  stimuli,  it  is  easy 
to  see  that  perceived  magnitude  is  identical  with  physical  magnitude.  However,  the  BP  is  usually 
not  physically  half-way  (i.e.,  at  the  arithmetic  mean)  between  the  physical  values  of  the  two 
interval-defining  stimuli.  When  this  is  the  case,  the  functional  relationship  between  perceived 
and  physical  magnitudes  must  be  deduced. 


When  the  bisection  technique  is 
employed  with  animals,  some  variant  of  the 
following  procedure  would  be  used.  Initially, 
animals  are  trained  to  make  one  response 
(R^)  if  a  particular  stimulus  (S^)  is  presented 
and  a  different  response  (Rg)  if  another 
stimulus  (Sfl)  is  presented.  The  two  stimuli, 

Sa  and  Sg,  define  the  interval  to  be  bisected. 

When  asymptotic  performance  has  been 
reached  (i.e.,  discriminative  accuracy  is 
consistently  high),  several  stimuli  with  values 
intermediate  to  and  Sg  (  i.e.,  ^  Sy, 

<  Sb)  are  interspersed  with  the  training 
stimuli  during  sessions.  In  these  "test" 
sessions  correct  responses  to  and  Sg  are 
reinforced  as  before,  but  responses  to  the 
new  stimuli  are  not  (maintained 
generalization).  A  BP  is  determined  by  examining  the  relative  frequency  of  one  of  the  responses 
in  the  presence  of  each  of  the  stimuli  (the  response  chosen  is  irrelevant  since  there  are  only  two 
responses  and  the  functions  will  be  complimentary).  If,  for  instance,  the  relative  frequency  of 
Ra  is  chosen,  the  relative  frequency  of  Ra  will  be  near  1.0  for  Sa,  near  0  for  Sg,  and  will  have 
intermediate  values  for  the  intermediate  stimuli  (Figure  3).  By  interpolation,  that  stimulus  value 
which  would  produce  a  0.5  relative  frequency  of  the  designated  response  is  determined  and  is 
defined  as  the  bisection  point  (Saob)  of  the  interval,  Sa  -Sg. 


Figure  3.  Psychometric  function  relating  relative 
frequency  of  the  response,  "This  is  stimulus  A", 
as  a  function  of  the  stimulus  value. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


17 


As  previously  described  (Raslear  et  al.,  1988;  Shurtleff  et  al.,  1990,  1992),  performance 
on  the  bisection  task  is  analyzed  within  the  context  of  a  simple,  heuristic,  information  processing 
model  of  animal  timing  (Church,  1984;  Gibbon  and  Church,  1984),  as  illustrated  in  Figure  4. 
This  model  contains  a  pacemaker  or  clock,  which  produces  a  mean  rate  of  output  (ticks/unit  time) 
and  an  associated  variance  (variability  in  clock  rate  across  observation  periods).  Clock  variance 
can  arise  from  a  variety  of  sources  either  inherent  in  the  pacemaker,  or  contributed  by  other 
functional  elements  of  the  model.  Major  sources  of  variance  arise  from  memory  and  attention 
functions.  The  model  has  a  memory  function  consisting  of  reference  memory  (relatively 
permanent  memory)  and  working  memory  (short-term  memory  of  a  stimulus  which  has  just  been 
presented).  Attention  functions  reside  primarily  in  the  switch  which  must  open  and  close  to 
allow  accurate  timing  of  a  stintulus. 


I NTERNAL  EXTERNAL 

STIMULI  STIMULI 


SBGQRY  FUNCTION 


aatx  AND 
SVITCH  FUNCTION 


vam  FUNCTION 


QECISiQN  A« 
PBKEPTUAL  FUNCTION 


IfiTQR  AM) 

GLAMMLAR  FUNCTION 


Figure  4..  A  heuristic  model  of  the  circadian  and  short  duration  event  timing  systems. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


18 


Timing  in  this  model  takes  place  in  the  following  fashion.  Within  a  variable  period  of 
time  following  the  onset  of  a  stimulus  (say  a  light),  the  switch  opens  and  the  accumulator  sums 
a  number  of  clock  ticks  from  the  slave  pacemaker.  When  the  stimulus  is  offset,  the  switch 
closes,  again  with  a  variable  latency.  Since  there  is  variance  inherent  in  the  slave  pacemaker 
(due  to  its  own  variability  and  that  xjf  the  master  or  circadian  pacemaker),  the  same  physical 
stimulus  duration  will  not  always  produce  the  same  sum  of  ticks  in  the  accumulator.  Moreover, 
opening  and  closing  the  switch  is  also  variable  and  further  increases  the  variability  of  the  sum 
in  the  accumulator  for  any  stimulus  duration.  The  sum  from  the  accumulator  is  sent  to  the 
working  memory  and  it  is  then  compared  with  the  stimulus  values  which  have  been  previously 
stored  in  the  reference  memory.  Both  the  reference  values  and  the  working  memory  values  are 
imprecise,  and  in  the  presence  of  noisy  data,  a  statistical  decision  theory  rule  (e.g.,  maximize  the 
per  cent  correct  responses)  is  used  to  decide  if  the  stimulus  which  was  presented  was  stimulus 
A  or  stimulus  B. 

Our  analysis  provides  two  different  measures  of  clock  function.  A’  is  a  nonparametric 
signal  detection  theory  measure  of  discriminability  (Green  and  Swets,  1974)  and  depends  upon 
both  the  mean  clock  rate  and  the  variance  of  the  clock  (see  Raslear  et  al.,  1988).  It  is  roughly 
equivalent  to  a  percent  correct  measure,  in  that  chance  performance  is  indicated  by  a  value  of 
A’  =  0.5  and  perfect  performance  is  indicated  by  a  value  of  A’  =  1.0.  The  BP  is  an  estimate  of 
the  perceptual  midpoint  of  the  temporal  interval  under  consideration  and  is  a  variance-free 
measure  of  clock  function.  Thus,  the  pattern  of  treatment  effects  on  these  two  measures  provides 
information  concerning  the  functional  locus  of  a  treatment’s  effect  on  time  perception. 
Treatments  which  affect  the  mean  rate  of  the  clock  should  produce  a  change  in  A’  and  BP,  while 
treatments  which  affect  the  variance  of  the  clock  should  only  produce  a  change  in  A’. 

Our  analysis  also  provides  two  measures  of  the  decision  function.  On  each  trial  the 
animals  make  a  decision  concerning  the  duration  of  the  stimulus  which  was  presented  (i.e..  was 
it  the  "long"  or  the  "short"  stimulus?).  The  measure  B"  is  a  nonparametric  signal  detection 
measure  of  response  bias  (the  tendency  to  over-report  "long"  or  "short"  stimuli).  This  measure 
provides  an  indication  of  the  location  of  the  subject’s  criterion  for  the  decision  to  report  "long" 
or  "short"  (remember  that  the  information  available  for  making  a  decision  is  noisy,  so  the  animal 
sets  a  criterion  to  meet  some  decision  rule.  If  the  criterion  is  set  low,  most  stimuli  will  be 
classified  as  "long",  and  if  the  criterion  is  set  high,  most  stimuli  will  be  classified  as  "short"). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


19 


In  addition,  null  responses  (no  response  within  the  duration  of  a  trial)  were  also  recorded 
for  each  stimulus.  Since  it  is  well  established  that  judgment  time  increases  with  decreasing 
confidence  in  the  correctness  of  a  judgment  (Costermans,  Lories,  and  Ansay,  1992;  Guilford, 
1954),  null  responses  serve  as  an  indicator  of  the  animal’s  confidence  in  the  decision. 

Finally,  session  time  was  also  measured  and  used  as  a  general  indicator  of  task 
performance.  In  drug  studies,  for  instance,  this  measure  is  used  to  indicate  that  dose  levels  have 
been  reached  which  are  not  pharmacologically  of  interest  because  the  animal  is  too  debilitated 
to  adequately  perform  (Shurtleff  et  al.,  1992). 

3.3  Methods  and  Materials 

3.3.1  Behavioral  Methods 

3.3.1. 1  Subjects 

Eight  male,  albino  Sprague-Dawley  rats.  90-110  days  old  at  the  start  of  the  e.xperiment 
served  as  subjects.  Following  a  short  period  of  adaptation  to  the  laboratory  and  individual 
housing,  the  rats  were  reduced  to  80%  of  their  free-feeding  weight.  V;  iter  was  freely  available 
in  the  home  cages  and  supplemental  chow  was  provided,  as  needed,  to  maintain  body  weight.  A 
12  hr  light:  12  hr  dark  cycle  (lights  on  at  0600)  was  maintained  throughout  the  experiment. 

3.3. 1.2  Apparatus 

Two  similarly  constructed  operant  chambers  (previously  described  by  Raslear,  1983), 
which  were  located  m  a  temperature-  and  humidity-controlled  environmental  chamber,  were  used. 
A  PDF  1 1/73  computer  was  used  to  control  the  experiment  and  record  data. 

3.3.1.3  Procedures 

General.  The  experimental  session  for  each  subject  occurred  at  approximately  the  same 
time  of  day,  5  days  per  week  excluding  holidays.  No  water  was  available  in  the  experimental 
chambers. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


20 


Discrimination  training.  A  two-choice,  discrete  trial  paradigm  was  used,  in  which  the  rats 
were  trained  to  discriminate  between  two  durations  of  light  (1.12  W  incandescent  lamp  mounted 
above  the  response  levers  in  the  operant  chamber)  that  defined  the  temporal  interval  to  be 
bisected  (0.5  and  5.0  s).  Responses  were  effective  for  10  s  following  termination  of  the 
discriminative  stimulus.  A  left  or  right  lever  response  was  reinforced  with  a  single  45-mg  Bio- 
Serv  food  pellet  following  termination  of  the  5.0  or  0.5  s  stimulus,  respectively.  If  no  response 
was  made  during  the  10  s  interval  the  trial  terminated  and  a  null  response  was  recorded.  The 
intertrial  interval  was  10  s,  during  which  time  responses  had  no  effect.  Each  stimulus  occurred 
with  equal  probability  on  each. trial. 

A  session  consisted  of  320  trials,  of  which  the  first  20  were  warm-up,  with  1.0  probability 
of  reinforcement  for  correct  responses.  Performance  on  these  trials  was  used  to  determine  the 
condition  the  rat  would  experience  for  the  next  300  trials.  During  discrimination  training,  if  the 
animals  produced  a  minimum  of  90%  correct  responses  during  the  warm-up,  the  remainder  of 
the  session  consisted  of  non-corrected  discrimination  training  in  which  the  probability  of 
reinforcement  was  set  at  a  predetermined  level.  At  the  end  of  training  and  during  the  remainder 
of  the  experiment  the  probability  of  reinforcement  was  0.25.  Otherwise,  a  correction  procedure 
was  in  effect  in  which  an  incorrect  response  to  a  discriminative  stimulus  resulted  in  that  stimulus 
being  presented  again,  0.2  s  following  the  incorrect  response.  The  probability  of  reinforcement 
for  a  correct  response  was  the  same  as  in  the  non-correction  procedure. 

The  probability  of  reinforcement  for  correct  responses  was  initially  1.0  and  wa.s  gradually 
reduced  to  .25  for  individual  animals  over  the  course  of  60  sessions.  The  criterion  for  changing 
reinforcement  probability  and  initiating  generalization  testing  was  a  minimum  of  3  to  5  days 
under  the  noncorrection  procedure. 

Generalization  testing.  A  maintained  generalization  procedure  was  used  during  the  test 
phase.  Five  new  durations,  intermediate  to  the  training  stimuli,  were  presented  in  addition  to  the 
training  stimuli.  The  five  new  stimuli  were  equally  spaced  on  a  logarithmic  scale  and  were  of 
the  following  durations;  0.74,  1.1,  1.62,  2.4  and  3.54  s.  All  seven  stimuli  were  presented  in 
random  order  throughout  the  session.  Responses  to  the  test  stimuli  were  never  reinforced,  but 
responses  to  the  training  stimuli  continued  to  be  reinforced. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


21 


Testing  sessions  occurred  on  Tuesdays  and  Thursdays.  A  maximum  of  one  exposure  per 
week  was  scheduled  for  alternate  Tuesdays  and  Thursdays.  The  remaining  test  session  was  used 
for  a  sham  or  cage  control  exposure.  Discrimination  training  was  conducted  on  the  remaining 
three  days  of  the  week.  The  data  from  discrimination  training  were  not  used. 

The  animals  were  exposed  to  an  ascending,  then  descending,  series  of  microwave  power 
outputs  so  that  all  power  levels  were  tested  twice. 

3.3.1.4  Behavioral  Data  Analysis 

The  discriminability  between  training  stimuli  on  generalization  test  days  was  computed 
for  each  rat  using  the  nonparametric  signal  detection  measure  A’  (Grier,  1971): 

A’=  {[(HIT  -  FA)  +  (HIT  -  FA)^]  /  (4  ♦  HIT  (1-FA))}  +  0.5, 

where  HIT  refers  to  the  probability  of  a  response  on  the  lever  appropriate  for  the  long  stimulus 
(i.e.,  a  "long"  response)  given  the  long  stimulus  was  presented,  and  FA  represents  the  probability 
of  a  response  to  the  lever  appropriate  for  a  long  stimulus  given  the  short  stimulus  was  presented. 
Values  of  this  index  can  range  from  0.5,  an  inability  to  discriminate  between  stimuli,  to  1.0, 
perfect  discrimination. 

To  estimate  the  BP,  the  psychometric  function  relating  the  proportion  of  "long"  responses 
to  the  seven  stimulus  durations  presented  during  generalization  tests  was  constructed  (Figure  3). 
The  BP  was  determined  by  interpolation  as  the  stimulus  duration  to  which,  during  generalization 
testing,  the  rat  was  equally  likely  to  respond  long  or  short.  This  index  is  used  to  determine  if 
the  treatment  altered  the  perceived  duration  of  the  stimuli  presented.  A  longer  BP  duration  would 
suggest  stimuli  were  perceived  as  shorter  than  usual,  and  a  shorter  BP  would  indicate  stimuli 
were  perceived  as  longer  than  usual. 

Response  bias  was  indexed  with  the  nonparametric  signal  detection  measure  B"  (Grier, 

1971); 

B”  =  [(HIT-HIT‘)  -  (FA-FA‘)I/(HIT-HIT'+FA-FA'). 

This  index  can  range  from  1.0  (bias  to  report  "short")  to  -1.0  (bias  to  report  "long").  A  value 
of  B"=0  indicates  an  absence  of  bias. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


22 


3.4  Results 


3.4.1  Psychometric  Functions 

Percent  "long"  responses  were  plotted 
as  normal  probabilities  and  stimulus  durations 
were  plotted  with  logarithmic  spacing  so  that 
the  psychometric  function  could  be  treated  as 
a  straight  line  (Guilford,  1954).  Figure  5 
presents  the  mean  psychometric  functions  for 
the  seven  exposure  conditions  plotted  in  this 
fashion.  Linear  multiple  regression  analyses 
on  the  probability  of  "long"  responses 
indicated  that  there  was  a  reliable  effect  of 
log  stimulus  duration  (b  =  0.881,  t  =  20.96,  df 
=  96,  p  <  .00001),  exposure  condition  (b=  - 
.122,  t=  -3.69,  df  =  96,  p  =  .0004),  and  the  interaction  of  log  stimulus  duration  and  exposure 
condition  (b=  0.109,  t=  2.4,  df  =  96,  p  =  .0185).  There  was  no  reliable  effect  of  the  order  of 
exposure  condition  (ascending  vs.  descending). 

The  reliable  exposure  condition  effects  indicate  that  the  slope  of  the  psychometric  function 
changed  across  conditions.  This  can  be  seen  in  Figure  5  as  a  steeper  slope  for  the  cage  control, 
sham,  -50  and  -40  dB  exposure  conditions  (open  symbols)  relative  to  the  -30,  -20  and  0  dB 
exposure  conditions  (closed  symbols).  Since  the  slope  of  the  psychometric  function  is  often  used 
in  classical  psychophysics  to  characterize  discriminability  (Engen,  1971),  this  suggests  that 
discriminability  may  have  been  decreased  at  the  higher  power  levels. 

3.4.2  Bisection  Point 

The  reliable  effect  of  exposure  condition  on  the  probability  of  "long"  responses  suggests 
two  possible  changes  in  the  psychometric  function  other  than  slope:  a  change  in  the  bisection 
point,  and/or  a  change  in  response  bias  (an  overall  increase  or  decrease  in  the  probability  of 
"long"  responses).  Examination  of  Figure  5,  however,  does  not  appear  to  support  either 
possibility. 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  23 


Figure  5.  Probability  of  "long  responses  as  a 
function  of  log  stimulus  duration  and  exposure 
condition. 


Figure  6.  The  bisection  point  as  a  function  of 
exposure  condition.  The  circles  represent  the 
mean  of  ascending  (open  triangles)  and 
descending  (filled  triangles)  determinations. 


Bisection  points  for  each  exposure 
condition  and  order  are  presented  in  Figure  6. 
It  is  clear  that  exposure  condition  did  not 
exert  a  systematic  effect  on  the  bisection 
points,  a  conclusion  which  is  supported  by  an 
ANOVA  (F6.42  =  0.56,  p  >  .05).  Similarly, 
there  were  no  reliable  effects  of  order  (F,  7  = 
0.5,  p  >  .05)  or  of  the  interaction  of  order  and 
condition  (F642  =  0.55,  p  >  .05). 


Figure  7.  Response  bias  (B")  as  a  function  of 
exposure  condition. 


3.4.3  Response  Bias 

Overall,  the  rats  tended  to  have  a  bias 
toward  reporting  "long",  as  can  be  seen  in 
Figure  7  which  presents  the  mean  B"  values 
for  each  exposure  condition  and  order. 
However,  exposure  condition  did  not  exert  a 
systematic  effect  on  response  bias  (F642  = 
1.26,  p  >  .05).  There  were  no  order  effects 
(F,  7  =  0.79,  p  >  .05)  or  interaction  of  order 
and  condition  (F642  =  0.51,  p  >.05). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


24 


3.4.4  Discriminability 


As  was  noted  above,  a  reliable  change 
in  slope  in  the  psychometric  function  indicates 
that  exposure  condition  a,ffected 
discriminability.  However,  as  can  be  seen  in 
Figure  8,  which  presents  the  mean  A’  values 
for  each  exposure  condition  and  order,  a 
systematic  change  in  discriminability  with 
exposure  condition  is  not  evident.  An 
ANOVA  indicated  a  marginal  effect  of 
exposure  condition  (F542  =  2.19,  p  =  .063), 
but  there  was  no  effect  of  order  (F,  7  =  3.00, 
p  >  .05)  or  interaction  of  order  and  exposure 
condition  (F642  =  1.23,  p  >  .05).  A’  in  this 
instance  provides  only  a  point  estimate  of 
discriminability  for  the  training  stimuli  (0.5 
vs.  5.0  s). 

3.4.5  General  Task  Performance 

There  are  two  measures  of  general  task  performance  which  are  of  considerable  importance 
in  behavioral  studies  of  toxic  substances  and  drugs.  These  are  the  total  trials  completed  and  the 
session  time.  In  the  present  task,  both  total  trials  and  session  time  are  limited:  300  trials  within 
6300  s.  Treatments  which  cause  physical  debility  (somnolence,  loss  of  motor  control,  etc.)  can 
affect  performance  of  the  bisection  task,  with  the  result  that  all  of  the  trials  in  a  session  are  not 
completed.  Often  data  from  such  sessions  are  erratic  and  are  routinely  discarded.  Our  previous 
research  with  drugs  and  the  bisection  procedure  (Shurtleff  et  al.,  1992)  has  indicated  that  rats  fail 
to  finish  all  300  trials  of  a  daily  session  at  drug  doses  which  are  physically  debilitating.  In  the 
present  study,  all  rats  completed  300  trials  in  every  test  condition,  indicating  that  the  exposures 
were  not  physically  debilitating. 


I  CONOmON 

Figure  8.  Discriminability  or  sensitivity  (A’)  as 
a  function  of  exposure  condition. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


25 


Examination  of  session  time,  however, 
reveals  a  definite  increase  in  time  to  complete 
300  trials  as  a  function  of  exposure  condition,  as 
can  be  seen  in  Figure  9.  This  is  a  reliable  effect 
iF^42  =  2.37,  p  <  .05),  although  there  was  no 
effect  of  order  (F,  7  =  .02,  p  >  .05)  or  order  by 
condition  interaction  (F642  =  1.32,  p  >  .05). 

3.4.6  Null  Responses 

Null  responses  occur  when  subjects  take 
longer  than  10  s  to  make  a  decision  on  a  given 
Figure  9.  Session  time  as  a  function  of  trial.  Given  the  increase  in  session  time,  it  was 
exposure  condition.  expected  that  total  null  responses  would  increase 

as  a  function  of  exposure  condition.  Figure  10 
shows  that  this  did  occur  (F642  =  2.62,  p  =  .03),  but  that  there  were  no  reliable  order  (F,  7  =  0.51, 
p  >  .05)  or  interaction  (F1542  =  0.92,  p  >  .05)  effects. 

3.4.6. 1  Null  Responses  and  Decision 
Confidence 

The  parallel  increase  in  null  responses  and 
session  time  could  reflect  an  increase  in  decision 
time,  or  a  minor  physical  debilitation  of  the  rats. 
In  classical  human  psychophysics,  a  subject’s 
confidence  in  a  judgment  or  decision  has  an 
inverse  relationship  to  the  judgment  time  and  to 
the  magnitude  of  the  stimulus  differences  being 
Figure  10.  Null  responses  as  a  function  of  judged  (Guilford,  1954;  Pierrel  and  Murray, 
exposure  condition.  1963).  If  null  responses  reflect  confidence  rather 

than  physical  performance,  they  should  be 
inversely  related  to  the  subject’s  confidence  in  the  judgment.  Thus,  the  fewest  null  responses 
should  occur  at  the  training  stimuli  because  the  magnitude  of  the  stimulus  differences  being 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


26 


judged  are  the  greatest.  By  the  same  logic,  the  highest  number  of  null  responses  should  occur 
at  the  bisection  point. 


Figure  1 1  shows  the  mean  null  responses  for  several  exposure  conditions  as  a  function 
of  stimulus  duration.  For  every  exposure  condition,  a  similar  pattern  was  observed:  the  fewest 
null  responses  occurred  at  the  two  training  stimuli  and  the  pet^  number  of  null  responses 
occurred  in  the  vicinity  of  the  bisection  point.  This  pattern  was  even  observed  in  the  cage 
control  condition  in  which  a  change  in  behavior  cannot  be  reasonably  attributed  to  physical 
debility  or  some  other  performance  factor.  A  multiple  regression  analysis  of  null  responses  as 
a  function  of  log  stimulus  duration,  squared  log  stimulus  duration  (to  account  for  the  quadratic 
effect  evident  in  Figure  10),  and  exposure  condition  accounted  for  87%  of  the  variance  in  the 
data  (F34J  =  110.75,  p  <  .00001).  Reliable  effects  of  log  stimulus  duration  (t  =  12.82,  p  < 
.00001),  squared  log  stimulus  duration  (t  =  -17.63,  p  <  .00001),  and  exposure  condition  (t  =  3.78, 
p  =  .0005)  were  found. 


Figure  II.  Null  responses  as  a  function  of  Figure  12.  Cumulative  null  responses  as  a 
stimulus  duration  and  exposure  condition.  function  of  stimulus  duration  and  exposure 

condition. 

A  putative  lower  limit  for  the  effect  of  microwave  exposure  on  decision  confidence  can 
be  obtained  by  examining  Figure  12.  Figure  12  plots  cumulative  null  responses  (null  responses 
summed  successively  across  stimulus  durations)  for  each  exposure  condition.  In  general,  the  full 
power  condition  has  the  highest  cumulative  null  response  function,  the  cage  control  condition  has 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  27 


the  lowest  cumulative  null  response  function,  and  the  remaining  power  levels  are  arrayed  in  order 
in  between.  The  sham  condition  neatly  divides  the  conditions  into  two  groups  between  -40  and  - 
30  dB.  This  suggests  a  time-averaged  SAR  in  the  range  of  7.2  X  10  *  to  7.2  X  10*  W/kg. 

3.4.7  Ionizing  Radiation  and  Acoustic  Noise  Effects 

Table  5  presents  the  correlations  between  non-microwave  exposures  (X-ray  and  noise)  and 
those  behaviors  for  which  there  were  reliable  microwave  effects.  None  of  the  correlations  were 
reliable,  which  indicates  that  changes  in  the  psychometric  function  (probability  long),  session 
time  and  null  responses  cannot  be  attributed  to  an  effect  of  X-radiation  or  noise  exposure. 


Table  5:  Correlation  Coefficients  (r),  T-test  statistics  (t),  and  Probability  Levels 
(p),  For  Covariations  Between  Noise  and  X-Ray  Exposures  and  Those 
Behaviors  Affected  by  Microwave  Exposures. 

NOISE 

Probability  Long 

r 

t 

P 

-.0646 

-.222 

0.6015 

Session  Time 

.165 

.227 

0.8217 

Null  Responses 

.126 

-1.04 

0.3031 

X-RAY 

Probability  Long 

r 

t 

P 

-.0808 

-.524 

0.6015 

Session  Time 

.183 

.623 

0.5362 

Null  Responses 

.159 

.421 

0.6758 

Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


28 


3.5  Discussion 


The  null  response  data  clearly  suggest  that  HPPM  can  affect  cognitive  function  in  rats 
within  a  two  h  period  of  time  immediately  following  the  exposure.  A  reliable  dose -response 
function  relating  null  responses  and  ihicrowave  power  was  demonstrated.  This  indicates  that 
manipulation  of  microwave  power  produces  orderly  changes  in  null  responses.  Moreover,  the 
lack  of  reliable  exposure  order  (ascending  vs.  descending)  or  interaction  effects  between  exposure 
order  and  power  level  demonstrates  that  this  is  a  robust  and  replicable  effect.  Null  responses 
measure  the  decision-making  process  of  the  rats  because  these  responses  are  demonstrably  under 
stimulus  control.  As  expected  from  the  human  literature,  null  responses  are  a  bitonic  function 
of  stimulus  differences.  Moreover,  null  responses  retain  a  bitonic  relationship  to  stimulus 
differences  as  they  increase  with  microwave  power.  The  threshold  SAR  for  this  effect  could  be 
as  low  as  7.2  X  10'*  W/kg.  At  full  power  the  SAR  was  0.072  W/kg,  which  is  still  considerably 
below  the  4  W/kg  SAR  at  which  previous  HPPM  effects  have  been  observed  (D’Andrea  and 
Cobb,  1987;  D’Andrea  et  al.,  1989)  and  about  one-fifth  of  the  current  occupational  safety 
standard. 

The  two  measures  of  discriminability  used  in  this  study  (slope  of  the  psychometric 
function  and  A’)  are  in  apparent  disagreement  regarding  the  effects  of  HPPM.  A’  values  did  not 
change  reliably  as  a  function  of  power,  but  reliable  slope  changes  did  occur.  The  change  in  slope 
was  noted  between  -40  dB  and  -30  dB,  which  is  consistent  with  the  results  for  null  responses. 
The  A’  measure  has  the  advantage  of  being  bias-free  in  the  sense  of  signal  detection  theory 
(Green  and  Swets,  1974),  but  provides  information  only  concerning  the  discriminability  of  the 
training  stimuli  (a  very  easy  discrimination).  The  slope  of  the  psychometric  function,  on  the 
other  hand,  relates  information  for  all  the  stimuli  presented,  but  is  not  bias-free.  Bias,  as 
measured  by  B"  (again  only  for  the  training  stimuli),  however,  also  did  not  vary  with  power 
level.  Thus,  the  difference  between  measures  may  be  due  to  the  greater  sensitivity  of  the  slope 
to  HPPM  effects  because  it  assays  more  difficult  discriminations  which  were  not  assayed  by  A’. 

Previous  studies  of  the  effects  of  HPPM  on  timing  behavior  did  not  employ 
psychophysical  tasks.  Both  D’Andrea  and  Cobb  (1987)  and  D’Andrea  et  al.  (1989)  studied 
behavioral  performance  on  a  Fixed  Interval  (FI)  schedule  of  reinforcement.  While  such 
performance  is  primarily  under  the  control  of  time  perception,  it  is  well-known  that  other  factors 
exert  considerable  control  over  FI  performance  (Gibbon,  1977).  Thus,  performance  in 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


29 


psychophysical  tasks  is  not  always  consistent  with  FI  performance  (e.g.,  Shurtleff  et  al.,  1990). 
Moreover,  if  the  difficulty  of  the  discrimination  is  crucial,  as  suggested  above,  it  is  unlikely  that 
an  effect  would  be  detected  in  FI  performance. 

An  effect  on  discriminability,  in  .the  demonstrated  absence  of  an  effect  on  the  BP, 
suggests  that  HPPM  is  affecting  the  variance  of  the  "internal  clock"  (Raslear  et  al.,  1988; 
Shurtleff  et  al.,  1990,  1992).  Unfortunately,  such  variance  arises  from  multiple  sources,  including 
memory,  attention,  the  pacemaker,  and  the  decision  function.  The  results  obtained  for  null 
responses  suggests  that  cognitive  functions  may  be  particularly  susceptible  to  HPPM  effects.  The 
data  which  will  be  presented  in  the  next  section  of  this  report  support  that  supposition  and  further 
suggest  that  changes  in  memory  function  may  be  responsible  for  the  increase  in  null  responses 
observed  in  the  bisection  task.  Thus,  we  suggest  that  future  research  on  HPPM  effects  focus 
more  on  cognitive  tasks. 

The  ability  to  expose  animals  to  very  high  peak-power,  low  average-power  microwave 
fields  within  a  controlled  environment  is  almost  unique.  We  have  used  that  ability  to  directly 
address  the  issue  of  whether  such  fields  can  affect  cognitive  and  perceptual  function  using 
behavioral  methods  which  have  been  demonstrated  (Fagot  and  Stewart,  1970;  Raslear,  1983; 
Raslear  et  al„  in  press)  to  yield  functionally  equivalent  information  in  animals  and  in  humans. 
Thus,  the  data  presented  above  constitute  a  unique  contribution  to  the  investigation  of  microwave 
effects  on  behavior. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


30 


SECTION  4:  MEMORY  CONSOLIDATION  (Y-MAZE)' 


In  the  previous  section  we  observed  that  HPPM  produces  a  dose-dependent  increase  in 
null  responses  and  also  a  dose-dependeni  decrease  in  discriminability  (slope  of  the  psychometric 
function).  Since  the  bisection  point  was  not  affected  by  HPPM,  we  concluded  that  the  variance 
of  the  timing  system  was  increased.  This,  in  turn,  indicates  that  one  of  several  cognitive 
functions  (memory,  attention,  decision  function)  could  have  been  affected.  Unfortunately,  it  is 
not  possible  to  specify  which  cognitive  function  was  affected  with  the  bisection  task.  The  Y- 
maze  task,  on  the  other  hand, .is  specifically  a  test  of  memory  consolidation.  Thus,  the  results 
of  this  experiment  can  be  used  to  suggest  a  more  specific  cognitive  deficit  than  the  bisection  task. 

4.1  Background 

The  primary  objective  of  this  experiment  was  to  examine  the  effects  of  high  peak,  low 
average  power,  pulsed  microwaves  on  memory  function  in  rats.  Current  civilian  and  DOD  safety 
regulations  specify  an  exposure  limit  averaged  over  a  six  minute  period  (see  Bassen,  1989; 
D’ Andrea,  Cobb,  and  de  Lorge,  1989)  but  do  not  limit  peak  power.  The  exposures  of  interest 
in  this  experiment  were  of  sufficiently  short  duration  so  as  to  not  violate  current  safety 
regulations.  However,  the  peak  power  levels  are  high  enough  to  cause  concern  that  they  may 
have  adverse  effects,  especially  since  there  is  a  report  that  memory  function  in  rats  is  affected 
by  low-level,  pulsed  microwave  exposure  (Lai,  Carino,  Horita  and  Guy,  1989).  Previous  work 
in  this  area,  as  noted  below,  has  not  used  the  very  high  peak  power  levels  which  will  be  used 
in  this  protocol. 

4.1.1  Memory  Consolidation 

It  is  common  knowledge  that  a  severe  jolt  to  the  human  brain,  caused  by  a  fall,  a  blow 
to  the  head,  or  an  electric  shock,  can  cause  a  loss  of  memory  for  events  in  the  recent  past 
(Lindsay  and  Norman,  1972).  This  phenomenon  is  known  as  retrograde  amnesia.  More  than  40 
years  ago  C.  P.  Duncan  (1949)  demonstrated  that  retrograde  amnesia  could  also  be  studied  in  an 


'  Portions  of  this  work  have  been  presented  at  the  13'^  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE 
Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  Society,  Orlando,  FL  (Raslear,  Akyel,  Serafini,  Bates,  and 
Belt,  1991a). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


31 


animal  model.  In  his  now  classic  experiment,  rats  learned  a  simple  avoidance  task  and  were 
subsequently  given  electroconvulsive  shock.  Those  rats  which  received  the  shock  15  min  after 
learning  the  task  had  poorer  retention  of  the  task  when  subsequently  tested  than  did  rats  which 
received  a  similar  shock  1  h  after  learning  the  task.  It  is  now  well  established  that  a  variety  of 
treatments,  including  neurohormones  and  other  drugs,  are  capable  of  modulating  the  retention  of 
newly-acquired  information  in  a  variety  of  aversive  and  appetitively  motivated  tasks  across  a 
wide  range  of  species  (McGaugh,  1990).  McGaugh  (1990)  indicates  that  changes  in  memory 
have  been  observed  in  bees,  birds,  fish,  rodents  and  primates,  and  that  memory  can  be  either 
enhanced  or  diminished,  depending  on  the  particular  treatment  administered.  As  was  the  case 
with  Duncan’s  classic  experiment,  the  effect  of  any  treatment  is  dependent  on  the  time  at  which 
it  is  administered  following  the  learning  experience.  Treatments  which  are  administered  30  min 
or  more  following  training  have  no  effects  on  subsequent  retention.  Current  theory  is  that 
memory  consolidation  is  an  active  process  with  a  time  course  of  approximately  30  min. 
Memories  which  are  not  consolidated  are  lost. 

A  variety  of  hormones,  including  ACTH,  vasopressin,  substance  P,  cholecystokinin,  and 
epinephrine,  and  opioid  peptides  have  been  found  to  exert  a  modulating  influence  on  memory 
consolidation  (McGaugh,  1990).  It  is  usually  the  case  in  these  studies  that  the  memory 
modulating  effect  is  not  only  time-dependent  but  also  dose-dependent.  For  instance,  low  doses 
of  epinephrine  (3  to  100  pg/kg)  enhanced  retention  of  an  inhibitory  avoidance  response,  while 
a  high  dose  (300  pg/kg)  impaired  retention.  Any  dose  given  30  or  more  min  after  training  was 
ineffective.  Because  of  the  biphasic  influence  of  many  of  these  memory  modulating 
biochemicals,  it  is  important  to  carefully  design  an  experiment  so  as  to  detect  changes  in 
performance  in  either  direction.  Moreover,  it  is  extremely  important  to  note  dose-response 
relationships  since  opposite  effects  can  easily  be  obtained. 

Since  the  modulation  of  memory  by  post-training  experiences  is  common  to  both  human 
and  sub-human  species,  the  use  of  animal  models  to  study  the  effects  of  potentially  toxic  or 
harmful  treatments  on  cognitive  processes  is  highly  attractive.  The  present  experiment  employs 
an  animal  model  to  study  the  effects  of  high  power,  short  duration,  pulsed  microwave  radiation 
on  memory  consolidation. 

Although  interest  in  the  effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  behavior  dates  to  the  1950’s, 
there  is  a  dearth  of  creditable  information  on  the  effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  cognitive 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


32 


processes  and  a  total  absence  of  information  regarding  high  power  microwave  radiation  of  the 
type  which  is  of  interest  here.  A  recent  review  of  the  literature  notes  that  "There  are  numerous 
reports  -  probably  more  than  in  any  other  area  of  claimed  bioeffects  of  weak  environmental  EM 
fields  -  of  subtle  behavioral  changes  in  situations  lacking  necessary  rigor  in  experimental  design, 
often  defective  in  control  procedures',  with  inadequate  evaluation  of  intercurrent  stimuli,  and 
plagued  by  experimental  data  so  noisy  that  even  statistical  evaluation  does  little  to  establish 
credibility  for  claimed  interactions."  (Adey,  1981.  p.  481).  As  recently  as  1984,  a  survey  of  the 
behavioral  literature  on  microwave  effects  (Gage,  1984)  did  not  report  any  animal  studies  of 
cognitive  processes.  The  vast  majority  of  animal  studies  have  employed  operant  conditioning 
procedures  and  focused  on  changes  in  response  rates  on  various  schedules  of  reinforcement.  Our 
own  review  of  the  microwave  literature  has  uncovered  two  studies  of  relevance,  although  neither 
employed  HPPM  radiation. 

Nealeigh,  Garner,  Morgan,  Cross  and  Lambert  (1971)  exposed  rats  to  a  2.45  GHz  field 
at  a  power  density  of  50  mW/cm*  for  20  min  prior  to  learning  the  location  of  food  in  a  Y-maze. 
The  radiation  was  continuous  wave  (CW)  and  produced  a  1-2  °C  increase  in  body  temperature. 
The  rats  were  tested  and  exposed  on  three  successive  days.  Both  sham-exposed  and  microwave- 
exposed  rats  showed  a  reliable  increase  in  correct  responses  as  a  function  of  training.  Although 
there  was  no  main  effect  of  the  microwave  exposure,  the  experimental  group  performed  better 
on  the  second  and  third  days  of  training,  as  indicated  by  a  reliable  Days  by  Treatment  interaction. 
More  recently,  Lai  and  his  colleagues  (Lai,  Carino,  Horita  and  Guy,  1989)  studied  the  effect  on 
rats  of  exposure  to  low-level  pulsed  microwaves  (2450  Mhz,  2  ps  pulses,  500  pps,  SAR  of  0.6 
W/kg)  for  either  20  or  45  nun  prior  to  learning  the  location  of  food  in  a  radial  arm  maze.  Rats 
which  received  a  45  min  exposure  performed  reliably  worse  than  sham-exposed  rats  over  a  ten 
day  training  period.  Rats  which  received  a  20  min  exposure  performed  reliably  better  than  sham- 
exposed  rats  for  the  first  two  days  of  training.  Thereafter  there  were  no  differences  between  the 
groups. 


The  biphasic  influence  of  the  microwave  treatment  in  the  Lai  et  al.  (1989)  study  is 
reminiscent  of  the  effects  of  numerous  neurochemicals,  such  as  opioid  peptides,  which  McGaugh 
discusses  in  his  review  of  memory  modulation.  Lai  and  his  colleagues  have,  in  fact, 
demonstrated  that  low-level  microwave  radiation  probably  activate  endogenous  opioids  which  in 
turn  cause  changes  in  cholinergic  activity  (Lai,  1987;  Lai,  1988;  Lai,  Horita,  Chou,  and  Guy, 
1987a;  Lai,  Horita,  Chou,  and  Guy,  1987b;  Lai.  Horita,  Chou,  and  Guy,  1987c).  The  mechanism 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


33 


by  which  endogenous  opioids  are  activated  is  currently  not  known.  Lai  et  al.  (1987  and  1988) 
have  shown  that  the  biochemical  reaction  to  microwave  exposure  is  similar  to  that  caused  by 
various  stressors,  although  the  rats  in  their  studies  exhibit  no  obvious  physical  signs  of  distress 
during  exposure.  (It  should  be  noted  that  Cordts  et  al.  (1988)  found  that  rats  would  not  learn  to 
avoid  HPPM  radiation,  which  further  suggests  that  the  animals  are  not  physically  distressed  by 
even  high  power  pulses  of  microwave  radiation).  It  is  possible,  however,  that  the  effect  is  direct. 
Recently  Weaver  and  Astumian  (1990)  have  developed  a  physical  model  which  shows  that  very 
weak  periodic  electric  fields  can  affect  macromolecules  in  a  cell’s  membrane.  Such  fields  can 
couple  to  membrane-associated,  enzyme-catalyzed  reactions  by  means  of  an  electroconformational 
mechanism.  Since  many  membrane-bound  enzymes  have  conformational  transitions  which  make 
them  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  electric  field  that  exists  across  the  cell  membrane,  it  is  possible 
that  electromagnetic  fields  can  exert  a  direct  effect  on  the  production  of  hormones, 
neurotransmitters  and  other  neurochemicals  by  the  modulation  of  enzyme  conformational 
transitions. 

Given  the  lack  of  dosimetry  in  the  Nealeigh  et  al.  (1971)  study,  it  is  difficult  to  cite 
agreement  with  the  performance  enhancement  found  by  Lai  et  al.  (1989).  Nevertheless,  the  two 
studies  taken  together  suggest  that  memory  function  in  animals  which  have  been  exposed  to  HPM 
warrant  a  closer  examination.  Either  thermoelastic  expansion  of  the  brain,  which  is  believed  to 
be  the  cause  of  "microwave  hearing"  (Lin,  1980),  or  neurochemical  changes  in  the  brain  could 
represent  a  sufficient  insult  to  the  brain  to  disrupt  cognitive  function  and  affect  the  performance 
of  military  personnel. 

4.2  Task  Description 

The  basic  idea  behind  this  experiment  is  that  some  learning  takes  place  each  time  an 
animal  or  person  experiences  something  new  or  significant.  However,  because  new  and/or 
significant  events  are  constantly  occurring  to  most  living  mammals,  not  all  such  learning  is 
permanently  preserved  in  memory.  Rather,  memory  has  two  forms:  a  short-term  form  and  a 
permanent  form.  Information  which  are  stored  in  the  short-term  memory  are  volatile.  If  they 
are  not  moved  into  the  long-term  memory,  they  fade  and  cannot  be  retrieved.  If  the  information 
are  not  made  permanent,  and  an  insult  occurs  to  the  brain  (e.g.,  a  blow  to  the  head),  the  memory 
(information)  will  be  lost. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


34 


A  good  example  of  short-term  memory  occurs  when  one  calls  information  at  a  phone 
booth.  If  a  pencil  and  paper  is  not  available,  the  common  strategy  for  remembering  a  new  phone 
number  is  to  sub-vocally  repeat  the  number  until  it  has  been  dialed.  Within  a  few  minutes  after 
the  call  has  been  completed,  most  persons  will  have  forgotten  the  number. 

In  the  Y-maze  task,  we  allow  a  thirsty  rat  to  explore  a  novel  environment  until  he 
discovers  and  drinks  water  for  a  few  seconds.  Because  the  rat  is  thirsty,  the  discovery  and 
drinking  of  water  makes  this  a  significant  event  in  his  life  (one  that  is  likely  to  be  remembered). 
Immediately  following  this  learning,  the  rat  is  subjected  to  a  treatment  condition.  If  the  treatment 
condition  consists  of  being  returned  to  its  home  cage,  the  short-term  memory  of  the  location  of 
the  water  will  be  transformed  into  a  permanent  memory  (memory  consolidation).  If  the  treatment 
consists  of  a  trauma  to  the  brain  (e.g.  microwave  exposure),  then  memory  consolidation  will  be 
disrupted. 


4.3  Materials  and  Methods 

4.3.1  Subjects 

Thirty  rats  served  as  subjects.  Ten  rats  were  exposed  to  full  power,  10  to  -30  dB  power, 
and  10  served  as  cage  controls.  The  rats  were  water  deprived  prior  to  training  and  testing  by 
restricting  access  to  water  to  one  hour  each  day.  Microwave-exposed  rats  received  200  pulses 
from  TEMPO,  as  described  in  the  Introduction  section. 

4.3.2  Apparatus 

The  Y-maze  consisted  of  three  arms  which  were  23  cm  long,  10  cm  wide  and  12  cm 
deep.  The  walls  of  the  maze  were  made  of  Plexiglas  and  the  floor  was  a  grid  constructed  of  steel 
bars.  To  facilitate  observation  of  the  subjects,  the  top  of  the  maze  was  covered  by  a  transparent 
Plexiglas  sheet.  Two  of  the  arms  were  illuminated  by  identical  12  W  lights  and  contained  water 
bottles.  A  guillotine  door  was  used  at  the  starting  arm  to  confine  the  subjects  before  the  start 
of  the  experiment 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


35 


4.3.3  Behavioral  Testing 


Y-maze  training  was  conducted  following  the  procedures  described  by  Sternberg  et  al. 
(1985).  Briefly,  five  days  prior  to  the  experiment  the  rats  were  placed  on  a  water  deprivation 
schedule  in  which  they  are  allowed  1  h  access  to  water  each  day.  On  the  day  of  exposure,  each 
animal  was  placed  into  the  starting  arm  of  the  Y-maze.  One  choice  arm  of  the  maze  was 
illuminated  (randomly  selected  for  each  rat),  and  a  full  water  bottle  was  located  at  the  end  of  that 
arm.  The  other  choice  arm  was  dark  and  an  empty  water  bottle  was  located  at  the  end  of  that 
arm.  Each  rat  was  allowed  to  explpre  the  maze  until  the  full  water  bottle  was  located  and  water 
was  consumed.  Errors  were  scored  for  entry  into  the  dark  arm,  re-entry  into  starting  arm,  and 
exit  of  the  lighted  arm  without  consumption.  Only  one  trial  was  allowed  (finding  and  drinking 
from  the  water  bottle)  per  rat.  The  available  literature  on  this  task  indicates  that  for  any 
treatment  to  affect  memory  consolidation,  it  must  be  administered  within  30  min  of  training 
(McGaugh,  1990).  Microwave  exposures  were  begun  within  1-2  min  of  learning  the  location  of 


Y-maze  testing  occurred  on  the  day 
following  exposure  (24-h  retention  test)  using 
the  same  procedures.  Errors,  scored  as  in 
training,  in  locating  the  water  were  used  to 
measure  the  retention  of  the  original  learning 
in  the  three  groups. 

4.4  Results 


Errors  on  the  24-h  memory 
consolidation  test  are  shown  in  Figure  13. 
Exposed  rats  made  an  average  of  13.2  errors, 
sham-exposed  rats  made  an  average  of  8.9 
errors,  and  the  cage  controls  made  an  average 
of  3.8  errors.  An  Analysis  of  Variance  on  the 
error  scores  indicated  a  significant  difference  between  the  groups  (F2,29  =  7.31,  p  =  .0029).  Post- 
hoc  analyses  indicated  that  the  two  exposed  groups  did  not  differ  from  each  other,  but  were 
reliably  different  from  the  cage  control  group. 


water. 


TREATMENT  GROUPS 


Figure  13.  Errors  in  24-h  retention  test  in  Y- 
maze  for  each  treatment  condition. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


36 


An  analysis  of  the  energy  output  for 
each  of  the  200  TEMPO  pulses  for  each  rat  in 
the  exposed  and  sham-exposed  conditions  was 
subsequently  conducted.  A  statistically 
reliable  correlation  was  found  betvyeen  the 
number  of  errors  each  rat  made  on  the  test 
day  and  the  mean  energy  output  of  TEMPO 
on  the  previous  day  (r  =  0.3837,  t,8  =  1.763, 
p  [1 -tailed]  =  .047).  This  is  illustrated  in 
Figure  14. 


4.5  Discussion 


Differences  in  errors  between  controls 
and  the  two  exposure  groups  could  be  due  a 
number  of  variables.  Both  exposure  groups 
experienced  additional  handling  stress.  X-ray  exposure,  and  noise,  which  were  not  experienced 
by  the  cage  controls.  The  correlation  between  errors  and  mean  energy  output,  however,  strongly 
suggests  that  differences  in  the  amount  of  RF  energy  experienced  by  the  two  exposure  groups 
was  critical.  Reference  to  Table  3,  moreover,  indicates  that  noise  exposure  was  highest  for  the  - 
30  dB  group,  which  is  contrary  to  the  positive  correlation  between  energy  output  and  errors. 
Similarly,  Table  2  shows  that  X-ray  exposure  was  also  highest  for  the  -30  dB  group.  The  only 
variable  which  can  account  for  the  increase  in  errors  is  increased  HPPM  energy  output. 

It  should  be  noted  that  the  results  of  this  experiment  are  consistent  with  the  results  of  the 
bisection  experiment.  An  increase  in  null  responses,  reflecting  a  decrease  in  decision  confidence, 
could  arise  from  a  memory  deficit.  In  other  words,  poor  recall  of  the  stimulus  just  presented, 
or  difficultly  in  recalling  the  reference  stimuli  could  result  in  an  increase  in  decision  time  and 
null  responses.  Taken  together,  the  bisection  and  memory  consolidation  experiments  strongly 
suggest  that  HPPM  may  have  a  significant  effect  on  memory  function.  This  notion  is  strongly 
supported  by  the  work  which  has  been  reported  by  Lai  and  his  co-workers  with  low  power 
microwave  exposures,  as  noted  above. 


Figure  14.  Mean  errors  as  a  function  of  mean 
energy  (J)  per  pulse. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


37 


38 


SECTION  5:  TREADMILL  RUNNING  ENDURANCE  ^ 


Physical  endurance  is  a  very  important  performance  characteristic  for  military  operations. 
Although  physical  endurance  can  be  measured  in  a  variety  of  ways,  we  chose  the  treadmill 
because  of  its  relevance  to  physiologjcal  function  and  its  easy  cross-species  comparability. 

5.1  Background 

The  primary  objective  .of  this  experiment  was  to  examine  the  effects  of  high  peak,  low 
average  power,  pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmill  endurance  in  rats.  As  has  been  noted  previously 
in  this  report,  current  civilian  and  DOD  safety  regulations  specify  an  exposure  limit  averaged 
over  a  six  minute  period  (see  Bassen,  1989;  D’ Andrea,  Cobb,  and  de  Lorge,  1989)  but  do  not 
limit  peak  power.  The  exposures  of  interest  discussed  here  are  of  sufficiently  short  duration  so 
as  to  not  violate  current  safety  regulations.  However,  the  peak  power  levels  are  high  enough  to 
cause  concern  that  they  may  have  adverse  effects,  especially  since  there  is  a  report  that  motor 
function  in  rats  is  affected  by  pulsed  microwave  exposure  (Klauenberg,  Merritt,  and  Erwin, 
1988).  This  previous  work,  however,  has  not  used  the  very  high  peak  power  levels  which  were 
used  in  this  experiment.  Moreover,  since  the  treadmill  endurance  task  has  not  been  used  to 
assess  the  effects  of  HPPM  exposure,  the  present  investigation,  is  exploratory  and 
groundbreaking  in  several  respects. 

5.2  Task  Description 

Treadmill  running  is  a  standard  laboratory  procedure  for  the  study  of  exercise  physiology 
(Selkurt,  1971).  However,  apart  from  its  more  strictly  physiological  uses  (e.g.,  the  measurement 
of  oxygen  consumption  [Bedford,  Tipton,  Wilson,  Oppliger,  and  Gisolfi,  1979],  muscle  blood 
flow  [Armstrong  and  Laughlin,  1985],  fat  metabolism  [Shibata  and  Nagasaka,  1987],  and  hepatic 
function  [Seelbach  and  Kris-Etherton,  1985]),  the  treadmill  also  provides  a  convenient  means  of 
assessing  an  animal’s  physical  endurance  following  various  drug  and  environmental 
manipulations  (Fancesconi  and  Mager,  1979, 1980;  Gerald,  1978;  Hillegaart  and  Ahlenius,  1987), 
including  ionizing  radiation  (Jones,  Osborn,  and  Kimeldorf,  1967). 


^  Portions  of  this  work  have  been  presented  at  the  First  Worid  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in 
Biology  and  Medicine  in  Lake  Buena  Vista,  FL  (Akyel,  Raslear.  Hammer  and  Belt,  1992). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


39 


The  amount  of  time  that  an  animal  can 
run  on  a  treadmill  without  faltering  is  a 
measure  of  the  animal’s  endurance  (E). 
Previous  research  has  shown  that  an  orderly 
relationship  exists  between  E  and  the  speed 
(S)  at  which  the  animal  is  required  to  run. 
Figure  15  illustrates  this  relationship  with  data 
from  a  study  by  Gerald  (1978).  Endurance  is 
an  exponential  function  of  running  speed  (i.e., 
E  =  10“'^^,  where  a  and  P  are  constants). 
Various  treatments,  such  as  drugs,  produce 
increases  or  decreases  in  E  which  are 
reflected  in  changes  in  the  constant  a.  This 
can  also  be  seen  in  Fig.  15,  which  shows  that 
E  increases  at  all  running  speeds  when  animals  are  given  2.5  mg/kg  amphetamine. 


Figure  15.  Relationship  between  running 
endurance  and  treadmill  speed  for  saline  and 
amphetamine.  Data  from  Gerald,  1978. 


The  relationship  in  Fig.  15  indicates  that  it  is  possible  to  select  a  running  speed  that  will 
generate  exhaustion  within  a  specified  period  of  time  for  the  average  rat  Groups  of  rats  tested 
at  a  selected  speed,  but  differing  in  their  exposure  to  HPPM,  can  thus  be  conveniently  compared 
with  respect  to  their  average  endurance  (time  running). 


In  the  present  experiment,  treadmill  running  at  a  selected  speed  was  used  to  assess 
physical  endurance  immediately  following  exposure  to  HPPM.  Literature  searches  conducted  at 
WRAIR  have  indicated  that  this  task  has  not  been  used  to  assess  the  effect  of  RF  energy. 


An  animal  model  of  physical  endurance  which  is  sensitive  to  changes  in  dose  of  RF 
radiation  would  be  of  great  interest  and  use  to  the  military  medical  community.  Physical 
endurance  is  a  key  component  of  many  basic  soldier  tasks,  particularly  in  a  combat  environment. 
Radar  transmitters  and  other  generators  produce  brief  high  energy  pulses  of  microwave  energy 
which  are  part  of  the  electromagnetic  environment  of  Army  and  other  military  personnel. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


40 


5.3  Materials  and  Methods 

5.3.1  Subjects 

Twenty-six  rats,  similar  to  thdse  previously  described,  served  as  subjects. 

5.3.2  Apparatus 

A  commercially  available  small  animal  treadmill  (Columbus  Instruments,  OH)  with  an 
adjustable  incline  and  speed  was  used. 

5.3.3  Behavioral  Testing 

For  8  days  prior  to  exposure,  rats  received  familiarization  training  on  the  treadmill 
apparatus  for  5  min  per  day.  Each  rat  was  placed  in  the  stationary  treadmill  at  an  8“  incline,  and 
a  relatively  slow  running  speed  (10  m/min)  commenced.  To  motivate  running,  animals  that  left 
the  moving  treadmill  and  entered  onto  an  adjoining  shock  grid  received  as  many  as  6  shocks  of 
200  ms  duration  at  163  V  and  0.5  mA  peak  shock  current  (the  lowest  possible  level  on  the 
equipment).  Shocks  could  be  avoided  by  running  and  could  be  escaped  by  re-entry  onto  the 
treadmill.  After  five  minutes  of  training  the  treadmill  was  stopped,  and  the  rat  was  returned  to 
its  home  cage. 

Following  the  training,  9  rats  were  exposed  to  200  microwave  pulses  (80  ns  width,  1 
pulse/8  s,  3  GHz)  using  the  TEMPO  exposure  system  with  700  MW  peak  transmitted  power 
(Bates  and  Bassen,  1989).  Nine  of  the  remaining  animals  were  sham-exposed,  and  8  rats  served 
as  cage  controls.  Sham-  or  microwave-exposed  animals  were  restrained  in  a  cylindrical  plastic 
enclosure  and  positioned  on  an  RF  transparent  platform  inside  a  corner  reflector.  Exposures 
lasted  approximately  25  min.  Immediately  following  the  sham-  or  microwave-exposure  the 
animals  were  placed  on  the  treadmill.  Control  animals  were  taken  from  their  cages  and  placed 
on  the  treadmill.  During  the  test  session  the  speed  of  the  belt  was  increased  to  30  m  per  min 
with  the  same  inclination.  Running  time  was  derined  as  the  total  time  that  each  animal  spent  in 
the  treadmill  before  receiving  3  consecutive  electric  shocks  within  10  s  without  leaving  the  shock 
grid  area. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


41 


2S0 


5.4  Results 


The  endurance  of  the  animals  was 

defined  as  the  total  running  time  of  the 

subject  during  the  high  speed  (30  m  per  min) 

test  trial.  As  depicted  in  Figure  16,  the  mean 

(±  SEM)  running  times  of  the  cage  control 

and  sham-exposed  animals  were  150.13  s  (± 

25.65)  and  152.89  s  (±  35.18),  respectively. 

On  the  other  hand,  microwave-exposed 

animals  ran  for  56.44  s  (±  10.69). 

Figure  16.  Mean  running  durations  (±  SEM)  .  ,  .  ,  ... 

r  ■  I  te.  n  ^  _ Significantly  less  than  the  two  groups  which 

for  microwave-exposed  (full  power),  sham-  &  ^  a  k 

exposed,  and  cage-control  rats.  were  not  exposed  to  microwave  fields.  A 

Kruskal-Wallis  one-way  ANOVA  test  (x' 
=6.02,  p  <  .05)  showed  that  reliable  differences  existed  among  the  groups. 

5.5  Discussion 

The  results  indicated  that  exposure  to  200  TE.MPO  pulses  decreased  the  rats’  endurance, 
as  reflected  in  running  time  on  the  treadmill  without  faltering.  While  tlife  current  safety 
guidelines  suggest  that  whole-body  SAR  should  be  limited  to  0.4  W/kg  and/or  a  local  SAR  of 
8  W/kg,  the  TEMPO  exposure  system,  which  was  used  in  the  present  experiment,  produced  a 
time-averaged  midbrain  SAR  of  0.21  W/kg  and  time-averaged  whole-body  SAR  of  0.07  W/kg. 
Thus,  while  exposure  to  microwave  fields  composed  of  very  short  pulses  and  extremely  high 
peak  power  may  be  within  present  safety  guidelines,  the  present  data  raise  questions  concerning 
the  adequacy  of  these  guidelines. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


42 


SECTION  6:  MOTIVATION  FOR  FOOD  (BEHAVIORAL  ECONOMICS) 

AND  CIRCADIAN  RHYTHMICITY  ' 

Because  the  term  "motivation"  is  ubiquitous  in  psychology,  it  has  various  meanings  in 
various  contexts.  In  the  present  study,  "motivation"  means  behavior  which  is  directed  by  a 
physiological  requirement  for  nutrients.  The  method  which  was  chosen  to  study  motivation  was 
dictated  by  the  recent  success  of  behavioral  economics  to  bring  together  the  disparate  fields  of 
behavioral  analysis  and  economics.  The  key  to  understanding  work  in  behavioral  economics  is 
an  understanding  of  a  few  basic  economic  concepts.  All  organisms,  including  people,  consume 
commodities  such  as  food.  The  amount  of  a  commodity  which  will  be  consumed  is  a  function 
of  the  price  of  that  commodity.  As  the  price  increases,  the  consumption  decreases.  The 
relationship  between  price  and  the  amount  consumed  (actually  the  slope  of  the  function)  is 
demand.  The  experiment  reported  here  examined  changes  in  the  demand  for  food  as  a  function 
of  HPPM  exposure.  Since  demand  curves  from  classical  economics  (with  humans  as  the 
consumers)  are  of  the  same  form  as  demand  curves  from  behavioral  economics  (with  rats, 
pigeons  and  monkeys  as  the  consumers),  this  aspect  of  the  task  should  provide  us  with  cross¬ 
species  information  on  motivational  effects  of  HPPM. 

Another  aspect  of  behavioral  economic  studies  is  that  they  often  take  place  within  a 
"closed  economy".  This  means  that  the  animals  live  in  the  experimental  situation  and  earn  all 
of  the  commodity  they  are  working  for  within  that  situation.  Thus,  the  method  readily  lends 
itself  to  a  simultaneous  examination  of  circadian  rhythms. 

6.1  Background 

Many  experimental  treatments  of  military  interest  have  multiple  behavioral  sequelae  which 
currently  require  the  use  of  several  behavioral  procedures  and  long  periods  of  training  to  measure. 
This  is  also  true  of  research  on  the  behavioral  effects  of  microwave  radiation.  The  most  reliable 
measures,  to  date,  of  microwave  effects  on  behavior  employ  operant  conditioning  techniques 
(Gage.  1984).  Typically  these  tasks  require  long  periods  of  training  with  relatively  few 
experimental  subjects.  As  a  result,  it  is  difficult  to  establish  functional  relationships  between  the 


'  Portions  of  this  work  have  been  presented  at  the  13*  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in 
Medicine  and  Biology  Society.  Orlando.  FL  (Raslear.  Akyel.  Serafini.  Bates,  and  Belt.  1991b). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


43 


physical  parameters  of  microwave  exposure  (e.g.,  frequency,  power  density,  specific  absorption 
rate  [SAR],  etc.)  and  behavioral  effects  in  a  sufficiently  large  sample  of  animals.  The  inability 
to  test  more  subjects  in  a  shorter  period  of  time  is  especially  serious  if  the  ultimate  objective  of 
the  research  is  to  establish  exposure  standards.  In  this  case,  a  sufficient  number  of  subjects  is 
essential  to  establish  and  test  the  replicability  of  effects  and  to  establish  population  estimates  (i.e.. 
means  and  confidence  intervals)  of  the  dose-response  function(s). 

A  cost-effective  method  for  the  behavioral  analysis  of  drugs,  toxins,  and  other  treatments 
of  interest  to  the  military  community  has  recently  been  devised  and  tested  (Raslear,  Bauman, 
Hursh,  Shurtleff,  and  Simmons,  1988;  Hursh,  Raslear,  Shurtleff,  Bauman  and  Simmons,  1988). 
The  research  reported  here  used  this  method  to  simultaneously  assay  microwave  effects  in  two 
behavioral  functions  of  military  relevance  (motivational  and  circadian  rhythm  function)  within 
a  seven  day  period  for  groups  of  six  rats  and  required  no  training  of  subjects.  The  rapid  testing 
method  allows  treatment  effects  to  be  replicated  within  seven  days  as  often  as  required.  A  brief 
description  of  the  testing  method  follows. 

6.2  Task  Description 


6.2.1  The  Behavioral  Assay 
Motivational  Effects 


V 


Motivational  effects  are  assessed  using  the  experimental  and  analytic  methods  developed 
by  Hursh  (1984).  In  this  method,  subjects  are  required  to  perform  a  specific  motor  response 
(e.g.,  lever  pressing)  in  order  to  obtain  their  entire  daily  ration  of  one  or  more  commodities  (e.g., 
food,  water,  etc.).  Under  these  conditions,  the  consumption  of  a  commodity,  such  as  food,  is 
partly  determined  by  the  price  of  the  commodity  (i.e.,  the  number  of  responses  required  to 
receive  a  single  food  pellet,  also  known  as  the  Fixed  Ratio).  A  plot  of  the  amount  of  a 
commodity  consumed  as  a  function  of  price  yields  a  demand  curve.  The  degree  to  which 
consumption  declines  with  increases  in  price  is  called  elasticity  of  demand.  Elasticity  directly 
determines  whether  a  price  increase  will  be  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  responding,  no  change 
or  a  decrease  in  responding.  A  demand  curve  with  a  shallow  negative  slope  implies  an  increase 
in  output  or  expenditure  and  is  called  inelastic  demand.  A  demand  curve  with  a  steep  negative 
slope  implies  a  decrease  in  response  rate  and  is  called  elastic  demand.  Hursh  has  found 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


44 


that  demand  is  a  major  dimension  of 
motivation  which  can  change  along  two 
different  dimensions:  intensity  and  slope. 

Recent  experiments  have  indicated  that  these 
two  dimensions  of  demand  are  sensitive  to 
such  variables  as  the  nature  of  the 
commodity,  the  availability  of  substitutes,  the 
level  of  deprivation  and  pharmacological 
treatments. 

Whereas  the  basic  experiments  on 
demand  analysis  required  long  periods  of  time 
to  complete  (e.g.,  approximately  30  days  to 
determine  a  single  demand  curx  e)  the  present  Figure  17.  Log  pellets  earned  as  a  function  of 
method  compresses  the  test  period  into  7  See  text  for  details. 

days.  This  is  accomplished  by  tripling  the 

response  requirement  each  day  (i.e.,  a  300%  daily  increase).  Previous  work  had  increased  the 
response  requirement  by  much  smaller  daily  increments  (e.g.,  20%),  and  so  required  longer  to 
produce  a  complete  demand  curve.  Extensive  testing  of  this  method  has  now  been  completed. 
For  instance.  Figure  17  presents  median  demand  curves  for  food  as  a  function  of  price  with 
response  effort  (W),  number  of  pellets  per  Fixed  Ratio  (M),  and  the  probability  (a)  of  receiving 
pellets  (per  Fixed  Ratio)  as  parameters  (Hursh  et  al.,  1988).  These  three  factors,  together  with 
the  response  requirement  (N,  fixed  ratio)  determine  the  unit  price  (P)  for  food: 

P-M. 

aM 

Predicted  food  consumption  as  a  function  of  price  can  be  determined  from: 

Q  =  L  P^  e'^^, 

where  Q  is  the  number  of  pellets  consumed,  P  is  the  unit  price,  L  is  the  level  of  consumption  at 
a  unit  price  of  1.0,  e  is  the  number  2.718...,  and  a  and  b  are  constants.  The  solid  line  in  Figure 
17  is  the  predicted  food  consumption  for  the  experimental  conditions.  At  each  required  number 
of  lever  presses,  the  rats  would  receive  either  one  or  two  pellets  of  food  with  a  probability  of  1 .0 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


45 


or  0.5  and  with  1  or  2  units  of  effort  (weight  of  the  lever  which  the  rat  presses).  As  can  be  seen, 
the  method  provides  data  which  are  consistent  with  the  theoretical  framework  of  behavioral 
economics. 


Circadian  Effects 

Since  the  rats  receive  al!  of  their  food  in 
the  experimental  cages,  data  are  naturally  collected 
over  a  24  hour  period.  Thus,  it  is  a  simple  matter 
to  record  the  data  according  to  the  time  of  day. 
Previous  research  (Raslear  and  Kaufman,  1983)  has 
shown  that  diisopropyl  phosphorofluoridate  (DFP, 
an  anticholinesterase  agent)  produces  a  long-term 
disruption  of  circadian  patterns  of  behavior,  and 
other  treatments  may  produce  a  similar  change. 
Because  it  is  a  major  biological  system, 
information  that  a  treatment  disturbs  the  normal 
circadian  pattern  is  important,  and  the  military 
relevance  of  such  a  change  is  apparent.  Figure  1 8 
presents  the  kind  of  data  which  Vill  be  used  to 
index  the  function  of  the  circadian  system  (from  Raslear,  Leu  and  Simmons,  1986).  The  figure 
shows  the  Dark-Light  Ratio  (number  of  responses  produced  in  the  dark  divided  by  the  number 
of  responses  produced  in  the  light)  for  groups  of  rats  given  0,  1.0  or  2.6  mg/kg  DFP.  Note  that 
both  high  and  low  doses  of  DFP  produced  changes  in  the  normal  circadian  distribution  of 
responding. 

6.3  Methods  and  Materials 
6.3.1  Subjects 

Twenty  four  male  Sprague-Dawley  rats  were  used  as  subjects. 


DFP  DOSE  (mg/kq) 


Figure  18.  Mean  darkl light  ratio  of  rats 
treated  with  various  doses  of  DFP,  an 
anticholinesterase  drug. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


46 


6.3.2  Apparatus 


Behavioral  measurements  were  conducted  in  six  modified  hanging  wire  cages  (Wahmann 
Co.)  situated  in  an  environmental  chamber.  Each  cage  was  24.1  cm  long,  20.3  cm  wide,  and 
18.4  cm  deep.  A  response  lever,  water  bottle,  and  food  magazine  were  mounted  on  the  front  of 
each  cage.  The  re.spon.se  lever  was  5.1  cm  long  and  1.3  cm  wide  and  extended  1.3  cm  into  the 
cage.  The  lever  required  0.265  N  to  operate.  The  lever  and  food  magazine  were  mounted  5.1 
cm  above  the  floor,  on  the  center  of  the  cage  front.  The  water  bottle  spout  extended  into  the 
cage  at  the  level  of  the  magazine  and  lever  on  the  same  side  of  the  cage  as  the  magazine.  Food 
pellet  dispensers  (Gerbrands,  Model  G5100)  were  mounted  above  each  cage.  These  delivered 
45-mg  food  pellets  (BioServ)  according  to  the  schedule  requirements  described  below. 

6.3.3  Behavioral  Testing 

One  week  prior  to  the  experiment,  rats  were  adapted  to  the  laboratory  conditions  and  the 
light/dark  cycle  by  being  housed  in  ordinary  hanging  wire  home  cages  within  the  environmental 
chamber  where  the  experimental  cages  are  housed.  Following  this  adaptation  period,  all  rats 
were  exposed  to  microwave  radiation  in  accordance  with  their  group  assignment. 

The  rats  were  exposed  to  one  of  three  conditions.  "Full  power"  rat^  were  exposed  to  700 
MW  peak  output  power  (400  pulses,  80  ns  width  ,  1  pulse/5  sec),  "-30  dB"  rats  were  exposed 
to  700  kW  peak  output  power,  and  "control"  rats  were  placed  in  the  exposure  chamber  for  a 
similar  period  of  time  as  the  other  two  groups,  without  operating  TEMPO.  Following  exposure, 
each  rat  was  placed  in  one  of  six  similar  home  cages  which  was  equipped  with  a  response  lever 
and  food  pellet  dispenser.  On  the  first  day  in  the  test  apparatus  a  single  response  produced  a 
single  45-mg  food  pellet  (BioServ).  The  animals  received  no  prior  lever-press  training  and  were 
not  food-deprived.  Data  from  the  first  day  were  not  used  to  allow  for  individual  differences  in 
lever-press  acquisition.  On  the  second  day  the  response  requirement  remained  at  1  response/food 
pellet  (FR  1,  Fixed  Ratio  1).  On  subsequent  days  the  response  requirement  was  increased  to  15, 
45,  90,  1 80  and  360  responses/pellet.  The  animals  were  free  to  respond  at  all  times  of  day.  A 
PDP  1 1/73  computer  recorded  responses  and  food  pellet  deliveries,  and  controlled  the  sequence 
of  response  requirements.  A  12:12  light:dark  cycle  (lights  on  at  0600,  off  at  1800  hours)  was 
in  effect  in  the  chamber  where  the  test  cages  were  located.  Water  was  available  at  all  times,  but 
the  only  source  of  food  was  what  the  rats  earned  in  the  experiment 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


47 


6.4  Results 


Figure  19  (left  panel)  shows  the  mean  number  of  pellets  consumed  by  each  group  as  a 
function  of  the  price  of  the  food.  The  pattern  of  decreasing  consumption  as  price  increased  is 
typical  of  rats  (and  even  people  when  the  price  of  an  essential  commodity  is  increased)  in  this 
simation  (Raslear  et  al.,  1988;  Hursh  et  al.,  1988)  .  There  are  no  apparent  differences  between 
groups,  and  it  must  be  concluded  that  HPPM  has  no  effect  on  food  motivation. 

Circadian  function  was  assessed  by  comparing  the  number  of  food  pellets  obtained  during 
the  day  and  the  night.  Rats  are  nocturnal  and  normally  consume  90  -  100%  of  the’u  food  during 
the  night.  Deviations  from  this  pattern  of  feeding  are  rare. 

With  the  e.xception  of  FR  1.  there  did  not  appear  to  be  an  effect  of  HPPM  on  circadian 
function.  Figure  19  (right  panel)  shows  the  FR  1  data.  The  two  exposure  groups  have  a  clearly 
different  pattern  of  circadian  food  intake  relative  to  the  controls.  A  Kruskal- Wallis  test  on  the 
FR  1  data  indicated  that  a  reliable  difference  exists  between  the  groups  (p  <  .05).  Since  total 


Figure  19.  Left  Panel:  Mean  pellets  consumed  as  a  function  of  cost  (fixed  ratio)  and 
exposure  condition:  Right  Panel:  Mean  proportion  of  pellets  consumed  during  the  dark  cycle. 


consumption  at  FR  1  was  equivalent  for  these  groups  (see  Figure  19,  left  panel),  the  exposed 
animals  apparently  consumed  more  food  during  the  day. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


48 


6.5  Discussion 


HPPM  does  not  appear  to  affect  food  motivation  in  the  rat.  Previous  research  with  this 
method  (Raslear,  Shurtleff,  Rigamonti,  Hursh,  and  Simmons,  1990)  has  shown  that  rats  with 
lesions  in  the  ventromedial  hypothalamus  (VMH)  exhibit  a  markedly  different  pattern  of 
consumption  as  the  price  of  food  is  increased.  The  amount  of  brain  damage  in  the  VMH  which 
is  necessary  to  produce  a  measurable  effect  with  this  method,  however,  is  not  currently  known. 
Thus,  there  may  be  damage  to  the  VMH  which  cannot  be  detected. 

The  data,  however,  suggest  that  the  circadian  pattern  of  consumption  may  be  altered.  As 
noted  previously,  rats  rarely  depart  from  a  circadian  pattern  of  consumption  in  which  90-100% 
of  their  daily  food  intake  is  consumed  in  the  dark.  Disrupted  rest-activity  cycles  are  a  significant 
human  medical  problem,  so  further  investigation  of  this  effect  is  clearly  warranted. 


\ 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  49 


50 


SECTION  7;  PORSOLT  SWIM  TEST  (BEHAVIORAL  DESPAIR) 


Affect  or  mood  is  a  very  important  constituent  of  human  existence,  but  it  is  only  rarely 
addressed  in  experimental  studies  with  animals  because  of  the  lack  of  suitable  models.  Recently, 
however,  several  models  of  depression  or  despair  have  been  developed  for  use  in  the 
pharmacology  community  to  aid  in  the  rapid  screening  of  drugs  for  antidepressant  activity.  The 
following  experiment  utilizes  one  of  these  models  to  explore  the  effects  of  HPPM  on  affect  in 
the  rat. 

7.1  Background 

Most  of  the  reported  effects  of  radioffequency  electromagnetic  (RFEM)  fields  on  human 
beings  have  come  from  Eastern  Europe  (NCRP,  1 986).  A  typical  set  of  symptoms  identified  as 
the  neurasthenic  syndrome  or  "microwave  sickness"  is  a  variable  collection  of  complaints  that 
includes  irritability,  headache,  lethargy,  insomnia,  impotence,  mnemonic  disorders,  and  loss  of 
libido  (Sadcikova,  1974).  When  persistent,  this  set  of  symptoms  is  like  that  labeled  the  "chronic 
depressive  reaction"  in  the  Diagnostic  and  Statistical  Manual  of  Mental  Disorders  (American 
Psychiatric  Association,  1987). 

Few  studies  of  the  human  response  to  RFEM  irradiation  have  been  reported  in  the 
Western  literature.  Although  they  were  not  limited  to  behavioral  effects,  individual  cases  that 
had  attracted  public  attention  were  not  investigated  scientifically.  A  classified  experimental  study 
of  possible  behavioral  and  physiological  effects  of  RFEM  radiation  in  primates  called  the  Pandora 
Project  and  a  study  named  Big  Boy,  which  was  initiated  in  late  60s  and  early  70s  to  investigate 
psychological  and  physical  effects  in  humans,  yielded  inconclusive  results.  One  study,  that 
involved  American  employees  of  the  United  States  Embassy  in  Moscow,  did  reveal  considerable 
neurasthenic  symptomology,  but  these  symptoms  were  not  correlated  with  levels  of  exposure 
(Lilienfeld.  Tonascia,  Tonascia,  Libauer,  Cauthen,  Markowitz,  and  Weida,  1978). 

One  of  the  weak  points  of  these  projects  was  the  inability  to  measure  correct  dose 
(exposure;  levels  in  the  subjects.  However,  in  recent  years,  dosimetric  procedures  have  become 
a  very  important  and  indispensable  part  of  RFEM  research.  The  techniques  and  the  equipment 
used  to  determine  the  dose  levels  absorbed  by  the  subjects  have  dramatically  improved  (Mathur. 
Akyel,  and  Lu.  1992). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


51 


On  the  other  hand,  the  major  problem  in  studying  depression  in  the  laboratory  setting  was 
the  absence  of  an  animal  model  (Willner,  1984).  In  the  last  10  years  a  model  developed  by 
Porsolt,  LePichon,  and  Jalfre  (1977)  has  raised  a  considerable  amount  of  interest  and  has  been 
used  extensively  in  testing  antidepressant  substances.  Much  information  regarding  this  test  is 
now  available.  The  antidepressant  procedures  useful  in  humans  produce  an  effect  in  this  test  and 
there  is  a  significant  correlation  between  clinical  potency  and  potency  of  antidepressants  in  the 
behavioral  despair  test  (Alonso,  Castellano,  Afonso,  and  Rodriguez,  1991). 

7.2  Task  Description. 

In  Porsolt’s  behavioral  despair  test,  rats  or  mice  are  forced  to  swim  in  a  confined 
inescapable  cylinder  containing  water  for  15  min.  After  an  initial  period  of  vigorous  activity,  the 
animal  becomes  immobile.  On  the  subsequent  immersion  (24  hours  later),  the  onset  of 
immobility  is  much  more  rapid.  These  behavioral  observations  suggest  that  the  animals,  on 
finding  that  escape  is  impossible,  give  up  trying  and  resign  themselves  to  the  experimental 
conditions.  Porsolt,  Anton,  Blavet,  and  Jalfre  (1978)  hypothesized  that  the  observed  immobility 
reflected  a  state  of  lowered  mood  or  hopelessness  in  the  rat  and  predicted  that  immobility  would 
be  reduced  by  treatments  which  are  known  to  be  affective  in  alleviating  depression  in  humans. 
Thus,  tricyclic  antidepressants  (Kitada.  Miyauchi,  Satoh,  and  Satoh,  1981),  monoamineoxidase 
inhibitors  (Drago,  Continella,  Mason,  Hernandez,  and  Scapagnini,  19^),  as  well  as 
electroconvulsive  shock  (Kawashima,  Araki,  Uchiyama,  and  Aihara,  1987),  and  REM  sleep 
deprivation  (Hodgson,  1984)  tend  to  reduce  immobility  in  forced-swimming  test 

The  extent  to  which  the  forced-swimming  test  is  specific  for  depression  has  been 
questioned,  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  it  only  measures  general  activity  which  can  easily  be 
measured  by  an  open-field  activity  monitor  (Borsini,  Volterra,  and  Meli,  1986;  Nishimura,  Tsuda, 
Oguchi,  Ida,  and  Tanaka,  1988).  However.  Alonso,  Arevalo.  Afonso,  and  Rodriguez  (1991) 
showed  that  open-field  activity  and  forced-swimming  tests  are  modified  in  a  different  way  by 
drugs  or  by  electric  shock.  They  also  found  no  significant  correlation  between  activity  in  the 
open-field  test  and  in  the  forced-swimming  test. 

In  recent  years  a  thorough  exploration  of  the  procedures  used  during  the  forced-swimming 
test  revealed  that  trained  observers  are  as  good  as  an  automated  version  in  recording  immobility 
time  and  that  the  swimming  performance  is  sensitive  to  water  depth  (De  Pablo,  Parra.  Segovia. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


52 


and  Guillamon,  1989).  Moreover,  it  has  been  found  that  swimming  in  a  cylinder  in  which 
another  rat  had  been  swimming  decreased  the  immobility  time  due  to  a  pheromone  released  by 
rats  after  a  3.5-min  or  longer  swimming  period  (Abel  and  Bilitzke,  1990;  Abel,  1991). 

Given  the  recent  improvements  in  dosimetry  for  high-power  microwave  studies,  and  a 
better  understanding  of  the  validity  of  the  forced-swimming  test  paradigm,  it  would  seem  that 
this  was  an  opportune  time  to  study  neurasthenic  sympthomology  of  "microwave  sickness”  using 
the  forced-swimming  test  as  an  animal  model  of  depression.  The  objective  of  this  e.xperiment 
was  to  determine  the  effects  of  high  energy  pulsed  microwave  exposures  on  forced-swimming 
test  in  rats’  performance,  which  is  a  widely  accepted  and  reliable  model  for  human  depression 
and  behavioral  despair. 

7.3  Materials  and  Methods 

7.3.1  Subjects 

Male  albino  Sprague-Dawley  rats  were  housed  in  temperature  and  humidity  controlled 
modules  designed  for  long  term  housing  in  the  DMR  laboratories.  The  vivarium  was  maintained 
at  22°  C,  50%  relative  humidity,  under  a  12  hour  light-dark  cycle;  lights  activated  at  0600. 

7.3.2  Apparatus 

All  exposures  were  performed  with  pulsed  microwave  radiation  at  DMR  laboratories  using 
a  700  MegaWatt  peak  power  pulsed  microwave  generator  (TEMPO)  operating  at  3  GHz. 
TEMPO  pulses  are  80  nsec  width  and  be  produced  at  a  rate  of  1  pulse/8  s.  A  corner  reflector 
was  used  to  concentrate  radiation  from  a  transmitting  antenna  onto  a  platform  immediately  inside 
the  reflector.  This  increased  the  exposure  density  by  a  factor  of  10.  The  animals  to  be  exposed 
were  restrained  in  plastic  holders  on  the  platform.  The  platform  was  located  in  the  reflector  and 
in  the  center  of  the  beam  from  the  transmitter’s  horizontally  polarized  slot  antenna. 

For  Porsolt's  forced-swimming  task,  a  clear  vertical  Polycarbonate  cylinder  (height  50  cm; 
diameter  20  cm)  containing  22  cm  of  water  maintained  at  the  room  temperature  (23°  C)  was 
used. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


53 


7.3.3  Behavioral  Testing 


Rats  were  plunged  individually  into  the  cylinder  containing  water.  The  water  level  was 
adjusted  such  that  as  the  rat  floated  with  its  nose  above  the  water  and  its  rear  paws  could  not 
touch  the  bottom  of  the  container.  After  15  min  in  the  cylinder  the  animals  were  removed  and 
allowed  to  dry  for  30  min  in  a  heated  enclosure  (28°  C)  before  being  returned  to  their  individual 
cages.  One  day  later  the  rats  were  again  placed  in  the  cylinder  and  the  duration  of 
immobilization  was  quantified  during  the  following  5  min.  Because  of  the  alarm  substance  (low 
volatile  pheromone)  produced  by  the  rats  during  the  swimming  (Abel,  1991),  the  cylinder  was 
cleaned  and  the  water  was  replaced  after  each  task. 

A  rat  was  judged  to  be  immobile  when  it  was  floating  passively,  making  only  those 
movements  necessary  to  keep  its  head  above  the  water.  The  swirruning  behavior  was  tape 
recorded  via  a  video  camera  and  the  cumulative  time  spent  immobile  was  recorded  by  stopwatch 
by  an  individual  who  was  unaware  of  the  prior  treatment  of  the  animals. 

Prior  to  the  second  immersion,  animals 
were  either  exposed  to  200  full  power 
TEMPO  pulses  that  lasted  30  min  (exposure 
group)  or  sham-exposed  forShe  same  period 
of  time  in  the  same  microwave  chamber. 
Each  group  consisted  of  13  animals. 

7.4  Results 

In  this  study  immobility  is  considered 
to  be  an  indicator  of  despair.  It  was 
hypothesized  that  there  would  be  a  difference 
in  the  duration  of  immobility  time  between  the  TEMPO  exposed  group  and  the  sham  group.  As 
can  be  seen  in  Figure  20  an  independent  t-test  comparing  the  two  groups  showed  that  the 
nonexposed  group  stayed  immobile  in  the  water  slightly  longer  than  the  exposed  group  but  this 
difference  was  not  reliable  (t  =  .41,  df  =  24,  p  =  .687). 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


54 


As  an  additional  measure  of  stress,  rat  droppings  were  counted  in  all  the  sessions. 
However,  an  independent  t-test  did  not  reveal  any  reliable  difference  between  the  number  of 
droppings  of  the  sham  and  the  exposed  groups  (t  =  .82.  df  =  24,  p  =  .421). 

7.5  Discussion 

The  present  experiment  used  Porsolt’s  forced-swimming  task  as  a  model  of  depression 
to  investigate  the  effects  of  acute  exposure  to  high  power  pulsed  microwave  fields.  Evidence  that 
HPP.Vl  affected  performance  was  not  found  in  this  study.  Hence,  we  cannot  conclude  that  HPPM 
affects  depression  or  despair.  However,  this  result  might  be  due  to  the  fact  that  only  acute  RF 
exposures  as  opposed  to  chronic  exposures  were  used.  According  to  the  literature,  symptoms  of 
neurasthenic  syndrome  or  "microwave  sickness"  develop  after  a  long-term  exposure  to  microwave 
fields.  Since  there  are  indications  that  chronic  exposures  may  yield  quite  different  results  it  is 
important  that  this  area  be  pursued  further.  Future  experiments  on  high  power  microwaves  need 
to  focus  more  on  the  effects  of  chronic  exposures  to  such  fields. 


Behavior"!  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


55 


SECTION  8:  SUMMARY,  CONCLUSIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS 
8.1  Summary  of  Results 

The  TEMPO  exposure  system  is  a  unique  experimental  platform  for  the  study  of  the 
biological  and  behavioral  effects  of  radiofrequency  electromagnetic  radiation.  The  system  is 
capable  of  producing  very  high  peak-power  outputs  (approximately  700  MW)  for  very  short 
periods  of  time  (approximately  80  ns).  As  a  result,  the  average  power  is  well  within  the  range 
in  which  no  heating  effects  should  be  observed  (approximately  2  W).  The  system  is  capable  of 
exposing  animals  within  an  anechoic  chamber  which  is  temperature-  and  humidity-controlled,  so 
that  good  environmental  control  can  be  arranged  during  the  conduct  of  experiments. 

Calorimetry  and  thermometry  indicate  that  the  time-averaged  SAR  produced  by  exposure 
to  TEMPO  is  well-below  the  recommended  exposure  limits.  The  peak  SAR  (associated  with  the 
peak  power  output  of  700  MW)  is  25.2  MW/kg,  but  the  time-averaged  SAR  is  merely  0.072 
W/kg.  Local  SARs  are  in  substantial  agreement  with  this  result,  as  can  be  seen  in  Figure  2.  The 
highest  SARs  (0.552  W/kg)  were  located  subcutaneously  in  the  region  of  the  nose,  but  were  still 
within  an  order  of  magnitude  of  the  time-averaged  SAR  obtained  with  calorimetry.  The  average 
SAR  in  Figure  2  (based  on  the  24  locations)  is  0.17  W/kg,  a  value  which  is  in  substantial 
agreement  with  the  time-averaged  SAR. 

Five  different  tasks  were  used  to  determine  if  exposure  to  high-peak,  low  average,  power 
microwave  pulses  has  an  effect  on  behavior  in  the  intact  animal.  Each  task  addresses  different 
functions  within  the  behaving  organism,  and  some  address  similar  functions.  The  temporal 
bisection  task  provides  measures  of  sensitivity  to  perceived  differences  in  time,  as  well  as 
allowing  inferences  concerning  such  cognitive  functions  as  memory,  attention,  and  decision¬ 
making.  The  Y-Maze  task  was  used  to  determine  if  HPPM  can  disrupt  the  consolidation  of  a 
short-term  memory  into  a  permanent  memory.  This  task  addresses  the  issue  of  memory  function 
very  directly,  so  that  the  information  it  provides  is  not  necessarily  redundant  with  that  obtained 
from  the  bisection  task.  The  treadmill  task,  on  the  other  hand,  is  mainly  concerned  with  physical 
endurance  and  has  little  functional  overlap  with  any  of  the  other  tasks  except  the  behavioral 
economics  task.  Motivation  for  food,  as  indicated  by  the  willingness  of  animals  to  press  a  lever 
repeatedly  for  food,  may  be  construed  as  similar  to  running  on  a  treadmill  to  avoid  foot  shock. 
A  primary  difference,  however,  is  that  running  on  a  treadmill  is  known  to  affect  the  concentration 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


57 


of  oxygen  and  carbon  dioxide  in  the  blood,  whereas  lever-pressing  probably  does  not.  Thus  these 
tasks  differ  with  regard  to  physical  endurance  while  bearing  equally  on  the  question  of 
motivation.  The  Porsolt  Swim  Test,  because  of  its  documented  ability  to  predict  the  anti¬ 
depressant  qualities  of  drugs,  is  probably  best  considered  to  be  a  functional  test  of  mood  (in  this 
case  despair  or  depression). 

The  bisection  task  indicated  that  time  perception  (i.e.,  the  relationship  between  physical 
duration  and  perceived  duration,  as  indicated  by  changes  in  the  bisection  point)  is  probably  not 
affected  by  HPPM.  Sensitivity  to  changes  in  time  (i.e.,  the  ability  to  detect  differences  in 
duration,  as  indicated  by  the  slope  of  the  psychometric  function  and  A’),  however,  may  be 
affected.  To  the  non-expert  in  psychophysics  this  may  sound  contradictory,  but  it  is  not.  The 
task  is  designed  such  that  estimates  of  the  bisection  point  are  not  based  on  the  same  information 
that  discriminability  estimates  are.  The  bisection  point  reflects  only  changes  in  the  mean  rate  of 
the  clock,  but  discriminability  uses  the  mean  rate  and  its  variance.  Thus,  this  result  suggests  that 
a  change  has  occurred  in  the  variance  of  the  timing  system  of  the  rat.  The  result  that  both 
session  time  and  null  responses  are  also  affected  by  HPPM  further  clarifies  the  situation.  Null 
responses  are  clearly  under  stimulus  control  (i.e.,  they  are  a  function  of  the  stimulus  duration 
presented),  so  it  is  impossible  to  claim  that  this  effect  is  a  simple  work  stoppage  (in  which  case 
the  stimulus  duration  would  be  urelevant).  Null  responses  reflect  decision-making,  and  decision¬ 
making  is  dependent  (see  Figure  4)  on  the  output  of  the  memory  function,  l^emory  function 
contributes  to  the  variance  of  the  clock  rate.  Therefore,  it  seems  likely  that  the  effects  of  HPP.M 
on  null  responses  and  on  time  discrimination  are  both  due  to  a  change  in  memory  function. 

As  noted  above,  memory  function  is  directly  assessed  in  the  Y-maze  memory 
consolidation  task.  If  memory  function  is  affected  by  HPPM  in  the  bisection  task,  then 
performance  in  the  Y-maze  task  should  also  be  affected  by  TEMPO  exposures.  Such  an  effect 
was,  in  fact,  observed,  thereby  lending  strong  support  to  the  hypothesis  that  HPPM  affects 
memory  function. 

Unlike  the  bisection  and  Y-maze  tasks,  the  treadmill  task  is  primarily  a  test  of  physical 
endurance.  Treadmill  running  is  widely  used  to  study  exercise  physiology  and  the  factors  which 
affect  fatigue.  The  treadmill  study  clearly  demonstrated  that  exposure  to  HPPM  affects  the 
amount  of  time  that  animals  can  run  on  a  treadmill.  We  interpret  this  result  to  indicate  that  the 
rats  which  are  exposed  to  HPPM  have  less  physical  endurance  than  control  animals.  It  is  also 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


58 


possible,  however,  that  HPPM  affected  the  motivation  of  the  exposed  rats  (i.e.,  foot  shock  seemed 
less  painful  or  salient),  or  that  HPPM  caused  the  rats  to  despair  (i.e.,  "I  might  as  well  give-up 
running  now,  since  shock  is  inevitable").  These  interpretations  were  addressed  in  the  studies  on 
motivation  and  behavioral  despair. 

The  behavioral  economics  task  has  demonstrated  sensitivity  to  motivational  variables.  For 
instance,  animals  with  brain  lesions  in  the  VMH  exhibit  an  altered  pattern  of  food  intake  in  this 
task.  Since  HPPM-exposed  rats  did  not  show  an  appropriately  altered  pattern  of  food  intake 
relative  to  controls  in  this  task,  it  appears  unlikely  that  motivation  is  affected  by  HPPM.  This 
suppons  our  contention  that  physical  endurance  was  affected  by  HPPM  in  the  treadmill  task.  It 
should  be  noted  that  the  change  in  circadian  rhythm  of  eating  which  was  produced  by  HPPM  in 
the  behavioral  economics  task  is  not  inconsistent  with  a  change  in  physical  endurance.  Numerous 
human  studies  have  demonstrated  that  the  performance  of  physical  tasks  is  highly  dependent  on 
the  time  of  day  (Brown  and  Graeber,  1982).  Thus,  it  is  possible  that  the  decrease  in  physical 
endurance  observed  in  the  treadmill  task  is  a  consequence  of  altered  circadian  rhythms. 

The  Porsolt  Swim  Test,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  standard  test  for  anti-depressant  activity 
in  drugs.  As  such,  we  consider  it  to  be  an  indicant  of  "mood"  in  the  rats.  In  particular,  it 
provides  information  concerning  depression  or  despair.  Thus,  the  finding  that  animals  exposed 
to  HPPM  do  not  differ  from  control  animals  suggests  that  HPPM  does  not  affect  mood. 
Performance  decrements  on  the  treadmill  following  HPPM  treatment,  therefore,  are  probably  not 
due  to  depression  or  despair. 

We  hypothesize,  therefore,  that  HPPM  has  at  least  two  adverse  effects  in  rats.  First,  as 
demonstrated  in  the  temporal  bisection  and  Y-maze  tasks,  HPPM  appears  to  interfere  with 
memory.  This  effect  occurs  at  the  level  of  memory  consolidation  (Y-maze)  task,  and  may  also 
involve  other  memory  processes  such  as  comparison  of  short-  and  long-term  memory  traces 
(bisection  task).  This  conclusion  is  supported  by  the  work  of  Lai  and  his  colleagues  (Lai  et  al., 
1989)  who  have  also  found  evidence  that  microwave  exposure  affects  memory  and  learning. 
Second,  HPPM  reduces  physical  endurance  (treadmill).  The  mechanism  of  this  effect  is  possibly 
due  to  disrupted  circadian  rhythms  (behavioral  economics  task),  and  is  probably  not  due  to 
changes  in  motivational  (behavioral  economics  task)  or  mood  states  (Porsolt  swim  test).  The 
mechanisms  of  both  effects  require  additional  research  and  investigation.  This  would  be  best 
done  with  tasks  which  specifically  target  the  functions  of  interest  and/or  alternative  mechanisms. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


59 


8.2  Safety  Standards 


As  noted  in  the  Introduction,  current  safety  standards  do  not  address  the  issue  of  the  peak 
power  that  can  be  used  to  achieve  a  "safe”  microwave  dose.  In  the  experiments  reported  here, 
time-averaged  SARs  were  all  well  below  the  suggested  whole-body  dose  of  0.4  W/kg.  This 
suggests  that  peak  power  may  also  have  to  be  considered  in  the  formulation  of  maximum 
permissible  exposure  levels  for  HPPM. 


\ 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM  ^ 


SECTION  9:  FUTURE  DIRECTIONS  FOR  RESEARCH 


The  TEMPO  is  a  unique,  highly  reliable  HPPM  source  which  has  allowed  replicable 
investigation  of  the  implications  of  low  average,  high  peak  power  microwave  exposures.  Since 
the  acute  exposures  which  have  been  pursued  to  date  appear  not  to  produce  any  long-term  or 
cumulative  effects  (see  particularly  the  temporal  bisection  experiment),  it  is  important  to  redirect 
research  objectives  toward  developing  protocols  involving  long  duration  exposures  with  extended 
post  exposure  evaluation  of  subjects.  This  approach  is  especially  important  since  it  would  more 
nearly  approximate  the  occupational  hazards  prevalent  within  the  Department  of  Defense. 

Historically,  the  military  services  often  find  themselves  subjected  to  public,  scientific  and 
legal  expressions  of  concern  regarding  soldier  safety  following  introduction  of  new  systems. 
Many  weapon  systems  currently  under  development  or  in  the  inventory  take  advantage  of  highly 
sophisticated  technologies,  such  as  radars,  which  emit  radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation. 
Additionally,  to  reduce  or  minimize  the  potential  for  detection,  these  same  systems  employ  short 
burst,  high  energy  emissions  that  could  potentially  present  a  hazard  to  soldiers  over  the  long 
term.  Current  safety  standards  do  not  appreciably  consider  these  potential  hazards  since  they  are 
currently  not  clearly  defined  or  understood.  Therefore,  it  is  imperative  that  safety  thresholds  be 
determined  in  a  scientifically  defensible  manner. 

\ 

To  date,  effects  have  been  studied  within  a  short  post-exposure  time  frame.  Most  of  our 
behavioral  measurements  have  occurred  within  24  h  of  exposure  to  HPPM.  Vinually  nothing  is 
known  concerning  the  effects  of  chronic  HPPM  exposures  of  the  type  produced  by  TEMPO. 
There  is  a  clear  need  to  determine  if  there  are  effects  of  HPPM  during  exposure  and  at  longer 
post-exposure  test  intervals.  The  presence  of  acute  exposure  effects  enhances  the  importance  of 
extending  our  research  in  this  direction.  We  suggest  that  several  areas  be  addressed  in  future 
research  on  this  basis. 

Although  noise  and  ionizing  radiation  do  not  appear  to  correlate  with  changes  in  behavior 
that  are  RF-dose  dependent,  it  would  be  desirable  to  expose  animals  to  HPPM  in  the  absence  of 
such  environmental  disturbances.  The  need  to  eliminate  extraneous  stimulation  from  the  exposure 
environment  and  the  need  to  study  chronic  exposures  both  indicate  a  requirement  for  additional 
research  on  bioeffects  exposure  platforms. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


61 


We  have  suggested  that  the  high  peak-power  produced  by  TEMPO  may  be  responsible 
for  the  observed  behavioral  effects.  In  the  near  future  we  plan  to  compare  TEMPO  exposures 
with  comparable  average  power  CW  source  exposures.  Acute  and  chronic  exposures  should  also 
be  compared  in  this  regard.  In-field  behavioral  tests  are  particularly  challenging  to  perform,  but 
may  provide  the  best  indicant  of  possible  adverse  effects. 

To  date,  very  few  behavioral  paradigms  have  been  examined.  The  logical  approach  is  to 
extend  investigation  into  those  areas  where  effects  have  already  been  discovered.  This  however, 
should  not  preclude  other  exploratory  investigations  with  untested  behavioral  paradigms. 


\ 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


62 


SECTION  10:  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Abel.  E.  (1991).  Alarm  substance  emitted  by  rats  in  the  forced-swim  test  is  a  low  volatile 
pheromone.  Physiology  and  Behavior,  50,  723-727. 

Abel,  E.  L.  and  Bilitzke,  P.  J.  (1990).  A  possible  alarm  substance  in  the  forced  swimming  test. 
Physiology  and  Behavior,  48,  233-239. 

Adey,  W.  R.  (1981).  Tissue  interactions  with  nonionizing  electromagnetic  fields.  Physiological 
Reviews,  61,  435-514. 

Akyel,  Y.,  Raslear,  T.  G.,  Hammer,  R.  M.,  Belt,  M.  (1992).  The  effects  of  high-peak  power 
pulsed  microwaves  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  rat.  Abstracts  of  the  First  World 
Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  p.  60. 

Alonso,  S.  J.,  Arevalo,  R,  Afonso,  D.,  and  Rodriguez,  M.  (1991).  Effects  of  maternal  stress 
during  pregnancy  on  forced  swimming  test  behavior  of  the  offspring.  Physiology  and 
Behavior,  50,  511-517. 

Alonso,  S.  J.,  Castellano,  M.  A.,  Afonso,  D.,  and  Rodriguez,  M.  (1991).  Sex  differences  in 
behavioral  despair:  relationships  between  behavioral  despair  and  open  field  activity. 
Physiology  and  Behavior,  49,  69-72. 

American  National  Standards  Institute.  (1992).  Safety  levels  with  respect  to  human  exposure  to 
radio  frequency  electrumagnetic  fields,  3  kHz  to  300  GHz  (Report  No.  ANSI  C95. 1-1991 ). 
New  York;  The  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronic  Engineers  Inc. 

.■\merican  Psychiatric  Association.  (1987).  Diagnostic  and  statistical  manual  of  mental  disorders 
(3rd  ed.  rev.).  Washington.  D.C.;  .Author. 

.Armstrong.  R.  B.,  and  Laughlin,  M.  H.  (1985).  Rat  muscle  blood  flows  during  high-speed 
locomotion.  Journal  of  Applied  Physiology,  59.  1322-1328. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


63 


Bassen,  H.  ( 1989).  U.S.  Army  high  power  microwave  biological  effects  research.  Seventh  DOD 
Conference  on  DEW  Vulnerability,  Survivability,  and  Effects. 

Bates,  F.,  and  Bas.sen,  H.  (1989).  A  biological  effects  exposure  facility  utilizing  and  800 
megawatt  peak  power  pulsed  microwave  source.  Proceedings  of  the  International 
Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  Society,  II,  1134-1135. 

Bedford,  T.  G.,  Tipton,  C.  M.,  Wilson.  N.  C.,  Oppliger,  R.  A.,  and  Gisolfi,  C.  V.  (1979). 
Maximum  oxygen  consumption  of  rats  and  its  changes  with  various  experimental 
procedures.  Journal  of  Applied  Physiology,  47,  1278-1283. 

Bermant,  R.,  Reeves,  D.,  Levinson,  D.,  and  Justesen,  D.  (1979).  Classical  conditioning  of 
microwave-induced  hyperthermia  in  rats.  Radio  Science,  14,  201-207. 

Boakes,  R.  A.  (1969).  The  bisection  of  a  brightness  interval  by  pigeons.  Journal  of  the 
Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  12,  201-209. 

Borsini,  F.,  Volterra,  G.,  and  Meli,  A.  (’.‘'soi  Does  the  behavioral  ’’despair"  test  measure 
’’despair’’  .’  Physiology  and  Behavior,  J8,  385-386.  ^ 

Bradley,  J.  V.  (1968).  Distribution-free  statistical  tests.  Englewood  Cliffs,  N.J.:  Fh-entice-Hall. 

Brown,  F.  W.,  and  Graeber,  R.  C.  (Eds.).  (1982).  Rhythmic  aspects  of  behavior.  Hillsdale,  N.J.: 
Erlbaum. 

Cain.  C.  ,A.,  and  Rissman,  W.  J.  (1978).  Mammalian  auditory  responses  to  3.0  GHz  microwave 
pulses.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Biomedical  Engineering,  25,  288. 

Carroll,  D.  R..  Levinson.  D.  M.,  Justesen.  D.  R.,  and  Clarke,  R.  C.  (1980).  Failure  of  rats  to 
escape  from  a  potentially  lethal  microwave  field.  Bioelectromagnetics.  /,  101-115. 

Chou,  C.  K.,  Guy.  A.  W..  and  Galambos,  R.  (1982).  Auditory  perception  of  radio-frequency 
electromagnetic  fields.  Journal  of  the  Acoustical  Society  of  America,  71,  1321-1334. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


64 


Church,  R.  M.,  and  Deluty,  M.  A.  (1977).  Bisection  of  temporal  intervals.  Journal  of 
Experimental  Psychology:  Animal  Behavior  Processes,  3,  216-228. 

Church,  R.  M.  (1984).  Properties  of  the  internal  clock.  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of 
Sciences,  423,  566-582. 

Cleary,  S.  F.,  Nickless,  F.,  Liu,  L.  VI..  and  Hoffman,  R.  (1980).  Studies  of  e.xposure  of  rabbits 
to  electromagnetic  pulsed  fields.  Bioelectromagnetics,  /,  345-352. 

Cordts,  R.  E.,  Merritt,  J.  H.,  Erwin.  D.  N.,  Hardy,  K.  A.,  and  Yochmowitz,  M.  G.  (1988). 
Behavioral  response  of  rats  exposed  to  high-power  microwave  radiation.  US  AFSAM-TR- 
87-30.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  TX. 

Costermans,  J.,  Lories,  G.,  and  Ansay,  C.  (1992).  Confidence  level  and  feeling  of  knowing  in 
question  answering;  The  weight  of  mferential  processes.  Journal  of  Experimental 
Psychology:  Learning,  Memory,  and  Cognition,  18,  142-150. 

Cure,  M.,  and  Rolinat,  J.  P.  (1992).  Behavioral  heterogeneity  in  Sprague-Dawley  rats. 
Physiology  &  Behavior,  51,  771-774. 

D’Andrea,  J.  A.,  and  Cobb,  B.  L.  (1987).  High  peak  power  microwave  pulses  at  I J  GHz: 
Effects  on  fixed  interval  and  reaction  time  performance  in  rats  (Report  No.  NAMRL- 
1337).  Pensacola,  FL;  Naval  Aerospace  Medical  Research  Laboratory. 

D’Andrea,  J.  A.,  Cobb,  B.  L.,  and  de  Lorge,  J.  O.  (1989).  Lack  of  behavioral  effects  in  the 
Rhesus  monkey:  High  peak  microwave  pulses  at  1.3  GHz.  Bioelectromagnetics.  10,  65- 
76. 

de  Lorge,  J.  O.  (1979a).  The  effects  of  microwave  radiation  on  behavior  and  temperature  in 
rhesus  monkeys.  IN  C.  C.  Johnson  and  M.  L.  Shore  feds.).  Biological  effects  of 
electromagnetic  waves.  Vol.  f.  HEW  Publication  (FDA)  77-8010.  Rockville,  .VID.  Pp. 
158-174. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPP.Vf 


65 


de  Lorge,  J.  O.  (1979b).  Disruption  of  behavior  in  mammals  of  three  different  sizes  exposed  to 
microwaves:  Extrapolation  to  larger  mammals.  IN  S.  Stuchly  (ed.).  Electromagnetic  fields 
in  biological  systems.  Ottawa,  Canada.  Pp.  215-228. 

de  Lorge,  J.  O.,  and  Ezell,  C.  S.  (1980).  Observing-responses  of  rats  exposed  to  1.28-  and  5.62 
GHz  microwaves.  Bioelectromagnetics,  /,  183-198. 

De  Pablo,  J.  M.,  Parra,  A.,  Segovia,  S.  and  Guillamon,  A.  (1989).  Learned  immobility  explains 
the  behavior  of  rats  in  the  forced  swimming  test.  Physiology  and  Behavior,  46.  229-237. 

Drago,  F.,  Continella,  G.,  Mason,  G.  A.,  Hernandez,  D.  E.,  and  Scapagnini,  U.  (1985). 
Phospholipid  liposomes  potentiate  the  inhibitory  effects  of  antidepressant  drugs  on 
immobility  of  rats  in  a  despair  test.  European  Journal  of  Pharmacology,  115,  179-185. 


Duncan,  C.  P.  (1949).  The  retroactive  effect  of  electroshock  on  learning.  Journal  of 
Comparative  and  Physiological  Psychology,  42,  32-44. 

Durney,  C.  H.,  Johnson,  C.  C.,  Barber,  P.  W.,  Massoudi,  H.,  Iskander,  M.  G.,  Lords,  J.  C., 
Reyser,  D.  K.,  Allen,  S.  J.,  and  Mitchell,  J.  C.  (1978).  Radiofre^ency  radiation 
dosimetry  handbook.  (2nd  edition).  USAFSAM-TR -78-22.  San  Antonio,  TX:  Brooks  Air 
Force  Base. 

Engen,  T.  (1971).  Psychophysics.  I.  Discrimination  and  detection.  IN  J.  W.  KJing  and  L.  A. 
Riggs  (Eds.),  Woodworth  &  Schlosberg  s  Experimental  Psychology  (3rd  ed.,  pp.  1 1-46). 
New  York:  Holt,  Rinehart  and  Winston. 

Fagot,  R.  F.,  and  Stewart,  M.  R.  ( 1970).  Test  of  a  response  bias  model  of  bisection.  Perception 
&  Psychophysics.  7,  257-262. 

Fields.  P.  E.  (1957).  The  effect  of  whole-body  X  radiation  upon  activity  drum,  straightaway,  and 
maze  performances  of  white  rats.  Journal  of  Comparative  Physiology.  50.  386-391. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


66 


Francesconi,  R.,  and  Mager,  M.  (1979).  Hypothermia  induced  by  chlorpromazine  or  L- 
tryptophan;  effects  on  treadmill  performance  in  the  heat.  Journal  of  Applied  Physiology. 
47.  813-817. 

Francesconi,  R.,  an  Mager,  M.  (1980).  Hypothermia  induced  by  5-thio-D-glucose:  effects  on 
treadmill  performance  in  the  heat.  Aviation  Space  and  Environmental  Medicine,  51.  754- 
758. 

Frey,  A.  H.,  Feld,  S.  R.,  and  Frey,  B.  (1975).  Neuronal  function  and  behavior.  Annals  of  the 
New  York  Academy  of  Science,  247,  433-439. 

Gage,  M.  I.  (1984).  Behavior.  In  J.  A.  Elder  and  D.  F.  Cahill  (Eds.),  Biological  effects  of 
radiofrequency  radiation  (EPA-600/8-83-026F,  pp.  5-53  -  5-63).  Research  Triangle  Park, 
NC:  United  States  Environmental  Protection  Agency. 

Gambrill,  C.  S.,  DeAngelis,  M.  L.,  and  Lu,  S-T.  (1992).  Error  analysis  of  a  thermometric 
microwave  dosimetry  procedure.  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress  for  Electricity 
and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  p.  52. 

\ 

Gandhi,  O.  P.,  Hunt,  E.  L.,  and  D’Andrea,  J.  A.  (1977).  Deposition  of  electromagnetic  energy 
in  animals  and  in  models  of  man  with  and  without  grounding  reflector  effects.  Radio 
Sciences,  12,  39-45. 

Gandhi,  O.  P.  and  Hunt,  E.  L.  (1980).  Corner-reflector  applicators  for  uniiateral  exposure  of 
animals  in  bioeffect  experiments.  Proceedings  of  IEEE,  68,  160-162. 

Gerald,  M.  C.  (1978).  Effects  of  (+)-amphetamine  on  the  treadmill  endurance  performance  of 
rats.  Neuropharmacology,  /  7.  703-704. 

Gibbon,  J.  (1977).  Scalar  expectancy  theory  and  Weber’s  Law  in  animal  timing.  Psychological 
Review,  84.  279-325. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


67 


Gibbon,  J.,  and  Church,  R.  M.  (1984).  Sources  of  variance  in  an  information  processing  theory 
of  timing.  IN  H.  L.  Roitblal,  T.  G.  Sever,  and  H.  S.  Terrace  (Eds.),  Animal  cognition, 
Hillsdale,  NJ:  Erlbaum. 

Gott,  C.  T.  &  B.  Weiss  (1972).  The  development  of  fi,\ed-ratio  performance  under  the  influence 
of  ribonucleic  acid.  Journal  of  the  Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  IS,  481-498. 

Green,  D.  M.,  and  Swets,  J.  A.  (1974).  Signal  detection  theory  and  psychophysics.  New  York: 
Krieger. 

Grier,  J.  B.  (1971).  Nonparametric  indexes  for  sensitivity  and  bias:  computing  formulas. 
Psychological  Bulletin,  75,  424-429. 

Guilford,  J.  P.  (1954).  Psychometric  methods.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill. 

Guy,  A.  W.,  Chou,  C.  K.,  and  Christensen,  D.  (1975).  Microwave-induced  acoustic  effects  in 
mammalian  auditory  systems  and  physical  materials.  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy 
of  Science,  247,  194-215. 

Hillegaan,  V.,  and  Ahlenius,  S.  (1987).  Effects  of  raclopride  on  exploratory  l^omotor  activity, 
treadmill  locomotion,  conditioned  avoidance  behaviour  and  catalepsy  in  rats:  behavioural 
profile  comparisons  between  radclopride,  haloperidol  and  preclamol.  Pharmacology  and 
Toxicology,  60,  350-354. 

Hirsch,  F.  G.,  McGiboney,  D.  R.,  and  Hamish,  T.  D.  (1968).  The  psychologic  consequences  of 
exposure  to  high  density  pulsed  electromagnetic  energy.  International  Journal  of 
Biometerology,  12,  263-270. 

Hjeresen,  D.  L.,  Doctor.  S.  R.,  and  Skeldon.  R.  L.  (1979).  Shuttlebox  side  preferences  as 
mediated  by  pulsed  microwave  and  conventional  auditory  cues.  IN  S.  Stuchley  (ed.). 
Electromagnetic  fields  in  biological  systems.  Ottawa,  Canada.  Pp.  194-214. 

Hodgson.  J.  A.  (1984).  Swimming  immobility  of  RE.VI  sleep  deprived  rats  reared  in  different 
environments.  Physiology  and  Behavior,  32.  17-22. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


68 


Hunt,  E.  L..  King,  N.  W.,  and  Phillips,  R.  D.  (1975).  Behavioral  effects  of  pulsed  microwave 
radiation.  Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Science,  247,  440-453. 

Hursh,  S.  R.  (1984).  Behavioral  economics.  Journal  of  the  Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior, 
42,  435-452. 

Hursh.  S.  R.,  T.  G.  Raslear,  D.  Shurtleff,  R.  Bauman  &  L.  Simmons  (1988).  A  cost-benefit 
analysis  of  demand  for  food.  Journal  of  the  Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  50.  419- 
440. 

Johnson,  R.  B.,  Meyers,  D.  E.,  Guy,  A.  W.,  Lovely,  R.  H.,  and  Galambos.  R.  (1976). 
Discriminative  control  of  appetitive  behavior  by  pulsed  microwave  radiation  in  rats.  IN 
C.  C.  Johnson  and  M.  L.  Shore  (eds.).  Biological  effects  of  electromagnetic  waves.  HEW 
Publication  (FDA)  77-8010.  Pp.  238-247. 

Jones,  D.  C.,  Osborn,  G.  K.,  and  Kimeldorf,  D.  J.  (1967).  Treadmill  exercise  performance  by 
the  aging  irradiated  rat.  Radiation  Research,  30,  714-724. 

Kawashima,  K.,  Araki,  H.,  Uchiyama,  Y.,  and  Aihara,  H.  (1987).  Amygdaloid  catecholaminergic 
mechanisms  involved  in  suppressive  effects  of  electroconvulsive  shock  on  duration  of 
immobility  in  rats  forced  to  swim.  European  Journal  of  Pharmacology,  141 ,  1-6. 

Kholodov,  Yu,  A.  (1975).  Reaction  of  the  nervous  system  to  electromagnetic  fields.  Moscow. 
(Cited  in  Postow  and  Swicord,  1986). 

King,  N.  W.,  Justesen,  D.  R.,  and  Clarke,  R.  L.  (1971).  Behavioral  sensitivity  to  microwave 
irradiation.  Science,  172,  398-400. 

Kitada,  Y.,  Miyauchi,  T.,  Satoh,  A,  and  Satoh,  A.  (1981).  Effects  of  antidepre.ssants  in  the  rat 
forced  swimming  test.  European  Journal  of  Pharmacology,  14,  145-152. 

Klauenberg,  B.  J.,  Merritt,  J.  H..  and  Erwin,  D.  N.  (1988).  Behavioral  effects  of  e.xposure  to  the 
TEMPO  high-power  microwave  system.  USAFSAM-TR-87-35.  Brooks  Air  Force  Base, 
TX. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPP.Vl 


69 


Lebovitz,  R.  M.  (1983).  Modulated  and  continuous  wave  microwave  radiation  yield  equivalent 
changes  in  operant  behavior  of  rodents.  Physiology  &  Behavior,  30,  891-898. 

Lai,  H.  (1987).  Acute  exposure  to  noise  affects  sodium-dependent  high-affinity  choline  uptake 
in  the  central  nervous  system  of  the  rat.  PhatTnacology,  Biochemistry  &  Behavior,  28. 
147-151. 

Lai,  H.  (1988).  Effects  of  repeated  exposure  to  white  noise  on  central  cholinergic  activity  in  the 
rat.  Brain  Research,  442,  403-406. 

Lai,  H.,  Carino,  M.  A.,  Horita,  A.,  and  Guy,  A.  W.  (1989).  Low-level  microwave  irradiation  and 
central  cholinergic  systems.  Pharmacology,  Biochemistry  &  Behavior,  33,  131-138. 


Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  Chou,  C-K.,  and  Guy,  A.  W.  (1987a).  Low-level  microwave  irradiation 
attenuates  naloxone- induced  withdrawal  syndrome  in  morphine-dependent  rats. 
Pharmacology,  Biochemistry  &  Behavior,  24,  151-153. 

Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  Chou.  C-K.,  and  Guy,  A.  W.  (1987b).  Effects  of  low-level  microwave 
irradiation  on  hippocampal  and  frontal  cortical  choline  uptake^  are  classically 
conditionable.  Pharmacology,  Biochemistry  &  Behavior,  27,  635-639. 

Lai,  H.,  Horita,  A.,  Chou,  C-K.,  and  Guy,  A.  W.  (1987c).  Low-level  microwave  irradiations 
affect  central  cholinergic  activity  in  the  rat.  Journal  of  Neurochemistry,  48,  40-45. 

Lilienfield,  A.  M.,  Tonascia,  J.,  Tonascia,  S.,  Libauer,  C.  H.,  Cauthen,  G.  M.,  Markowitz,  J.  A., 
and  Weida,  S.  (1978).  Foreign  Service  Health  Status  Study-Evaluation  of  Health  Status 
of  Foreign  Service  and  Other  Employees  from  Selected  Eastern  European  Posts.  Final 
Report  Contract  No.  6025-619073,  Department  of  Sute,  Washington,  D.C.  in  Biological 
Effects  and  Exposure  Criteria  for  Radiofrequency  Electromagnetic  Fields.  National 
Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurements  (NCRP)  Report  No.  86.  Bethesda. 
.MD. 

Lin,  J.  C.  (1980).  The  microwave  auditory  phenomenon.  Proceedings  of  the  IEEE,  68,  67-73. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


70 


Lindsay,  P.  H.,  and  Norman,  D.  A.  (1972).  Human  information  processing.  New  York; 
Academic  Press. 

Lu,  S-T.,  DeAngelis,  M.  L.,  and  Gambrill,  C.  S.  (1992).  Ocular  microwave  thermometric 
dosimetry  and  thermometry  in  the  rabbit.  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress  fur 
Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  p.  6 1 . 

Maricq,  A.  V.,  and  Church,  R.  M.  (1983).  The  differential  effects  of  haloperidol  and 
methamphetamine  on  time  estimation  in  the  rat.  Psychopharmacology,  79,  10-15. 

Maricq,  A.  V.,  Roberts,  S..  and  Church,  R.  M.  (1981).  Methamphetamine  and  time  estimation. 
Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology:  Animal  Behavior  Processes,  7,  18-30. 

Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  and  Lu,  S-T.  (1992).  Whole-body  microwave  dosimetry  based  on  a 
single  gradient-layer  calorimeter.  Bioelectromagnetics,  13,  435-438. 

Mazur,  J.  E.  (1983)  Steady-state  performance  on  fixed-,  mixed-,  and  random-ratio  schedules. 
Journal  of  the  Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  39,  293-307. 

McGaugh,  J.  L.  (1990).  Significance  and  remembrance;  The  role  of  neuromodulatory  systems. 
Psychological  Science,  /,  15-25. 

Mc.Millan,  D.  E.  &  JU.  D.  Leander  (1976).  Effects  of  drugs  on  schedule-controlled  behavior. 
In  S.  D.  Glick  and  J.  Goldfarb  (eds.).  Behavioral  pharmacology  (pp.  85-139).  St.  Louis, 
Mosby. 

Meek.  W.  H.  (1983).  Selective  adjustment  of  the  speed  of  internal  clock  and  memory  processes. 
Journal  of  Experimental  Psychology:  Animal  Behavior  Processes,  9,  171-201. 

Mele,  P.  C.,  Franz,  C.  G.,  and  Harrison,  J.  R.  (1988).  Effects  of  sublethal  doses  of  ionizing 
radiation  on  schedule-controlled  performance  in  rats.  Pharmacology  Biochemistry  & 
Behavior,  30,  1007-1014. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


71 


Mele.  P.  C.,  Franz,  C.  G.,  and  Harrison.  J.  R.  (1990).  Effects  of  ionizing  radiation  on  fixed-ratio 
escape  performance  in  rats.  Neurotoxicology  and  Teratology,  12,  367-373. 

Michaelson,  S.  M.  (1986).  Interaction  of  nonmodulated  radio  frequency  fields  with  living  matter: 
Experimental  results.  In  C.  Polk  and  E.  Postow  (eds.),  CRC  handbook  of  biological 
effects  of  electromagnetic  fields.  Boca  Raton,  FI:  CRC  Press.  Pp.  339-423. 

National  Council  on  Radiation  Protection  and  Measurement.  (1986).  Biological  effects  and 
e.xposure  criteria  for  radiofrequency  electromagnetic  fields  (Report  No.  86).  Bethesda, 
MD:  Author. 

Nealeigh,  R.  C.,  Gamer,  R.  J.,  Morgan,  R.  J.,  Cross,  H.  A.,  and  Lambert.  P.  D.  (1971).  The 
effect  of  microwave  on  Y-maze  learning  in  the  white  rat.  Journal  of  Microwave  Power, 
6,  49-54. 

Nishimura,  H.,  Tsuda,  A..  Ogushi,  M.,  Ida,  Y.  and  Tanaka.  M.  (1988).  Is  immobility  of  rats  in 
the  forced-swim  test  "behavioral  despair"?  Physiology  and  Behavior,  42,  93-95. 

Notterman,  J.  M.  St  D.  E.  Miniz  (1965).  Dynamics  of  response.  New  York,  Wiley. 

\ 

Pierrel,  R.,  and  Murray,  C.  S.  (1963).  Some  relationships  between  comparative  judgment, 
confidence,  and  decision-time  in  weight-lifting.  American  Journal  of  Psychology,  76,  28- 
38. 

Polk,  C.,  and  Postow,  E.  (Eds.).  (1986).  CRC  handbook  of  biological  effects  of  electromagnetic 
fields.  Boca  Raton,  FI:  CRC  Press. 

Porsolt,  R.  D.,  LePichon,  M.,  and  Jalfre,  M.  (1977).  Depression:  A  new  animal  model  sensitive 
to  antidepressant  treatments.  Nature,  266,  730-732. 

Porsolt,  R.  D..  .Anton,  G.,  Blavet,  N.  and  Jalfre,  M.  (1978).  Behavioural  despair  in  rats:  a  new 
model  sensitive  to  antidepressant  treatments.  European  Journal  of  Pharmacology.  47. 
379-391. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


72 


Postow,  E.,  and  Swicord,  M.  L.  (19X6).  Modulated  fields  and  "window"  effects.  In  C.  Polk  and 
E.  Postow  (eds.),  CRC  handbook  of  hiolofjical  effects  of  eleciromaiinetic  fields.  Boca 
Raton,  FI;  CRC  Press.  Pp.  425-460. 

Raslear,  T.  G.  (1975).  The  effect  of  varying  the  distribution  of  generalization  stimuli  within  a 
constant  range  upon  the  bisection  of  a  sound  intensity  interval  by  rats.  Journal  of  (he 
Experimental  Analysis  of  Behavior,  23,  369-375. 

Raslear,  T.  G.  (1982).  On  the  use  of  bisection  procedures  in  animal  psychophysical  scaling. 
Psychometrika,  47,  95-99. 

Raslear,  T.  G.  (1983).  A  test  of  the  Pfanzagl  bisection  model  in  rats.  Journal  of  Experimental 
Psychology:  Animal  Behavior  Processes,  9,  49-62. 

Raslear,  T.  G.  (1985).  Perceptual  bias  and  response  bias  in  temporal  bisection.  Perception  & 
Psychophysics,  38,  261-268. 

Raslear,  T.  G.  (1991).  Psychophysik  bei  Tieren.  [Animal  psychophysics.]  IN  S.  H.  Hursh  and 
W.  Angemeir  (Eds.)  Operantes  lernen:  Ein  Handbuch.  Munich:  Reinhardt. 


Raslear,  T.  G.,  Akyel,  Y.  (1992).  Null  responses,  decision  confidence,  and  temporal  bisection 
in  rats;  The  effect  of  high-power  pulsed  microwaves.  Proceedings  and  Abstracts  of  the 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  Eastern  Psychological  Association,  13,  16. 

Raslear,  T.  G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Bates,  F..  Belt,  M.  (1992).  The  effects  of  high-peak  pulsed  microwave 
irradiation  on  time  bisection  in  rats.  Abstracts  of  the  First  World  Congress  for  Electricity 
and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine,  p.  61. 


Raslear,  T.  G.,  Akyel,  Y..  Serafini,  R..  Bates,  F.,  Belt,  .M.  (1991a).  Memory  consolidation  in  the 
rat  following  high-peak  power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation.  Proceedings  of  the  .Annual 
International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology  Society,  13. 
958-959. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


73 


Raslear.  T.  G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  Serafini,  R.,  Bates,  F.,  Belt,  M.  (1991b).  Food  demand  and  circadian 
rhythmicity  following  high-peak  power  pulsed  microwave  irradiation.  Proceedings  the 
Annual  International  Conference  of  the  IEEE  Engineering  in  Medicine  and  Biology 
Society,  13,  962-963. 

Raslear,  T.  G.,  R.  A.  Bauman,  S.  R.  Hursh,  D.  Shurtleff  &  L.  Simmons  (1988).  Rapid  demand 
curves  for  behavioral  economics.  Animal  Learning  &  Behavior,  16,  330-339. 


Raslear,  T.  G.,  &  Kaufman,  L.  W.  (1983).  Diisopropyl  phosphorofluoridate  (DFP)  disrupts 
circadian  activity  patterns.  Neurobehavioral  Toxicology  and  Teratology,  5.  407-41 1. 

Raslear,  T,  G.,  J.  R.  Leu  &  L.  Simmons  (1986).  The  effects  of  diisopropyl  phosphorofluoridate 
(DFP)  on  inter-response  time  and  circadian  patterns  of  lever-pressing  in  rats. 
Neurobehavioral  Toxicology  and  Teratology,  8,  655-658. 


Raslear,  T.  G.,  Shurtleff,  D.,  Rigamonti,  D.,  Hursh,  S.  R.,  and  Simmons,  L.  (1990). 

Ventromedial  hypothalamic  lesions  in  rats:  A  behavioral  economics  anal]^sis.  Proceedings 
and  Abstracts  of  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Eastern  Psychological  Association,  61,  34. 

Raslear,  T.  G.,  Shurtleff,  D.,  and  Simmons,  L.  (1988).  The  effects  of  diisopropyl 

phosphorofluoridate  (DFP)  on  time  perception  in  rats.  Physiology  (fe  Behavior,  43,  805- 
813. 

Raslear,  T.  G.,  Shurtleff,  D.,  and  Simmons,  L.  (in  press).  Loudness  bisection  and  masking  in  the 
rat  (Rattus  norvegicus).  Journal  of  Comparative  Psychology. 

Roberti,  B.,  Heebels,  G.  H.,  Hendricx,  J.  C.  M.,  deGreef,  .A.  H.  .A.  M.,  and  Wolthuis,  O.  L. 

(1975).  Preliminary  investigation  of  the  effect  of  low-level  microwave  radiation  on 

spontaneous  motor  activity  in  rats.  .Annals  of  the  New  York  Academy  of  Science.  247. 
417-424. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


74 


1 


I 

i 

! 

I 

» 

' 

I 

i 

t 

< 


Sadchikova,  M.  W.  (1974).  Clinical  manifestation.s  of  reaction.s  to  microwave  irradiation  in 
various  occupational  groups.  In  P.  Czerski,  K.  Ostrowaski,  C.  Silverman.  M.  L.  Shore. 
M.  J.  Suess.  and  B.  Waldeskog  (Eds.)  Effects  and  Health  Hazards  of  Microwave 
Radiation.  Polish  Medical  Publishers,  Warsaw,  Poland. 

Schrot,  J..  Thomas.  J.  R.,  and  Banvard,  R.  A.  (19X0).  Modification  of  the  repeated  acquisition 
of  re.sponse  sequences  in  rats  by  low-level  microwave  e.xposure.  Bioelectronia^netics.  /, 
X9-99. 


Seaman,  R.  L.,  and  Lebovitz,  R.  M.  (1987).  Auditory  unit  responses  to  single-pulse  and  twin- 
pulse  microwave  stimuli.  Hearing  Research,  26,  105-1 16. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  and  Lebovitz,  R.  M.  (1989).  Thresholds  of  cat  cochlear  nucleus  neurons  to 
microwave  pulses.  Bioelectromagnetics,  10,  147-160. 

Seelbach,  J.  D.,  and  Kris-Etherton,  P.  M.  (1985).  The  effect  of  vigorous  treadmill  exercise  on 
plasma  lipoproteins  and  hepatic  lipoprotein  production  in  Zucker  rats.  Atherosclerosis, 
57,  53-64. 


Selkurt,  E.  E.  (1971).  Physiology.  (Third  Edition).  Boston:  Little,  Brown  and  Company. 

Shellock,  F.  G.,  and  Rubin.  S.  A.  (1984),  Temperature  regulation  during  treadmiU  exercise  in 
the  rat.  Journal  of  Applied  Physiology,  57,  1872-1877. 

Shepherd,  R.  E.,  and  GoUnick,  P.  D.  (1976).  Oxygen  uptake  of  rats  at  different  work  intensities. 
Pflugers  Archiv,  362,  219-222. 

Shibata,  H.,  and  Nagasaka,  T.  (1987).  The  effect  of  forced  running  on  heat  production  in  brown 
adipose  tissue  in  rats.  Physiology  Behavior,  39,  377-380. 

Shurtleff.  D..  Raslear,  T.  G..  Genovese.  R.  F..  and  Simmons.  L.  ( 1992).  Perceptual  bisection  in 
rats:  The  effects  of  physostigmine,  scopolamine  and  pirenzepine.  Physiology  &  Behavior. 
51.  381-390. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HP  PM 


75 


Shurtleff.  D.,  Raslear,  T.  G.,  and  Simmons,  L.  (1990).  Circadian  variations  in  time  perception 
in  rats.  Physiology  &  Behavior,  47,  931-939. 

Sternberg,  D.  B.,  Isaacs,  K.,  Gold,  P.  E.,  and  McGaugh.  J.  L.  (1985).  Epinephrine  facilitation 
of  appetitive  learning;  Attenuation  with  adrenergic  receptor  antagonists.  Behavioral  a/ul 
Neural  Biology.  44,  447-453. 

Stevens,  S.  S.  (1975).  Psychophysics.  Introduction  to  its  perceptual,  neural,  and  social 
prospects.  New  York;  Wiley. 

Stuchly,  M.  A.,  and  Stuchly,  S.  S.  (1986).  Experimental  radio  and  microwave  dosimetry.  In  C. 
Polk  and  E.  Postow  (eds.),  CRC  handbook  of  biological  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields. 
Boca  Raton,  FI;  CRC  Press.  Pp.  229-272. 

Thomas,  J.  R.,  Burch,  L.  S.,  and  Yeandle.  S.  S.  (1979).  Microwave  radiation  and 
chlordiazepoxide;  Synergistic  effects  on  ft.xed-interval  behavior.  Science,  203.  1357-1358. 

Thomas,  J.  R.,  Finch,  E.  D.,  Fulk,  D.  W.,  and  Burch,  L.  S.  (1975).  Effects  of  low-level 
microwave  radiation  on  behavioral  baselines.  Annals  of  the  New  York  .Academy  of 
Science,  247,  425-432. 

Thomas,  J.  R.,  Schrot,  J.,  and  Banvard,  R.  A.  (1980).  Behavioral  effects  of  chlordiazepoxide  and 
diazepam  combined  with  low-level  microwaves.  Neurobehavioral  Toxicology,  2. 131-135. 

Thomas,  J.  R.,  Schrot,  J.,  and  Banvard,  R.  A.  (1982).  Comparative  effects  of  pulsed  and 
continuous-wave  2.8  GHz  microwaves  on  temporally  defined  behavior. 

Bioelectromagnetics.  3,  227-235. 

Weaver.  J.  C..  and  Astumian,  R.  D.  (1990).  The  response  of  living  cells  to  very  weak  electric 
fields;  The  thermal  noise  limit.  Science.  247.  459-462. 

Weiss.  B.  &  C.  T.  Gott  (1972).  .A  microanalysis  of  drug  effects  on  fcxed  ratio  performance  in 
pigeons.  Journal  of  Pharmacology  and  Experimental  Therapeutics.  ISO.  189-202. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


76 


Willner,  P.  (1984).  The  validity  of  animal  models  of  depression.  PsychophanyiacoUr^y . 
16. 


Behavioral  Toxicology  of  HPPM 


77 


