CONTRACT  NUMBER  DAMD17-94-C-4069 


TITLE:  Services  to  Operate  and  Maintain  a  Microwave  Research 

Laboratory 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR:  Yahya  Akyel,  Ph.D. 


CONTRACTING  ORGANIZATION:  McKesson  Bioservices 

Gaithersburg,  Maryland  20879 


REPORT  DATE:  June  1997 


TYPE  OF  REPORT:  Annual 


PREPARED  FOR: 


U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT: 


Approved  for  public  release; 
distribution  unlimited 


The  views,  opinions  and/or  findings  contained  in  this  report  are 
those  of  the  author (s)  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an  official 
Department  of  the  Army  position,  policy  or  decision  unless  so 
designated  by  other  documentation. 


[DEC  ESBS 


SCfES  i 


19980826  011 


REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 


farm  Approved 
OMB  No.  0704-0188 


C  r*oo™*  txadan  for  ttM  c  option  *  **  ormwon  Z  mxunsfd  to  1  hour  r-oon-*.  *" 

S.V^rv^r^motm-rinQ  it*  dot*  hmom.  *nd  compiotina  *nd  roving  tf»  cod*ctK>n  of  rtorm*co»vSjnd 

coilicaon  of  format, on.  ^cud^j  ^Qastjom  for  mduonQ  tfw  txrtm.  to  Wo*fwx3ton  H«*0Quarar«  Soonooo,  Oir*^or«t*  for  MonMM mT^S^^DC2-G&D3^^ 
D*v<*  MtgfrwsY,  Sui*  1 204.  Aw; ton.  VA  22202-4302.  and  to  Hem  Offico  of  M*n*g*cT>«nt  and  SudQM.  Piporworfc  Roducoon  Pro«o<a  <0704-0188).  W-Tangton.  DC  *0503. 


1.  AGENCY  USE  ONLY  (Leave  blank) 


2.  REPORT  DATE 

June  1997 


1 3.  REPORT  TYPE  AND  DATES  COVERED 
Annual  (21  May  94  -  20  May  97) _ 


4.  TITLE  AND  SUBTITLE 

Services  to  Operate  and  Maintain  a  Microwave  Research  Laboratory 


5.  FUNDING  NUMBERS 


D  AMD  17-94-C-4069 


6.  AUTHOR(S) 


Yahya  Akyel,  Ph.D. 


7.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 


8.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 
REPORT  NUMBER 


McKesson  Bioservices 
Gaithersburg,  Maryland  20879 


9.  SPONSORING  /  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME(S)  AND  ADDRESS(ES) 

U.S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Materiel  Command 
Fort  Detrick,  Maryland  21702-5012 


10. SPONSORING  /  MONITORING 
AGENCY  REPORT  NUMBER 


11.  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 


1  2a.  DISTRIBUTION  /  AVAILABILITY  STATEMENT 
Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


1 2b.  DISTRIBUTION  CODE 


1 3.  ABSTRACT  (Maximum  200  words:) 

Behavioral,  biological,  cardiovascular,  cellular  effects  of  ultrawide  band  and  high  peak 
power  pulsed  microwave  fields;  ocular  effects  of  high  peak  power  pulsed  microwave  fields, 
and  biological  effects  of  millimeter  wave  fields  were  studied  using  various  physiological 
and  behavioral  paradigms  in  animal  models.  Behavioral  studies  involved  analgesia  and 
open  field  activity  in  mice.  Cardiovascular  effect  studies  indicated  systolic,  mean,  and 
diastolic  arterial  pressures  decreased  significantly  in  UWB  exposed  rats.  Cellular  effects 
involved  Nitric  Oxide  Synthase  activity  in  cultured  cells,  and  mutagenic  and 
recombinagenic  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields.  Millimeter  wave  studies  showed 
frequency  specific  neural  effects  below  the  effective  permissible  safety  limits.  Engineering 
part  of  the  program  involved  determination  of  fields  strengths,  dosimetry  and  modeling  of 
radiofrequency  fields.  A  two-step  deconvolution  routine  was  developed  to  characterize 
ultra  fast  rise  time  UWB  pulse  and  has  been  adopted  by  other  military  services  to  be  used 
in  their  systems.  Details  and  accomplishments  of  the  research  program  and  a  list  of 
publications  are  presented  in  this  report. 


14.  SUBJECT  TERMS  ,  .  ..  IS.  NUMBER  OF  PAGES 

High  power  pulsed  microwaves,  ultrawide  band  microwave  fields,  _ 

millimeter  waves,  dosimetry,  cardiovascular  effects,  cellular  effects,  i6.  price  code 

ocular  effects. _ _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ 

17  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  ll 8.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  1 19.  SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  20.  LIMITATION  OF  ABSTRAC1 
OF  REPORT  OF  THIS  PAGE  OF  ABSTRACT 

Unclassified  Unclassified  Unclassified  Unlimited _ 


NSN  7540-01-280-5500 


Standard  Form  298  (Rev.  2-89} 
Preicribad  by  ANSI  Std.  239-18  298-102 


USAPPC  VI  .00 


FOREWORD 


Opinions,  interpretations,  conclusions  and  recommendations  are 
those  of  the  author  and  are  not  necessarily  endorsed  by  the  U.S. 
Army. 

Where  copyrighted  material  is  quoted,  permission  has  been 
obtained  to  use  such  material. 

Where  material  from  documents  designated  for  limited 
distribution  is  quoted,  permission  has  been  obtained  to  use  the 
material . 

Citations  of  commercial  organizations  and  trade  names  in 
this  report  do  not  constitute  an  official  Department  of  Army 
endorsement  or  approval  of  the  products  or  services  of  these 
organizations . 

In  conducting  research  using  animals,  the  investigator (s) 
adhered  to  the  "Guide  for  the  Care  and  Use  of  Laboratory 
Animals,"  prepared  by  the  Committee  on  Care  and  use  of  Laboratory 
Animals  of  the  Institute  of  Laboratory  Resources,  national 
Research  Council  (NIH  Publication  No.  86-23,  Revised  1985) . 

For  the  protection  of  human  subjects,  the  investigator (s) 
adhered  to  policies  of  applicable  Federal  Law  45  CFR  46. 

In  conducting  research  utilizing  recombinant  DNA  technology, 
the  investigator (s)  adhered  to  current  guidelines  promulgated  by 
the  National  Institutes  of  Health. 

In  the  conduct  of  research  utilizing  recombinant  DNA,  the 
investigator (s)  adhered  to  the  NIH  Guidelines  for  Research 
Involving  Recombinant  DNA  Molecules. 

In  the  conduct  of  research  involving  hazardous  organisms, 
the  investigator ( s )  adhered  to  the  CDC-NIH  Guide  for  Biosafety  in 
Microbiological  and  Biomedical  Laboratories. 


Atm. _ iluha 

PI  -  Signature  C  « Date 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


INTRODUCTION  .  1 

I.  Behavioral  and  Biological  Effects  of  Ultrawide  Band  and  High  Peak 

Power  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields  .  3 

Relevant  Publications  and  Presentations  . 5 

II.  Cardiovascular  Effects  of  Ultrawide  band  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed 

Microwave  Fields  . . . . . . . . .  6 

Relevant  Presentation  .  9 

III.  Cellular  Effects  of  Ultrawide  band  and  High  Peak  Power  Microwave 

Fields  . 10 

A.  Effects  of  UWB  Electromagnetic  Fields  on  NOS  Activity  in 

Cultured  Cells  .  10 

B.  Mutagenic  and  Recombinagenic  Effects  of  High-Peak  Power 

Electromagnetic  Pulses  .  11 

C.  Effects  of  UWB  and  Other  Pulsed  Electromagnetic  Fields  on 

Melanosomes  from  Retinal  Pigmented  Epithelium  .  13 

D.  Electropermeabilization  of  Cells  by  High-Peak  Power  Microwave 

Pulses  .  14 

Relevant  Publications  and  Presentations  .  15 

IV.  Ocular  Effects  of  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields .  18 

Relevant  Publications  and  Presentations  .  22 

V.  Biological  Effects  of  Millimeter  Wave  Fields  .  23 


A.  Genetic  Effects  of  Low-Level  Millimeter  Waves  .  23 

B.  Neural  Effects  of  Low-Intensity  Millimeter  Waves  .  24 

Relevant  Publications  and  Presentations  .  25 

VI.  Determination  of  Field  Strengths,  Dosimetry  and  Modeling  of 

Radiofrequency  Fields  .  29 

A.  Complex  Dielectric  Characterization  of  Materials  .  29 

B.  Development  of  Finite-Difference  Time-Domain  Simulation 

Software  with  Object-Oriented  Design .  30 

c.  Characterization  of  Ultrawide  Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  32 

Relevant  Publications  and  Presentations  .  33 

Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  Representation  in  Scientific  Meetings  .  35 


CONCLUSIONS 


36 


INTRODUCTION 


The  following  report  summarizes  the  performance  of  McKesson  BioServices 
(MBS)  staff  at  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research,  US  Army  Medical  Research 
Detachment,  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  at  Brooks  AFB,  Texas  under  the 
contract  DAMD1 7-94-C-4069. 

McKesson  BioServices'  understanding  of  technical  issues  and  insight  into 
scientific  principles  has  been  the  keystone  of  success  for  Microwave  Bioeffects 
Branch's  research  program.  Due  to  our  efforts  in  planning  and  managing  the 
research  program,  the  research  productivity  of  the  Branch  has  risen  dramatically. 

In  the  past  year  alone,  dozens  of  scientific  papers  have  been  published  or 
submitted  for  publication.  Moreover,  in  this  period  of  time  our  research  program 
has  achieved  a  well-respected  stature  within  the  TriService  microwave  bioeffects 
arena:  our  staff  participates  in  international  conferences  as  presenters,  our  staff 
has  been  consulted  numerous  times  by  other  services  and  our  products  are  in  use 
in  various  microwave  laboratories. 

We  are  determined  to  continue  to  provide  high-quality  scientific  research  and 
to  represent  the  U.S.  Army's  Microwave  Bioeffects  program  under  the  guidance  of 
the  U.S.  Army  Medical  Research,  Development,  Acquisition  and  Logistics 
Command  at  Brooks  Air  Force  Base  in  San  Antonio,  Texas. 


Based  on  the  guidance  provided  in  the  contract,  McKesson  BioServices 
concentrated  its  research  efforts  in  the  following  areas: 

I.  Behavioral  and  biological  effects  of  ultrawide  band  and  high  peak  power 
pulsed  microwave  fields. 

II.  Cardiovascular  effects  of  ultrawide  band  and  high  peak  power  pulsed 
microwave  fields 

III.  Cellular  effects  of  ultrawide  band  and  high  peak  power  pulsed  microwave 
fields 

IV.  Ocular  effects  of  high  peak  power  pulsed  microwave  fields 

V.  Biological  effects  of  millimeter  wave  fields 

VI.  Determination  of  fields  strengths,  dosimetry  and  modeling  of  radiofrequency 
fields. 

The  present  report  summarizes  the  efforts  of  McKesson  BioServices  staff  in 
the  aformentioned  research  areas  and  presents  a  list  of  publications/presentations 
made  in  these  fields.  In  Volume  II  of  this  report,  you  will  be  able  to  find  the  copies 
of  each  scientific  paper  produced  by  the  McKesson  BioServices  staff  during  the 
three  base  years  of  the  DAMD17-94-C-4069  which  covers  the  time  period  of  May 


I.  Behavioral  and  Biological  Effects  of  Ultrawide  Band  and  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed 
Microwave  Fields. 

Based  on  the  following  issues:  the  need  for  standard  for  exposure  of  soldier, 
increased  use  of,  and  incomplete  information  on  biological  effects  of  UWB  pulses  in 
and  around  military  sources.  Dr  Ronald  Seaman  designed  a  protocol  entitled 
"Effects  of  U/trawideband  (UWB)  Electromagnetic  Fields  on  Analgesia  and  Activity 
in  Mice 

The  objective  of  the  study  was  to  add  information  on  biological  effects  of 
UWB  pulses  to  the  database  used  to  set  exposure  standards  for  the  soldier. 
Scientists  have  previously  shown  that  morphine-induced  changes  are  affected  by 
other  types  of  electromagnetic  fields.  Based  on  this  information.  Dr.  Seaman  tried 
to  determine  whether  exposure  to  laboratory  UWB  pulses  changes  nociception  and 
activity  in  mice  by  using  normal  nociception  and  activity  as  well  as  morphine- 
induced  decreased  nociception  (analgesia)  and  hyperactivity  to  reach  a  conclusion. 
McKesson  BioServices'  scientific  staff  exposed  animals  for  30  minutes  to  UWB 
pulses  at  repetition  frequencies  of  60/s  and  600/s.  Appropriate  cage  and  sham- 
exposed  controls  were  used. 

At  the  above  described  conditions,  normal  and  morphine-modified  activity 
and  nociception  were  not  affected  in  C57BL/6  mice.  In  CF-1  mice,  normal 


nociception  and  activity  and  morphine-increased  activity  were  not  affected.  On  the 
other  hand,  at  45-minute  exposure  at  600/s  morphine-induced  analgesia  was 
possibly  affected  in  CF-1  mice. 

It  has  been  observed  that  UWB  pulses  changed  activity  and  nociception  only 
for  certain  conditions  in  the  study;  morphine-induced  change  in  nociception  in  CF-1 
mice  had  been  observed  after  30  minute  exposure  at  600/s.  Thus,  the  studies 
point  toward  only  weak  effect  on  a  behavioral  endpoint  that  involves  activation  of 
opioid  receptors. 

Furthermore,  to  determine  whether  exposure  to  laboratory  UWB  pulses  can 
cause  or  modify  a  startle  response  in  rats,  Dr.  Seaman  designed  a  study  to 
investigate  possible  UWB  pulse  modification  of  acoustic  and  tactile  startle 
responses,  both  of  which  are  a  rapid  neuromuscular  response  to  sudden 
intense  stimuli.  The  well-studied  rat  startle  response  is  sensitive  to  various  agents, 
including  microwave  pulses.  The  approach  includes:  the  use  of  controlled  single 
pulses  and  brief  patterns  of  pulses,  the  use  of  timing  of  UWB  pulses  as  an 
independent  variable,  and  the  use  of  appropriate  no-pulse  trials  as  controls. 


A  custom-built  startle  sensor  has  been  constructed  for  use  in  the  UWB 
exposure  system  by  the  technical  staff  of  McKesson  BioServices.  This  challenging 
task  has  been  accomplished  during  the  last  months  of  the  contract  and  the  system 


is  ready  to  carry  out  the  study  described  in  the  approved  protocol  for  UWB  pulses. 


Relevant  Publications/Presentations 

Seaman,  R.  L.f  Belt,  M.  L.,  Doyle,  J.  M.,  &  Henry,  P.  J.  (1997).  Ultra-Wide-Band 

Pulses  Fail  To  Modify  Morphine-Induced  Analgesia  and  Hyperactivity  in  Mice. 
Presented  at  The  Second  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in 
Biology  and  Medicine. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  &  Henry,  P.  (1996).  Early  Results  From  a  Study  Of 

Ultra-Wide  Band  Pulses  and  Morphine  Induced  Analgesia  in  the  Mouse.  The 
Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  The  Bioelectromagnetics  Society. 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  &  Henry,  P.  (1996).  Testing  For  Effects  of  Ultra-Wide- 
Band  Pulses  on  Nociception  and  Activity.  Second  CERT  Symposium  for 
Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology. 


II.  Cardiovascular  Effects  of  Ultrawide  Band  and  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed 
Microwave  Fields 

Dr.  Shin-Tsu  Lu,  as  the  principal  investigator,  with  the  collaboration  of  Dr. 
Satnam  Mathur,  Michelle  Belt  and  Joanne  Doyle  studied  the  "Delayed 
Cardiovascular  Disturbances  Determined  by  a  Non-invasive  Procedure  in  Rats 
Exposed  to  Ultra-Wide  Band  (UWB)  Electromagnetic  Fields" 

The  safety  aspect  of  the  ultrashort/ultra-wide  band  (UWB)  electromagnetic 
field  has  been  widely  questioned  recently.  The  central  issue  is  the  lack  of  an 
adequate  biological  database  to  support  the  UWB  Interim  Guidelines  and  modeling 
for  delayed  effects  of  electromagnetic  fields  in  general. 

The  objectives  of  this  study  were: 

a)  the  evaluation  of  the  heart  rate  (systolic,  mean  and  diastolic  pressures)  for 
4  weeks  in  Wistar-Kyoto  rats  exposed  to  various  "doses"  of  UWB  fields  by  a 
non-invasive  tail  cuff  procedure  without  the  use  of  anesthetic  agent  or 
tranquilizer. 

b)  the  evaluation  of  the  heart  rate  (systolic,  mean  and  diastolic  pressures)  for 
4  weeks  in  Spontaneously  Hypertensive  rats  exposed  to  various  "doses"  of 
UWB  field  by  a  non-invasive  tail  cuff  procedure  without  the  use  of  anesthetic 
agent  or  tranquilizer  to  study  the  possibility  of  enhanced  sensitivity  to  UWB 


electromagnetic  fields  due  to  a  common  disease. 

The  uncompensated  bradycardia  and  hypotension  can  lead  to  fatigue, 
decrement  in  work  performance  and  reduction  in  brain  perfusion.  This  results  in 
central  nervous  system  effects  such  as  headache,  irritability  and  fainting.  Finally, 
prolonged  and  untreated  hypertension  leads  to  increased  risk  of  cardiovascular 
accidents.  These  conditions  have  serious  health  implications  for  the  warfighters. 

In  this  study,  the  animal  model  used  to  study  the  cardiovascular  effects  of 
ultrawide  band  were  male  Wistar-Kyoto  normotensive  rats  (WKY)  and  male 
Spontaneously  Hypertensive  rats  (SHR)  of  10-12  weeks  of  age. 

Exposure  conditions  (six  minutes),  UWB  pulse  shapes,  and  field  strengths 

were: 

-  sham  exposure  (0  mW/cm2) 

-  UWB,  1  kHz  repetition  rate,  85  kV/m  peak,  1  ns  pulsewidth  (1.95  mW/cm2) 

-  UWB,  500  Hz  repetition  rate,  93  kV/m  peak,  1  ns  pulsewidth  (1.15 
mW/cm2) 

-  UWB,  250  Hz  repetition  rate,  95  kV/m  peak,  1  ns  pulsewidth  (0.60 
mW/cm2) 

-  UWB,  1 25  Hz  repetition  rate,  95  kV/m  peak,  1  ns  pulsewidth  (0.30 


mW/cm2) 


The  biological  endpoints  studied  were  heart  rate,  systolic  arterial  pressure, 
mean  arterial  pressure,  and  diastolic  arterial  pressure.  Readings  for  these  endpoints 
were  recorded  at  the  pre-exposure  baseline,  1  hour,  24  hours,  72  hours,  1  week,  2 
weeks,  3  weeks,  and  4  weeks  after  exposure. 

The  results  indicated  that  the  heart  rate  in  UWB-exposed  WKY  rats  was  not 
altered  significantly.  However,  systolic,  mean  and  diastolic  arterial  pressures 
decreased  significantly  in  UWB  exposed  WKY  rats  at  1  kHz  (1.95  mW/cm  2)  and 
500  Hz  (1.15  mW/cm  2)  but  not  at  250  Hz  (0.60  mW/cm2  )  or  125  Hz  (0.30 
mW/cm2).  Thus,  the  UWB-induced  hypotensive  effects  could  appear  as  early  as 
one  hour  after  exposure  and  it  could  persist  throughout  the  entire  study  period,  4 
weeks  after  exposure. 

Dr.  Ronald  Seaman  also  studied  "Ultra  Wide  Band  Pulses:  Effects  on  the 
Cardiovascular  System  of  the  Rat"  as  a  principal  investigator.  The  increased  use 
of  UWB  pulses  in  military  systems,  the  need  for  standard  for  exposure  of  soldier  to 
UWB  pulses  and  the  incomplete  information  on  biological  effects  of  UWB  pulses 
were  the  underlying  reasons  for  this  study. 

The  objective  of  this  research  was  to  add  information  on  biological  effects  of 
UWB  pulses  to  the  database  used  to  set  exposure  standards  for  the  soldier.  Unlike 
the  previous  experiment,  this  research  project  was  designed  to  determine  whether 


acute  exposure  to  laboratory  UWB  pulses  can  cause  changes  in  blood  pressure  and 
heart  rate  of  the  rat. 

Briefly  this  study  used  animals  under  ketamine  for  study  of  acute  effects. 
Animals  were  exposed  to  brief  patterns  of  UWB  pulses,  lasting  2  minutes 
maximum.  Single  UWB  exposure  of  two  minutes  with  pulses  at  repetition 
frequencies  of  500/s  or  1000/s  were  used  as  exposure  conditions.  Aortic  catheter 
and,  in  some  cases,  leads  for  EKG  have  been  used  to  collect  the  data.  A 
computerized  system  has  been  installed  to  acquire,  record,  and  analyze  blood 
pressure  and  EKG  in  more  detail. 

No  change  in  mean  blood  pressure  and  average  heart  rate  was  seen  in  earlier 
acute  UWB  experiments;  however,  as  indicated  in  a  previous  study,  reduced  blood 
pressure  without  change  in  heart  rate  was  seen  in  Dr.  Lu's  chronic  experiment. 

In  this  experiment,  no  change  occurred  in  mean  blood  pressure  or  in  heart 
rate  for  animals  in  acute  experiment  with  2-minute  exposure  to  UWB  pulses  at 
50/s,  500/s,  and  1000/s,  confirming  earlier  acute  experiment  results. 

Relevant  Presentation 

Lu,  S.-T.,  Henry,  P.,  &  Mathur,  S.  P.  (1996).  Manifestation  of  an  Ultra-Wide  Band 

Induced  Hypotension  in  Rats.  Third  Annual  Michaelson  Research  Conference. 


III.  Cellular  Effects  of  Ultrawide  Band  and  High  Peak  Power  Microwave  Fields. 

A.  Effects  of  Ultrawideband  (UWB)  Electromagnetic  Fields  on  Nitric  Oxide 

Synthase  (NOS)  Activity  in  Cultured  Cells 

NOS  has  been  implicated  in  other  studies  of  electromagnetic  fields  in  the 
hippocampus  and  in  peripheral  blood  vessels.  In  order  to  determine  whether 
exposure  to  laboratory  UWB  pulses  can  cause  a  change  in  the  production  of  nitric 
oxide  (NO)  by  cultured  cells,  established  RAW  264.7  cell  line  and  selected 
transfectants,  all  of  which  produce  NO  through  NOS  activity  have  been  used.  Cell 
cultures  were  exposed  for  30  minutes  to  UWB  pulses  at  repetition  frequency  of 
600/s.  twenty-four  hours  later,  nitrite  concentration,  as  indicator  of  NO 
production,  was  measured.  Appropriate  sham-exposed  cells  were  used  as  controls. 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  add  information  on  biological  effects  of 
UWB  pulses  to  the  working  database  used  and  to  set  exposure  standards  for  the 
soldier. 

The  results  indicated  that  NO  production  increased  in  UWB-exposed  RAW 
cells  stimulated  with  gamma-interferon  (gIFN),  lipopolysaccharide  (LPS),  and  39 
mM  nitrate  relative  to  the  respective  sham-exposed  controls.  NO  production  in  the 
RAW  cells  that  were  unstimulated  and  stimulated  by  gIFN  and  LPS  but  not  nitrate 


was  unchanged.  NO  production  in  three  RAW  transfectants  that  were 
unstimulated  or  stimulated  in  either  way  was  also  unchanged.  And  finally, 
increased  NO  production  could  have  resulted  from  increased  activity  of  NOS,  from 
increased  induction  of  NOS,  or  from  both. 

Future  research  may  include:  pursuing  the  investigation  of  the  observed 
increase  of  NO  production  in  RAW  264.7  cells,  and  testing  for  important  UWB 
field  parameters,  exposure  duration  and  timing  relative  to  cell  stimulation. 

B.  Mutagenic  and  Recombinagenic  Effects  of  High-Peak-Power 
Electromagnetic  Pulses 

Genome  rearrangements  may  lead  to  cell  death,  heritable  mutations,  and 
cancer  induction.  Studying  of  genetic  effects  is  obligatory  for  assessment  of  any 
potentially  hazardous  environmental  factor  and  possible  health  hazards  to  exposed 
personnel.  At  the  present  time,  no  experimental  data  are  available  on  possible 
genetic  effects  of  high-peak-power  electromagnetic  pulses  per  se  or  in  combination 
with  chemical  or  physical  mutagens. 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  analyze  whether  high-peak-power  pulses 
might  modify  spontaneous  or  ultraviolet-(UV)  induced  mutagenesis  and 
recombinagenesis. 


Methods:  D7  strain  of  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  was  used  to 
determine: 

■  mutations,  including  reversions,  point  mutations,  deletions,  aneuploidy, 

etc., 

■  intragenic  mitotic  recombination  (gene  conversion), 

•  intergenic  mitotic  recombination  (crossing-over), 

■  colony  forming  ability  (CFA) 

Two  different  microwave  sources  were  used  for  this  study.  The  UWB 
exposure  system  was  operated  for  30  min  at  1 6  Hz  or  600  Hz.  On  the  second 
series  of  experiment  TEMPO  exposure  system  was  operated  at  10  and  100  ps 
(1ps/7s)  at  170-180  kW/cm2  power  density.  UV  254  nm  (100  J/m2)  was  used  as 
a  mutagen. 

The  results  indicated  that  UWB  pulses  did  not  affect  CFA  or  induced  any 
mutations  or  recombinations.  UWB  exposure  did  not  modify  mutagenic  or 
recombinagenic  effectiveness  of  UV.  TEMPO  pulses  did  not  induce  mutations  or 
recombinations.  And,  exposure  to  100  TEMPO  pulses  decreased  CFA  in  50%  of 
experiments  (p<0.05). 

Thus,  electromagnetic  radiation  from  UWB  and  TEMPO  sources  is  unlikely  to 
pose  any  immediate  genetic  hazard.  The  decrease  of  CFA  after  treatment  with 


100  TEMPO  pulses  appears  to  result  from  mechanisms  other  than  chromosome 
damage  (e.g..,  membrane  alterations). 

C.  Effects  of  Ultra  Wide  Band  (UWB)  and  Other  Pulsed  Electromagnetic  Fields  on 
Melanosomes  from  Retinal  Pigmented  Epithelium. 

The  increased  use  of  UWB  pulses  and  other  electromagnetic  fields  in  military 
systems,  the  need  for  standard  for  exposure  of  soldier  to  pulsed  fields,  an 
incomplete  information  on  biological  effects  of  pulsed  fields,  and  the  questions  that 
have  been  raised  concerning  retinal  effects  of  pulsed  fields  are  the  issues 
surrounding  this  area  of  research. 

The  objective  was  to  add  information  on  biological  effects  of  UWB  and  other 
electromagnetic  pulses  to  the  database  used  to  set  exposure  standards  for  the 
soldier  and  to  develop  techniques  examining  the  role  of  melanosomes  in  reported 
ocular  effects  of  pulsed  microwaves. 

The  approach  was  to  determine  whether  exposure  to  laboratory 
electromagnetic  pulses  can  cause  leakage  of  free  radicals  or  melanin  from 
melanosomes.  In  order  to  acheive  this  goal  melanosomes  from  bovine  retinal 
pigmented  epithelium  were  used  and  melanosome  preparation  have  been  exposed 
to  electromagnetic  pulses  such  as: 


-  UWB  pulses  at  600/s  for  30  minutes 

-  L-band  microwave  pulses  (1250  MHz)  at  1/s  for  15  minutes 

-  200  Tempo  pulses  over  25  minutes 

NADPH  oxidation  was  used  as  an  indicator  of  melanin  radical  concentration 
in  medium  after  exposure.  The  action  by  microwave  pulses  on  melanosomes  has 
been  suggested  as  a  mechanism  for  retinal  damage. 

The  results  indicated  weak  or  no  effect  after  exposure  to  UWB  pulses. 

Thus,  action  on  melanosomes,  or  the  melanin  they  contain,  may  not  participate 
inmediating  effects  of  RF/microwave  pulses  on  the  retina. 

D.  Electropermeabilization  of  Cells  by  High-Peak  Power  Microwave  Pulses. 

Electropermeabilization  of  cell  membrane  is  a  well-known  biological 
phenomena,  which  has  been  used  for  years  in  biology  and  medicine  to  alter  the  cell 
membrane  permeability  to  transport  substances  (drugs,  genes,  dyes,  etc.)  into  or 
out  of  the  cell.  There  are  theoretical  predictions  that  high-peak  power  microwave 
pulses  can  alter  permeability  of  cell  membrane.  A  hypothesis  has  been  put  forward 
that  electropermeabilization  (EP)  of  membranes  could  be  a  possible  mechanism  of 
biological  effects  in  FPS-7  and  TEMPO  exposures. 

The  objectives  were  to  establish  whether  electropermeabilization  of  cells  can 


14 


be  produced  by  high-peak  power  microwave  pulses  (HPPMP),  and  to  determine  the 
threshold  conditions  for  this  effect. 

The  method  and  procedures  for  this  aproach  have  been  tested  and  are  ready 
to  begin  systematic  experiments  with  irradiation  in  1998.  If  we  show 
experimentally  that  EP  can  be  caused  by  HPPMP,  this  will  be  the  first  observation 
of  EP  at  microwave  frequencies.  This  will  provide  with  sound  explanation  of 
biophysical  mechanisms  responsible  for  HPPMP  physiological  and  behavioral 
effects,  and  is  essential  for  development  of  well-founded  safety  guidelines  for 
HPPMP  exposures. 


Relevant  Presentations/  Publications 

Glickman,  R.,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  &  Belt,  M.  L.  (1996).  Ultra-Wide-Band  Pulses  Do  Not 
Induce  Free  Radicals  in  Melanosomes  From  Bovine  Retinal  Pigmented 
Epithelium.  Second  CERT  Symposium  on  Environmental  Radiation 
Toxicology. 

Kiel,  J.  L.,  Parker,  J.  E.,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  &  Mathur,  S.  P.  (1997).  Engineered 
Bacteria  as  Sensors  of  Weak  Ultra-Wide-Band  (UWB)  Radiofrequency 
Radiation  (RFR)  Effects.  Presented  at  Seventy  Third  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
American  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science. 

Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Belt,  M.  E.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Effect 


of  High-Peak-Power  Pulsed  Microwave  Radiation  on  the  Colony-forming 
Ability,  Mutagenesis  and  Recombinagenesis  in  Yeast.  Presented  at  The 
Second  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and 
Medicine. 

Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Effect  of 

Ultrawide  Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  on  Ultraviolet-Induced  Mutation  and 
Mitotic  Recombination  in  Yeast.  Presented  at  the  Ninth  International 
Congress  on  Genes ,  Gene  Families,  and  Isozymes . 

Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1996). 
Effect  of  Ultrawide  Band  (UWB)  Radiation  Pulses  on  Spontaneous  and 
Ultraviolet  Light-Induced  Mutation  and  Mitotic  Recombination  in  Yeast. 
Second  CERT  Symposium  for  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology  . 
Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Lack 
of  Genetic  Effects  of  Ultrawide-Band  Electromagnetic  Radiation  in  Yeast. 
Electro  and  Magnetobiology,  16(3). 

Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Belt,  M.  L.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (In  press). 
Ultra-Wide-Band  Electromagnetic  Radiation  Does  Not  Affect  UV-Induced 
Recombination  and  Mutagenesis  in  Yeast.  Bioelectromagnetics. 

Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1996).  Recombinagenic 

and  Mutagenic  Processes  in  Yeast  After  Exposure  to  Ultra  Wide  Band 
Radiation  Pulses.  The  Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 


Society. 


Seaman,  R.  L.,  Kiel,  J.  L.,  Parker,  J.  E.,  Grubbs,  T.  R.,  &  Prol,  H.  K.  (1996).  Effects 


of  Ultra-Wide  Band  Pulses  on  Nitric  Oxide  Production  in  Murine 
Macrophages.  The  Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society  . 

Seaman,  R.  L.,  Kiel,  J.,  &  Parker,  J.  (1996).  Ultra-Wide-Band  Pulses  Increase  Nitric 
Oxide  Production  in  Murine  Macrophages.  Second  CERT  Symposium  for 
Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology  . 


IV.  Ocular  Effects  of  High  Peak  Power  Pulsed  Microwave  Fields 

This  very  important  research  project,  under  the  leadership  of  Microwave 
Bioeffects  Branch  is  also  sponsored  by  the  US  Air  Force  and  US  Navy's  Directed 
Energy  Research  Departments.  From  McKesson  BioServices  Drs.  Shin-Tsu  Lu  and 
Satnam  Mathur  participated  as  co-principal  investigotors. 

Previous  research  has  reported  that  pulsed  microwave  can  induce  retinal 
injuries  in  non-human  primates.  The  retinal  injury  includes  reduction  in  b-wave 
amplitude  in  electroretinogram,  cone  photoreceptor  degeneration  (karyolysis  and 
vacuolization),  and  pyknotic  changes  of  the  pigmented  epithelium  in  the  monkeys 
[Kues  et  al.  1989a,  1989b,  1991,  Kues  and  McLeod  1990,  Kues  and  Monahan 
1992].  Increased  incidence  of  chorioretinal  scar  in  "microwave  worker"  has  also 
been  reported  [Tengroth  and  Aurell  1974]. 

The  threshold  for  pulsed  microwave  induced  retinal  injury  in  primates  was 
considered  to  be  around  4  W/kg.  Current  personnel  protection  guidelines  are 
derived  from  a  whole-body  average  Specific  Absorption  Rate  (SAR)  4  W/kg  with  a 
10  or  50  fold  modifying  factors  for  occupational  or  general  population  standards. 
The  guidelines  allow  a  local  SAR  up  to  8  W/kg. 


Therefore,  experimental  outcome  on  the  susceptibility  of  retinal  tissue  to 


radiofrequency  induced  injury  has  a  direct  impact  on  promulgation  of  a  personnel 
protection  guideline. 

The  major  health  implication  for  the  warfighter  concerning  this  issue  is  that 
retinal  injuries  can  lead  to  vision  impairment  or  blindness  in  severe  case.  In  this 
experiment  the  sensitivity  of  the  primate  eye  to  pulsed  microwave  induced  injuries. 

Female  Rhesus  monkeys,  4-5  years  of  age,  4-5  kg,  normal  eyes  without 
functional  deficit  and  morphological  abnormalities  are  being  used  as  subjects. 

To  ascertain  normal  ocular  health  prior  to  exposure  and  to  provide  baseline 
for  post-exposure  retinal  endpoints,  the  following  pre-exposure  screening  and 
baselines  were  obtained:  Electroretinogram  (ERG)  evaluation  [Physiological 
Function],  Fundus  photographic  evaluation  [Clinical  Morphology],  Scanning  Laser 
Ophthalmoscopic  (SLO)  examination  and  Fluorescein  Angiograph  (FA)  and 
Indocyanine  Green  (ICG)  Angiograph  [Clinical  Morphology]. 

Pulsed  microwaves  from  a  Navy  FPS-7  radar  operated  at  1.25  GHz  carrier 
frequency  are  used  for  microwave  exposures.  An  open-ended  WR650  waveguide 
is  used  as  an  antenna.  The  distance  between  the  eyes  of  the  subject  and  the 
waveguide  is  7.6  cm.  The  transmitter's  peak  power  is  1  MW  and  has  a  pulse 
duration  of  6  /js.  The  pulse  repetition  rate  were  0.6  Hz  ,  1 .2  Hz  ,  and  2.8  Hz 


respectively  for  three  dose  levels  of  4  W/kg,  8  W/kg,  and  20  W/kg.  Average 
power  densities  were  9.5  mW/cm2,  19.0  mW/cm2  ,  and  47  mW/cm2  for 
corresponding  dose  levels.  The  subjects  were  exposed  4  hours/day,  3  days/week, 
for  3  weeks. 

During  the  post-exposure  the  following  procedures  were  performed  in 
sequence  24  hours  after  the  last  microwave  exposure:  Post-exposure  ERG,  post¬ 
exposure  fundus  photographs,  post-exposure  SLO/FA  and  ICG  angiogram, 
euthanization,  enucleation  and  histo-pathological  evaluations. 

Specific  absorption  rates  (SAR)  were  determined  by  thermometric  dosimetric 
method  using  2  female  Rhesus  monkey  carcasses,  at  4.5  and  4.9  kg,  respectively. 
Two  Luxtron  MAM-05  probes  with  4  sensors  each  and  5  mm  spacing  were 
employed  via  8  channel  Luxtron  3000  Fluoroptic  Thermometry  System  at  a  1 0  Hz 
acquisition  rate  and  4  Krohn-Hite  3322  Filters  at  1  Hz  low  pass  computer  at  2  Hz 
data  acquisition  rate  via  8  channels.  The  location  of  the  temperature  sensor  probes 
were  at  4  quadrants:  superior,  oral,  temporal  and  nasal  along  the  surface  of  the 
globe.  Four  replications  were  used  for  each  determination  at  4  depths  of  0.0,  0.5, 
1.0,  and  1.5  cm  from  the  Limbus  16  locations  per  globe  and  32  locations  for  both 
eyes. 


Exposures  were  performed  at  7.6  cm  from  antenna,  vertical  E-field, 


horizontal  H-field,  using  1.25  GHz  pulsed  microwaves  at  1  MW  peak  power  and  6 
fjs  pulsewidth  with  17.5  Hz  pulse  repetition  rate,  80-100  W  average  power,  and  a 
reflection  coefficient  of  <  3.4  %. 

Field  Characterization’.  The  L-band  exposure  system  produces  2.79  mW/cm2 
per  Watt  transmitted  through  the  antenna  at  7.6  cm  from  the  antenna  where  the 
monkey's  head  is  positioned.  The  power  density  decreases  exponentially  with 
distance  from  the  antenna  at  the  direction  of  propagation.  The  contour  of  the  field 
is  oval.  The  -3  dB  (50  %)  field  width  is  approximately  6  cm.  The  power  density 
decreases  to  -20  dB  (1  %)  15  cm  from  the  center  of  the  field.  The  exposure  is 
essentially  a  head-and-neck  exposure  while  anatomical  structures  below  the 
diaphragm  are  out  of  incident  field. 

Dosimetry.  The  local  SAR  varies  with  location  and  animal.  Approximately  a 
6  fold  difference  in  local  SARs  are  noted.  The  average  retinal  SAR  is  very  uniform 
from  animal  to  animal  and  eye  to  eye.  The  largest  difference  among  4  eyes  is  less 
than  21  %.  The  average  retinal  SAR  is  1.25  W/kg  per  W  power  transmitted 
through  the  antenna  or  0.45  W/kg  per  mW/cm2. 

Current  Status  of  the  Project :  Four  monkeys  were  exposed  at  each  dose 
level  (0,  4,  8,  20  W/kg).  The  preliminary  results  indicate  that  retinal  injury  did  not 
occur  in  any  of  the  eleven  monkeys  examined  so  far.  However,  post  exposure 


effects  were  noted.  Increased  glycogen  storage  in  the  cone  receptors  and  Muller 
cells,  and  enhanced  post-exposure  cone  photoreceptor  b-waves  were  observed. 
The  increased  glycogen  storage  and  enhanced  b-wave  amplitude  occurred  most 
frequently  in  monkeys  exposed  to  8  W/kg  and  20  W/kg  but  not  at  4  W/kg.  These 
effects  could  be  "stressed"  photoreceptors  which  may  or  may  not  lead  to  injury. 

Relevant  Presentation/Publication 

D' Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J.  M.,  Lu,  S.  T.f  Mathur,  S.,  Merritt,  J.  H.,  Johnson,  M., 
Lutty,  G.,  Zwick,  H.,  &  Stuck,  B.  (1997).  Rhesus  Monkey  Vision  After 
Exposure  to  High  Peak  Power  Microwave  Pulses.  Presented  at  The  Second 
World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine  . 
D'Andrea,  J.  A.,  Ziriax,  J.,  Lu,  S.  T.,  Mathur,  S.,  &  Merritt,  J.  H.  (1997).  Rhesus 
Monkey  Vision  After  Exposure  to  High  Peak  Power  Microwave  Pulses.  In: 
Abstracts  of  the  1997  DOD  Electromagnetic  Environmental  Effects  (E3) 


Program  Review 


V.  Biological  Effects  of  Millimeter  Wave  Fields. 


A.  Genetic  Effects  Of  Low-Level  Millimeter  Waves 

Most  known  frequency  specific  effects  of  low  and  extremely-low  levels  of 
millimeter  waves  (MMW)  are  related  to  genome  structure  and  function.  However, 
the  data  have  not  been  generally  accepted  in  the  scientific  community.  The 
existence  of  nonthermal  genetic  effects  of  MMW  requires  independent 
confirmation. 

The  objective  of  this  research  is  to  investigate  possible  MMW  effects  on  UV- 
induced  mutagenesis  and  recombinagenesis  and  to  study  frequency  dependency  of 
MMW  effects. 

Methods:  D7  strain  of  yeast  Saccharomyces  cerevisiae  was  used  to 
determine: 

■  mutations;  including  reversions,  point  mutations,  deletions,  aneuploidy, 

•  intragenic  mitotic  recombination  (gene  conversion), 

■  intergenic  mitotic  recombination  (crossing-over), 

■  colony  forming  ability  (CFA). 

UV  254  nm  (100  J/m2)  was  used  as  a  mutagen.  MMW  (61 .0  -  61 .4  GHz,  0.5 
mW/cm2,  30  min)  served  as  a  modifying  factor. 


The  results  indicated  that  MMW  at  different  frequencies  enhanced  intragenic 
mitotic  recombination.  Furthermore,  MMW  had  no  effect  on  mutagenesis, 
intergenic  mitotic  recombination  or  CFA. 

Dr.  Pakhomova  concluded  that  MMW  pre-treatment  may  change  the 
proportion  between  pre-mutagenic  and  pre-recombinagenic  DNA  damages  or 
enhance  the  recombinagenic  repair  process.  This  implies  a  possible  role  of  MMW 
as  a  carcinogenic  or  co-carcinogenic  factor. 

B.  Neural  Effects  of  Low-Intensity  Millimeter  Waves 

Reliable  knowledge  of  frequency  specific,  nonthermal  bioeffects  of  millimeter 
waves  (MMW)  is  necessary  for  development  of  safety  guidelines  for  human 
exposure. 

The  objectives  of  these  studies  were:  to  reveal  and  analyze  specific 
bioeffects  of  millimeter  waves  (MMW)  in  model  nerve  and  neuron  preparations,  to 
develop  response  spectra  with  respect  to  the  wavelength  and  intensity  of  the 
radiation,  and  to  define  nervous  functions  and  structures  most  sensitive  to  MMW. 

Models  and  endpoints  employed: 

1 .  Action  potential  conduction,  refractoriness,  and  tolerance  to  a  high-rate 

of  electrical  stimulation  in  isolated  frog  sciatic  nerve. 


2.  Synaptic  processes  in  the  isolated  frog  spinal  cord,  including  mono-  and 
polysynaptic  conduction  via  chemical  and  electrical  synapses,  pre-  and 
postsynaptic  recurrent  inhibition,  summation  on  motoneurons,  posttetanic 
potentiation,  habituation,  heterosynaptic  facilitation,  etc. 

Results  indicated  that  over  200  experiments  in  isolated  nerve  and  over  60  in 
isolated  spinal  cord  allowed  us  to  identify  significant  bioeffects  which  are  induced 
by  MMW  intensities  far  below  the  effective  safety  limits.  These  effects 
demonstrated  resonance-like  dependence  on  the  frequency  of  the  radiation,  while 
their  dependence  on  the  field  intensity  was  rather  flat. 

The  observed  nonthermal,  frequency-specific  neural  effects  prove  that  it  is 
inadequate  to  base  safety  standards  solely  on  the  thermal  action  of  MMW.  Revision 
of  currently  effective  safety  standards  requires  accumulation  of  sufficient  database 
on  MMW  bioeffects  and  understanding  of  basic  mechanisms  of  MMW-specific 
interactions. 


Relevant  Presentations/Publications 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.  (1997).  Millimeter  Wave  Medicine  in  Russia:  A  Review  of 

Literature.  Presented  at  the  workshop  Infrared  Lasers  and  Millimeter  Waves: 
The  Links  Between  Microwaves  and  Laser  Optics  . 


Pakhomov,  A.  G.  (1995).  Millimeter  Wavelength  Radiation  Effects  on  Nerve 
Function.  Presented  at  Second  Michaelson  Research  Conference  . 
Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Nonthermal  Physiological  Effects  of 
Microwave  Exposure.  Presented  at  33rd  International  Congress  of 
Physiological  Sciences  . 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G.  (1995).  Frequency 
Dependence  of  Low-Level  Millimeter  Waves  Effect  on  Nerve  Conduction. 
First  CERT  Symposium  on  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G.  (1995).  Low-Level 
Millimeter-Wave  Radiation  Alters  Isolated  Nerve  Resistance  To  A  High-Rate 
Stimulation.  The  Seventeenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society ,  46. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Effect  of 
Millimeter  Waves  on  Polysynaptic  Conduction  in  Isolated  Spinal  Cord. 
Presented  at  The  Second  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in 
Biology  and  Medicine  . 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  A  Pilot  Study  of 
the  Millimeter  Wavelength  Radiation  Effect  on  Synaptic  Transmission. 
Electro-  and  Magnetobiology. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G. 
(1996).  Frequency  and  Intensity  Dependence  of  the  Millimeter-Wave 
Radiation  Effect  on  Isolated  Nerve  Function.  The  Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting 


of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society  . 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell.  C.  B.  G. 

(1996).  Frequency-Specific  Effects  of  Low-Intensity  Millimeter  Waves  on 
Isolated  Nerve  Function.  Third  International  Congress  of  the  European 
Bioelectromagnetics  Association  . 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G. 

(In  Press).  Role  of  Field  Intensity  in  The  Biological  Effectiveness  of  Millimeter 
Waves  At  A  Resonance  Frequency.  Bioelectrochemistry  and  Bioenergetics  . 
Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G. 

(1997).  Search  for  Frequency-Specific  Effects  of  Millimeter-Wave  Radiation 
on  Isolated  Nerve  Function.  Bioelectromagnetics ,  4(18),  324-334. 

Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Prol,  H.  K.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G.  (1997). 
Frequency-Specific  Effects  of  Millimeter-Wavelength  Electromagnetic 
Radiation  in  Isolated  Nerve.  Electro-  and  Magnetobioiogy,  76(1),  43-57. 
Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1996).  Effect  of  Millimeter 
Waves  on  Mutagenic  and  Recombinagenic  Repair  in  Yeast.  The  Third 
International  Congress  of  the  European  Bioelectromagnetics  Association  . 
Pakhomova,  0.  N.,  Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1997).  Effect  of  Millimeter 
Waves  on  UV-Induced  Recombination  and  Mutagenesis  in  Yeast. 
Bioelectrochemistry  and  Bioenergetics. 

Pakhomova,  O.  N.,  Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1995).  Mutagenic  and 
Recombinagenic  Effects  of  Millimeter-Wave  Radiation.  First  CERT 


Symposium  on  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology. 

Prol,  H.  K.,  Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Akyel,  Y.,  &  Campbell,  C.  B.  G.  (1995).  A  Screening 
Assessment  of  Frequency-Specific  Effects  of  Millimeter  Waves  on  Isolated 
Nerve  Function.  The  Seventeenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society,  110. 

Prol,  H.  K.,  Pakhomov,  A.  G.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  C.  B.  G.  Campbell.  (1996). 

Comparison  of  Field  Intensity  Levels  on  the  Biological  Effect  of  Millimeter 
Waves  at  41 .34  GHz.  Second  CERT  Symposium  for  Environmental  Radiation 


Toxicology  . 


VI.  Determination  of  Field  Strengths,  Dosimetry  and  Modeling  of  Radiofrequency 
Fields. 


A.  Complex  Dielectric  Characterization  of  Materials 

The  issue  of  the  lack  of  complex  dielectric  data  of  materials  (biological, 
liquids,  solids)  at  super  high  frequencies  and  models  in  wide  frequency  band  led  Dr. 
Jian-Zhong  Bao,  to  study  the  "Complex  Dielectric  Characterization  of  Materials" . 

The  objective  of  this  research  was  to  obtain  dielectric  spectra  and  models  of 
biological  materials  and  low  and  high  density  solids  in  a  wide  frequency  range. 

To  study  this  problem,  we  utilized  the  open  ended  coaxial  probe  technique 
with  a  computer  controlled  HP  851  OB  network  analyzer  to  measure  the  dielectric 
spectra  in  the  frequency  range  between  45  MHz  and  26.5  GHz,  and  the  complex 
nonlinear  least  squares  method  to  model  the  dispersions  with  the  common 
empirical  formulas:  Debye,  Cole  Cole,  Cole  Davidson,  Havriliak  Negami  functions. 
An  object  oriented  analysis  program  with  C+  +  has  been  developed  to  model  the 
complex  dielectric  spectra. 


Many  complex  dielectric  measurements  on  biological  tissues,  tissue 
simulating  phantom  material,  and  some  low  and  high  density  solids  have  been 
performed.  The  results  are  consistent  with  the  previously  published  data  in  low 


frequencies.  The  data  of  rat  brain  tissues  have  been  analyzed  extensively. 

Thanks  to  the  efforts  of  McKesson  BioServices'  scientists,  a  complex 
dielectric  measurement  laboratory  has  been  set  up  and  an  object  oriented  analysis 
program  with  C+  +  has  been  developed  in  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch.  With 
these  hardware  and  software  tools,  it  is  possible,  in  principle,  to  measure  and 
analyze  all  the  liquid  and  solid  materials  in  the  radio  and  microwave  frequencies. 
This  new  addition  to  the  capabilities  of  the  US  Army's  Microwave  Bioeffects 
Branch  has  been  recognized  by  the  other  two  services  on  the  compound  and  the 
facility  has  been  used  to  provide  assistance  and  support  for  other  Services'  needs. 

B.  Development  of  Finite-Difference  Time-Domain  Simulation  Software  with 

Object-Oriented  Design. 

Lack  of  effective  experimental  methods  for  the  measurements  of 
electromagnetic  field  distributions  in  a  complex  system,  such  as  biological  bodies, 
in  a  detail  form  is  one  of  the  biggest  and  complex  issue  in  the  radio  frequency  field. 

The  objective  of  this  project  is  to  develop  a  generic  simulation  program  using 
finite-difference  time-domain  method  to  study  the  electromagnetic  problems  in 
complex  systems.  Computer  simulation  is  the  only  solution  to  this  problem. 


The  finite-difference  time-domain  technique  is  a  powerful  tool  to  solve  the 
Maxwell's  equation,  especially  for  the  complex  systems  in  time  domain.  With  a 
bigger  and  faster  computer,  a  better  accuracy  can  be  achieved.  The  Yee's 
discretization  algorithm  with  Berenger  and  Mur  absorption  boundary  conditions  is 
utilized. 

Developing  this  software  with  object-oriented  technique  offers  the  following 
advantages: 

1)  Code  Reuse:  The  code  is  much  more  apt  to  be  reused  again.  It  is  feasible 
and  practical  to  considering  writing  something  once  and  to  have  it  used 
repeatedly. 

2)  Localization  of  Change :  Because  of  the  polymorphism  and  inheritance, 
changes  are  usually  local  to  a  class  rather  than  spread  out  across  a  whole 
application. 

3)  Short  Development  Cycle:  Because  of  the  above  advantages,  the  cycle  of 
development  is  short,  in  the  long  run. 

A  new  Sun  Workstation  has  been  acquired  for  this  project.  Although  Yee's 
discretization  algorithm  and  some  of  the  boundary  conditions  have  been  coded,  the 
code  is  still  under  development.  In  the  near  future  some  simple  geometry  object 
will  be  tested  first,  followed  by  more  complex  systems. 


C.  Characterization  of  Ultra-Wide-Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses 
The  characterization  of  the  ultrawide  band  exposure  system  is  extremely 
difficult  due  to  the  errors  in  fast  pulse  measurements  caused  by  sensors,  cables, 
and  a  sampling  scope.  In  order  to  obtain  the  best  characterization  of  the  E-field  in 
the  UWB  pulses  and  their  energy  spectra  in  an  exposure  facility  for  biological 
effects  studies,  a  two-step  deconvolution  routine  was  developed. 

The  following  steps  have  been  taken  to  correct  the  measurement  errors: 

1 )  Obtain  the  transfer  function  for  the  connection  cable  and  SCD5000 
system  with  a  pico  second  pulse  generator  and  a  CSA803  sampling  scope. 

2)  Model  the  impulse  response  function  of  the  D-dot  sensor  with  delta- 
functions  to  cancel  the  reflections,  and  optimize  the  parameters  of  the  delta- 
functions  with  a  reference  measurement  and  our  object-oriented  software. 

3)  Deconvolve  the  measured  pulse  using  the  transfer  functions  obtained  in 
the  above  two  steps  with  various  filters. 

The  UWB  pulses  delivered  by  this  system  have  been  characterized  with  this 
technique  and  were  found  to  have  a  rise  time  less  than  1 66ps  and  a  magnitude  as 
high  as  107kV/m.  This  routine  worked  successfully  in  correcting  the  rise  time  and 
the  magnitude  of  UWB  pulses,  and  in  compensating  pulse  shape  and  energy 
spectra.  This  has  also  been  adopted  by  the  Air  Force.  Four  measurements  have 
been  performed  on  their  KenTech  system  thus  far. 


Relevant  Presentations/Publications 


Bao,  J.-Z.  (1997).  Picosecond  Domain  Electromagnetic  Pulse  Measurements  in  an 
Exposure  Facility:  An  Error  Compensation  Routine  Using  Deconvolution 
Techniques.  Review  of  Scientific  Instruments,  68(4),  2221-2227. 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Belt,  M.  E.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Lu,  S.  T.  (1996). 
Characterization  of  Ultra-Wide  Band  Electromagnetic  Pulses  in  a  Biological 
Exposure  Facility.  The  Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics 
Society  . 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Belt,  M.  E.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Lu,  S.-T.  (1996). 
Error  Correction  in  Transient  Electromagnetic  Field  Measurements  Using 
Deconvolution  Techniques.  American  Electromagnetics  International 
Conference  . 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Belt,  M.  E.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  Mathur,  S.  P.,  &  Lu,  S.  T.  (1995). 

Field  Characterization  of  an  Ultra-Wide  Band  Bioeffect  Exposure  Facility.  First 
CERT  Symposium  on  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology. 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Belt,  M.,  Cox,  D.,  Mathur,  S.,  &  Lu,  S.-T.  (1997).  Ultra- 

Wideband,  Short-Pulse  Electromagnetics  3.  (Baum  et  al.  ed.,  pp.  373-380). 
New  York:  Plenum  Press. 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1995).  Analysis  of 
Ultra-Wide-Band  Pulses  in  a  GTEM  Cell.  Intense  Microwave  Pulses  III,  SPIE 
Proceedings  (Vol.  2557  pp.  237-248).  H.E.  Brandt. 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lee,  J.  C.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  Seaman,  R.  L.,  &  Akyel,  Y.  (1995).  Analysis  of 


Ultra-Wide-Band  Pulses  in  a  GTEM  Cell.  Presented  at  Fortieth  Annual 
Meeting  of  International  Society  of  Optical  Engineering  . 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  &  Hurt,  W.  D.  (1997).  Complex  Dielectric  Measurements  and 
Analysis  of  Brain  Tissues  in  Radio  and  Microwave  Frequencies.  IEEE 
Transactions  on  Microwave  Theory  and  Techniques,  45(9). 

Bao,  J.-Z.,  Lu,  S.-T.,  Hurt,  W.  D.,  Belt,  M.  E.,  Cox,  D.  D.,  &  Henry,  P.  J.  (1996). 
Dielectric  Measurements  of  Brain  Tissues  in  the  Frequency  Range  Between 
45  MHz  and  26.5  GHz.  The  Eighteenth  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Bioelectromagnetics  Society . 

Lee,  J.,  Bao,  J.  Z.,  Lu,  S.  T.,  &  Seaman,  R.  L.  (1995).  An  Ultra-Wide-Band 

Exposure  System  For  Studying  Biological  Effects.  The  Seventeenth  Annual 
Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society,  1 60. 


Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  Representation  in  Scientific  Meetings 


One  or  several  members  of  the  Microwave  Bioeffects  Branch  staff  attended 
and  made  presentations  at  the  following  meetings: 

♦  Seventh  National  Conference  on  High  Power  Microwave  Technology 

♦  First,  2nd,  and  3rd  CERT  Symposium  on  Environmental  Radiation  Toxicology 

♦  Second,  3rd.,  and  4th  Annual  Michaelson  Conference 

♦  Sixteenth,  17th,  and  18th.  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Bioelectromagnetics  Society 

♦  Fortieth  Annual  Meeting  of  the  International  Society  of  Optical  Engineering 

♦  Third  International  Congress  of  the  European  Bioelectromagnetics  Association 

♦  Ninth  International  Congress  on  Genes,  Gene  Families,  and  Isozymes 

Besides  the  above  conferences  that  have  been  attended,  the  work  of  the 
MBB  has  also  been  presented  in  the  following  meetings: 

♦  Second  World  Congress  for  Electricity  and  Magnetism  in  Biology  and  Medicine 

♦  Thirty-Third  International  Congress  of  Physiological  Sciences 

♦  Seventy-Third  Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Association  of  the 


Advancement  of  Science 


CONCLUSIONS 


Behavioral,  biological,  cardiovascular,  cellular  effects  of  ultrawide  band  and 
high  peak  power  pulsed  microwave  fields;  ocular  effects  of  high  peak  power  pulsed 
microwave  fields,  and  biological  effects  of  millimeter  wave  fields  were  studied 
using  various  physiological  and  behavioral  paradigms  in  animal  models.  Behavioral 
studies  involved  analgesia  and  open  field  activity  in  mice.  Cardiovascular  effect 
studies  indicated  systolic,  mean,  and  diastolic  arterial  pressures  decreased 
significantly  in  UWB  exposed  rats.  Cellular  effects  involved  Nitric  Oxide  Synthase 
activity  in  cultured  cells,  and  mutagenic  and  recombinagenic  effects  of 
electromagnetic  fields.  Millimeter  wave  studies  showed  frequency  specific  neural 
effects  below  the  effective  permissible  safety  limits.  Engineering  part  of  the 
program  involved  determination  of  fields  strengths,  dosimetry  and  modeling  of 
radiofrequency  fields.  A  two-step  deconvolution  routine  was  developed  to 
characterize  ultra  fast  rise  time  UWB  pulse  and  has  been  adopted  by  other  military 
services  to  be  used  in  their  systems. 

McKesson  is  determined  to  provide,  under  the  general  guidance  of  the  COR 
and  appropriate  WRAIR  program  managers,  a  high-quality  peer-reviewed  scientific 
journal  publishable  research  support.  Specific  research  protocols  will  focus 
primarily  on  the  behavioral  and  biological  effects  of  the  electromagnetic  radiation  in 
the  microwave  region  of  the  spectrum.  McKesson  researchers  will  continue  to 
investigate  potential  hazards  of  the  RF  Directed  Energy  Sources  to  personnel 


operating  in  a  tactical  environment  using  existing  L-Band,  UWB,  EMP,  and  MMW 
sources  supplied  by  the  Government. 

McKesson  will  continue  to  give  priority  to  behavioral  and  CNS  experiments 
with  a  commitment  to  the  highest  scientific  standards  resulting  in  high  quality  peer- 
reviewed  publications.  We  understand  that  the  MMB  research  efforts  in  high 
power  microwave  fields  have  little  precedent  and  are  considered  innovative  and 
pioneering. 

We  were  able  to  publish  and/or  present  46  articles  over  the  three  base  year 
period.  This  is  excellent  proof  of  the  productivity  and  the  dedication  of  the 
McKesson  staff  employed  here  at  The  US  Army  Medical  Research  Detachment. 

The  value  of  this  productivity  is  heightened  when  limited  financial  resources  of  the 
Branch  is  considered.  We  do  realize  the  resource  difficulties  of  the  Command  in 
recent  years.  Our  staff  is  willing  to  accommodate  revised  and  further  limited 
resources  and  to  produce  the  highest  quality  research  possible  under  the  new 
circumstances. 

With  the  guidance  of  the  US  Army  Operational  Medicine  Research  Program 
managers  and  our  COR  Bruce  E.  Stuck  McKesson  BioServices  scientific  staff  will 
investigate  new  arenas  of  research  to  respond  to  current  health  and  safety  issue  of 
the  warfighters.  We  will  continue  to  promote  the  success  of  Walter  Reed  Army 


Institute  of  Research  and  be  the  world  leader  in  military  relevant  biomedical 
research.  We  will  help  WRAIR  to  ensure  that  the  warfighters  will  have  the  best 
available  knowledge  and  protection  against  environmental  electromagnetic  threats. 
Concurrently,  we  are  committed  to  support  the  efforts  of  the  program  to  acquire 
new  funding  from  various  sources. 


