00 

CD 

4> 

Q 

^5} 


I  f 

V  A 


A  PSYCHOPHYSICAL  STUDY  OF  THE  RF  SOUND  PHENOMENON 
A.  Frey,  R. Messenger ,  E.  Eichert 


Final  report,  June,  1972 

U.  S.  Army  Mobility  Equipment  Research 
and  Development  Center 
Fort  Belvoir,  Va.  22060 
Contract  #  DA4K02-71-C-0213 


D  D  C 


Randomline,  Inc. 


York  and  Moreland  Roads 


Willow  Grove,  Penna. 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


Reproduced  by 

NATIONAL  TECHNICAL 
INFORMATION  SERVICE 

U  S  Department  of  Commerce 
Springfield  VA  22131 


UNCLASSIFIED 


,'?*.  -«  p**-  -^v 


Unclassi fled 

_ Security  Classification _ 

DOCUMENT  CONTROL  DATA  -  R&D 

(Stcvnty  ctoootflcotton  ot  tttto.  body  o l  obotroct  ont*  indoxkt  g  onnototton  «wi(  b*  wJttn  tfi«  ovormit  report  l • 

1  ORIGINATING  ACTIVITY  {Coiponr*  Mthof>  2*  NC*o*T  IECunity  C  UlCPiCATtON 

Randomline,  Inc.  Unclassified _ 

York  &  Moreland  Roads  zt  «*ou»  ~ 

Willov  Grove,  Pa.  19090 _ _ _ _ 

J  REPORT  TITLE 

A  psychophysical  study  of  the  rf  sound  phenomenon. 

4  DESCRIPTIVE  NOTES  (Typo  ol  to  pert  mod  incktoiro  dotoo) 

_ Final  report  Feb,  1971  -  Apr1'!  1972. _ 

J  AUTHORfS;  (Loot  no mm.  tint  nano,  initio! ) 

Frey,  A.,  Messenger,  R.,  Eichert,  E. 


«  REPORT  0*TE 

June,  1972 

•  «.  contract  on  GRANT  NC. 

DAAK02-71-C-0213 

&  project  no. 

1J662712AJ21 


7a.  TOTAL  NO.  op  PACE*  7ft.  NO.  OP  RCPI 

32  NA 

9a.  ORICINATOR'I  RERORT  NUMRtRfS) 


9ft.  O’KED  REPORT  NOf?J  (A nr  otfxr  r<RNl>ai»  ftatatr 
B.'«  report) 


ft*  aaaijnarf 


10  A  V  A  IL  ABILITY /LIMITATION  NOTICES 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 


11-  SUPPLEMENTARY  NOTES 


IS.  ABSTRACT 


IS.  SPONSORING  MILITARY  ACTIVITY 

U.S.  Army  Mobility  Equipment  Research 
and  Development  Center 
Fort  Belvoir,  Va.  22060 


The  objective  of  the  experimentation  reported  herein  was  to  obtain 
additional  data  on  the  rf  sound  phenomenon.  This  phenomenon  is  the  perception 
of  what  is  reported  to  be  a  sound  when  the  head  is  illuminated  with  rf  energy 
of  particular  characteristics.  In  the  first  phase  of  the  experimentation,  we 
assembled  a  portable  rf  sound  demonstration  unit.  This  was  successfully  used 
to  demonstrate  the  phenomenon  and  its  characteristics.  In  phase  two,  we  de¬ 
termined  what  rf  parameters  are  relevant  to  gen  irating  the  perception  of  rf 
sounds  of  significance.  We  learned  enough  in  this  phase  to  successfully  create 
a  perceived  sound  that  we  desired  tc  create.  In  phase  three,  we  explored  the 
possibility  of  determining  if  the  perception  of  speech  could  be  induced.  It 
was  found  that  aspects  cf  vocoder  technology  could  not  be  used  to  generate 
speech.  It  was  also  found  that  perceived  rf  sound  can  not  be  generated  using 
the  rules  of  the  periodicity  pitch  phenomenon. 

Key  words  -  rf  sound,  microwaves,  hearing,  sound,  nervous  system,  sensor, 
periodicity  pitch,  psychophysics. 


DD  MX.  1473 


Unclassified  v 

Security  Classification 


4 


5\  */ 


A 


A  PSYCHOPHYSICAL  STUDY  OF  THE  RF  SOUND  PHEROMEIiOK 
A.  Frey,  R. Messenger,  E.  Sichert 

Final  report,  June,  1972 

U.  S.  Array  Mobility  Equipment  Research 
and  Development  Center 
Fort  Belvoir,  Va.  22060 
Contract  #  DAAK02-71-C-0213 
Project  #  1J662712AJ21 


Randomline,  Inc. 

York  ana  Horeland  Roads 
Willow  Grove,  Penna. 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


r*  i 

; 


K 


/ 


6 


i 

i 

5 

i 

c 


*«*a*ft£*WS4SSfS!S?5S5855^§? 


suig-asY 

The  objective  of  the  experimentation  reported  herein  was  to  obtain 
additional  data  on  the  rf  sound  phenomenon .  This  phenomenon  is  the  r>erc  t-roion 
of  what  is  reported  to  be  a  sound  when  the  head  is  illuminated  with  rC  er c 
of  particular  characteristics.  In  the  first  phase  of  the  experimentation,  ve 
assembled  a  portable  rf  sound  demonstration  unit.  This  was  successfully  used 
to  demonstrate  the  phenomenon  and  its  characteristics.  In  nbase  twoj  we  de¬ 
termined  what  rf  parameters  are  relevant  to  generating  the  perception  of  rf 
sounds  of  significance.  He  learned  enough  in  this  phase  to  successfully  create 
u  perceived  sound  that  we  desired  to  create.  In  phase  three,  we  explored  the 
possibility  of  determining  if  the  perception  of  speech  could  be  induced.  It 
was  found  that  aspects  of  vocoder  technology  could  not  be  used  to  generate 
speech.  It  was  also  found  that  perceived  rf  speech  can  not  be  generated  using 
the  rules  of  the  periodicity  pitch  phenomenon. 


i 


I 


a 


i 


| 


I 

% 

\ 


INTRODUCTION 


The  perception  of  what  is  reported  to  he  a  sound  when  the  bead  is  illumi¬ 
nated  with  rf  energy  of  particular  characteristics  is  defined  as  rf  sound. 

p 

These  characteristics  include  very  loir  (microvatt/cn  level)  average  power  den¬ 
sities,  carrier  frequencies  in  a  band  from  O.U  GHz  to  3  GHz  and  specific  modu¬ 
lations.  The  nature  of  the  sound  is  related  to  properties  of  the  pulse  modu¬ 
lation  of  the  rf  energy.  Pulse  widths  between  2.5  us  and  2000  us  and  pulse 
rates  between  1  and  1*00  pulses  per  second  have  been  used  to  induce  the  sound¬ 
like  sensation  in  humans.  The  sensation  is  reported  by  people  to  be  a  buzzing, 
clicking,  or  hissing  which  seems  to  originate  (regardless  of  the  person's 
position  in  the  field)  within  or  just  behind  the  head.  The  crude  thresholds 
that  were  found  in  past  studies  are  shown  in  Fin.  1.  The  experimental  arrange¬ 
ment  ruled  out  explanations  of  the  phenomena  such  as  rectification  by  fillings 
in  the  teeth.  The  most  sensitive  area  was  the  region  over  the  temporal  lobe 


10,000 


a> 

f x. 


cu 

E 

o 


iooo  L 


i 


T 

1 


3 


GHz  0.2  1  2 

Fig.  1  Preliminary  thresholds  for  rf  sound  as  a  function  of  rf  energy. 


’tea 


?&&***&  ffF/rf&iSSSKp 


of  the  brain. 

Initially  this  writer  felt  that  the  rf  sound  effect  and  the  electrophonic 
effect  night  be  comparable,  and  that  a  technique  had  been  found  that  could  be 
used  to  explain  the  electrophonic  effect  (stimulation  of  sensation  in  the 
auditory  system  with  electric  current).  The  writer  pursued  experimented  stud¬ 
ies  which  indicated  that  the  rf  sound  effect  and  electrophonic  effect  are  not 
the  same  phenomenon.  Mathematical  analyses  were  also  carried  out  to  consider 
the  possibility  that  vibration  of  the  skin  due  to  rf  radiation  pressure  might 
account  for  the  effect.  The  results  indicated  that  radiation  pressure  could 
not  account  for  tne  effect. 

In  an  attempt  to  locate  the  sensor,  a  search  was  undertaken  for  cochlear 
microphonics  in  guinea  pigs  and  in  cats  exposed  to  rf  energy.  Eo  cochlear 
microphonics  were  found  in  either  species.  Control  tests  with  acoustic 
energy  of  comparable  waveform  and  loudness,  including  the  alternation  of 
acoustic  and  rf  energy,  indicated  that  a  microphonic  does  not  occur  with  rf 
energy,  Lae  power  densities  used  were  far  above  that  needed  to  induce  the 
auditory  effect  in  cats.  This  would  suggest  that  the  sensor  may  not  he  prior 
to  the  inner  ear. 

Based  upon  th*>  foregoing,  an  experimental  program  was  undertaken  to 
elicit  additional  information  on  the  phenomenon.  The  program  was  developed 
in  three  phases  and  the  results  are  reported  here. 

OBJECTIVES 

In  phase  one,  the  objective  was  to  assemble  the  equipment  needed  for  a 
portable  short  range  rf  sound  demonstration  unit.  Such  a  demonstration  of  the 
rf  sound  was  to  he  carried  out  'and "the  unit  then  used" for  the  experimental  work 


In  phase  two,  the  objective  was  to  combine  our  experience  with  the  rf 


sound  and  the  data  from  vocoder  technology  in  order  to  experimentally  deter¬ 
mine  if  there  are  rf  parameters  which  viil  yield  the  perception  of  rf  sounds 
o?  significance. 

In  phase  three,  an  attempt  vas  to  be  undertaken  to  determine  if  the  per¬ 
ception  of  speech  sounds  could  be  induced.  The  intention  vas  to  make  suen  an 
attempt  through  the  use  of  buzzes  and  hisses  as  is  done  in  vocoder  technology. 
PHASE  1 

A  number  of  equipment  assemblies  were  considered  and  evaluated  within  the 
context  of  our  objectives.  The  assembly  finally  selected  and  obtained  consi'.ced 
of  an  Applied  Microwave  Laboratory  pulse  signal  source  that  was  capable  of 
emitting  energy  at  a  carrier  frequency  of  1.2  GHz.  The  energy  was  conveyed 
via  a  model  87 *  General  Radio  Co.  air' line  and  RG-fl  coaxial  cable  to  a 
Scientific  Atlanta  coax  to  waveguide  adaptor  and  standard  gain  horn  antenna. 
Uithin  our  experimental  environment,  the  horn  antenna  emitted  the  energy  into 
an  rf  anechcie  chamber.  The  antenna  was  oriented  for  the  demonstration  and 
most  of  the  experimentation  such  Lhat  the  energy  was  horizontally  polarized. 

It  was  found  at  the  start  of  the  project  that  vertically  polarized  energy 
yields  similar  effects. 

A  demonstration  of  the  hearing  effect  and  the  effect  of  varying  pulse 
width,  pulse  repetition  rate,  and  pulse  amplitude  was  given  at  USAJJEPDC . 

PHASE  2 

In  the  second  phase,  three  dimensional  field  plots  were  made  of  the  rf 
anechoic  chamber  that  was  to  be  used  for  the  experimentation.  The  plots  were 
made  using  the  carrier  frequency  to  be  used  in  most  of  the  experimentation, 
i.e.,  1.2  GHz.  The  measurements  were  oadr-  using  a  half  wave  dipole  mounted 
on  a  wooden  pole  as  the  in-chamber  pickup.  The  dipole  antenna  was  supported 
by  a  wooden  pole  in  order  to  minimize  field  disturbance  during  the  measurement . 


In  addition  to  field  plots,  in  each  specific  experimental  session  measurements 
were  taken  using  the  half  v.ve  dipole  antenna  located  in  a  position  which  va? 
approximately  the  same  as  •  t  location  of  the  center  of  the  subject’s  (S's)  - 
head  during  data  collection.  The  dipole  was  connected  via  RG-58  coaxial  cable 
to  a  microlab  model  AF  20  attr~mator  that  was  located  evtside  of  the  climber. 

The  attenuator  was  connected  to  a  Hewlet  '•-Packard  model  h7TB  thernister  mount 
and  the  -  -vt,  to  a  W  wlett-Pac.  ard  model  h30C  power  meter.  The  cable  within 
the  chair.  ms  orient  i  f-r  minimal  field  disturbance.  This  measurement  equip¬ 
ment  yield1  an  avero.  -  o  r  measur  ement  from  which  peak  power  is  derived  by 
the  standard  duty  ey_.  formula.  The  signal  attenuation  due  to  the  cable  and 
the  attenuator  are  accounted  for  in  the  reported  measurements.  The  reader 
should  keep  in  mind  the  inherent  and  tinspecifiable  error  in  all  rf  measurements 
due  to  the  effect  of  the  measuring  instrument  in  the  field  and  the  effect  of 
biological  objects  in  the  field. 

After  exploratory  experimentation,  a  series  of  experiments  designed  to 
obtain  data  on  perceived  loudness  and  "sound”  quality  as  a  function  of  various 
rf  parameters  was  initiated.  This  vas  necessary  in  order  to  gain  an  under¬ 
standing  of  the  effect  of  the  rf  parameters  on  perception.  It  was  expec  1 
that  from  such  a  data  base  ve  could  move  to  generating  meaningful  sound. 

In  the  first  data  collection  series,  a  judgement  task  was  set  for  the 
subjects.  The  task  was  to  determine  which  rf  sound  of  a  pair  was  louder.  The 
test  consisted  of  one  standard  pulse  amplitude  and  5  differing  pulse  amplitudes 
which  had  the  characteristics  shown  in  Table  I.  As  can  be  seen  in  the  table, 
the  pulse  widths  were  varied  with  the  standard  pulse  having  a  pulse  width 
that  fell  between  the  two  extremes.  The  duty  cycle  also  varied  as  did  the 
aY*rru£e  vcver,  Th®  peak  poorer  wo  keyt  constant.  For  the  first  tc-st  series. 


k 


aaasa  gwiv  i  lywtfijMU^gtaa  inreaaMHPaa»a«og«  »^iiuAio»*.aeJgggE^agg?&gasqz»^  ^^.1...^.,,^ 


Table  I 


Rf  Parameters  Used  at  Each  Test  Condition  Number  Shown  in  the  Figures 


Test  Condition  i? 

Pulse  width 

Duty  cyx.?e 

Average  Power 

fk*Xfo«*r 

us 

arlC“3 

p 

ntw/cm 

Standard  Pulse 

1*0 

*  -  -  - 

.28 

fyo 

1 

60 

3.0 

.i*2 

140 

O 

c. 

50 

2.5 

.35 

lhO 

3 

30 

1.5 

.21 

'h0 

*4 

20 

1.0 

.11* 

lhO 

5 

10 

0.5 

.07 

lhO 

we  h'  d  h  subjects  compare  the  "sound"  induced  by  the  standard  pulse  to  the 
"sound"  induced  by  the  5  variable  pulses  through  10  repetitions.  This  was 
done  over  several  sessions  for  each  subject. 

Each  subject  wa3  placed  in  the  rf  chamber  and  he  was  told  the  following: 
"Your  Job  is  to  determine  the  loudness  of  certain  sounds.  A  light  will  flash 
on  to  signal  that  a  sound  is  coming.  After  the  first  sound,  there  will  be 
an  6  second  pause  after  which  you  will  hear  a  second  sound.  You  are  to  in^ 
dicate  which  of  the  two  sounds  is  louder.  This  is  done  by  pressing  button 
#1  on  a  hand  switch  if  the  first  sound  is  louder  or  pressing  button  #2  if 
the  second  sound  is  louder.  The  first  sound  you  hear  is  a  standard  sound  and 
will  always  remain  at  the  same  loudness.  The  second  sound  will  vary  and  be 
either  louder  or  softer.  The  direction  and  the  amount  that  it  varies  has 
been  predetermined  by  a  table  of  random  numbers.  Consequently  there  is  no 


organized  pattern  to  the  second  sound  clonges.  The  test  has  been  set  up  so 
that  the  second  sound  may  not  be  heard  in  all  cases.  In  the  eyent  that  you 
can't  hear  the  second  sound  Vithin  10  seconds  or  so  after  the  first,  th-u*  you 
should  signal  that  the  first  sound  is  louder  by  pressing  button  #1.  Ir;  this 
type  of  test,  sounds  can  not  be  repeated.  So  vhen  the  light  flashes  on  be 
prepared  to  listen.  You  can  not  say  that  the  sounds  are  of  equal  loudness. 
You  must  choose  vhich  of  the  two  sounds  seems  the  loudest.” 

After  the  series  was  completed,  histograms  were  constructed  from  the 
average  results  for  each  of  the  subjects  and  one  total  average  histogram  was 
computed.  From  the  individual  histograms  it  was  determined  that  all  the  sub¬ 
jects  had  problems  distinguishing  loudness  levels  between  pulses  1,  2,  and 
3.  In  all  cases  the  subjects  seemed  to  have  no  trouble  distinguishing  between 
pulses  U  and  5,  and  the  standard  pulse.  The  results  ere  shown  in  Fig.  2. 


Fig.  2  Histogram  of  means  of  subjects  exposed  to  rf  energy  of  characteristics 
shown  in  Table  I.  Peak  power  was  held  constant. 


Wa tgatramcgxa 3gaa ctm^TCT;«.'i ^Tx^jymgrwyrji.  sr?j*T2ar&< tw^traujtw** /rewwjp  ,i.m  -.■»-».  — -— ■- o-mmua waa^a » 


TABLE  II 

Rf  Parameters  Used  at  Each  Test  Condition  Number  Shown  in  the  Figures 


Test  Condition  ft 

Pulse  width 

Duty  cycle 

Average  Power  p-'eb  Power 

US 

xl0~3 

mw/cm^ 

/  2 
aw/ cm 

Standard  Pulse 

1*0 

2.0 

0.735 

368 

1 

Go 

3.0 

1.225 

368 

2 

50 

2.5 

0.920 

368 

3 

30 

1.5 

0.555 

368 

U 

20 

1.0 

0.368 

363 

5 

10 

0.5 

0.10L 

368 

TABLE  III 

Rf  Parameters  Used  at  Each  Test 

Condition  Number  Shown  in  the 

Figures 

Test  Condition  ft 

Pulse  width 

Duty  cycle 

Average  Power 

Peak  Power 

us 

xlO-3 

p 

mw/cm 

O 

mw/cic 

Standard  Pulse 

1*0 

2.0 

.22 

110 

1 

10 

0.5 

.22 

1*1*0 

2 

20 

1.0 

.22 

220  ’  ‘ 

3 

30 

1.5 

.22 

11*6 

1* 

50 

2.5 

.22 

"88 

5 

6o 

3.0 

.22 

73 

T 


Fig.  4  Histogram  of  means  of  subjects  exposed  to  rf  energy  at  characteristics 
shown  in  Table  III.  Average  power  was  held  constaht. 


Based  upon  this  set  of  data,  two  further  series  of  tests  were  designed. 

In  these  series,  ten  subjects  were  used.  Two  subjects  were  used  in  a  test', 
series  that  once  again  held  peak  power  constant  and  varied  average  power. 

The  parameters  are  shown  in  Table  II.  In  another  series,  the  other  8  subjects 
were  used  to  explore  the  effect  of  holding  average  power  constant  and  varying 
peak  power.  The  rf  parameters  used  are  listed  in  Table  £El.  After  these  series 
were  completed,  histograms  were  constructed  for  the  two  test  series.  The  histo¬ 
grams  of  the  averages  are  shown  in  Fig.  3  and  4.  The  results  shown  in  Fig.  3 


8 


535 


M  ^!l'-UWMtlCTHf.J»'  n<=>.-=- 


. . . . >*qa — gBMw; - i — ; - 1  i  i 


are  comparable  to  those  in  F ip.  2  as  expected.  The  data  that  resulted  in  the 
averages  shown  in  Fig.  h  indicated  that  the  subjects  had  little  or  no  trouble 
distinguishing  which  of  the  pulses  were  louder  or  softer  than  the  reference 
pulse.  It  can  be  seen  in  Fig.!*  that  pulse  number  1  was  sometimes  considered 
softer  than  the  standard  pulse.  One  reason  for  this  might  have  been  that  prise 
number  1  was  a  very  narrow  pulse  i.e.,  10  ps.  As  one  subject  described  it,  he 
felt  that  he  was  listening  through  the  sound.  l:The  sound  seems  very  weak,  lack¬ 
ing  in  depth.'1'  This  suggested  that  another  parameter  had  to  be  considered  in 
our  attempt  to  generate  meaningful  sound.  At  this  point  in  time,  we  discovered 
a  problem  unique  to  the  rf  sound  phenomena.  Paradoxical  effects  can  occur  when 
a  subject  is  overtrained  for  the  Job  i.e.,  has  greater  musical  background  than 
is  required.  When  such  a  subject  listens  to  a  narrow  pulse  induced  sound  he 
has  the  impression  that  these  pulses  are  softer  than  the  standard  rf  sound. 

But  instead  of  reporting  the  expected,  he  decides  that  there  is  a  pulse  width 
difference  and  that  such  rf  sounds  are  not  truly  softer.  As  a  result,  he  re¬ 
ports  them  as  louder.  Very  careful  instructions  are  needed  to  handle  such 
problems  as  well  as  thorough  debriefings  after  each  session. 

In  the  next  test  series,  we  explored  pulse  repetition  rate  effects  with 
two  subjects.  The  pulse  width  was  fixed  at  30  us  and  the  repetition  rate  was 
varied  from  a  low  of  50  pulses  per  sec  (pps)  to  a  high  of  200  pps.  The  stand¬ 
ard  pulse  was  set  at  125  pps.  It  was  found  that  the  subjects  tended  to  cue  on 
repetition  rate  rather  than  peak  power.  It  was  also  found  that  the  quality  of 
the  sound  changed  as  a  function  of  repetition  rate  and  that  repetition  rate 
was  the  dominant  parameter. 

We  also  explored  the  effect  of  different  patterns  of  rf  pulses  on  per¬ 
ception  with  the  use  of  our  special  purpose  minicomputer.  We  programmed  the 


9 


computer  to  so  control  the  rf  source  that  we  obtained  moment  to  moment  changes 
in  pulse  repetition  rate.  In  this  way  we  were  able  to  explore  the  effect  of 
PRF  on  the  perception  of  what  might  be  called  pitch.  It  was  not  true  Ditch  in 
that  we  found  that  there  were  very  real  timbre  characteristics  in  the  rf  sounds 
generated  in  this  way.  We  also  explored  putting  these  complex  modulation  pat- 
terms  on  magnetic  tape  and  controlling  the  rf  source  in  this  fashion.  In  this 
we  met  with  a  qualified  success.  Spurious  signal's  did  present  problems. 

At  this  point,  it  was  decided  that  we  had  enough  information  to  design  a 
test  series  to  obtain__precise  data  on  critical  parameters  and  to  gather  data  on 
thresholds.  New' subjects  (so  that  they  would  be  unbiased)  with  extensive  musical 
training  were  recruited.  Upon  applying  for  a  position  on  the  panel  the  potential 
subject  was  first  screened  with  the  Gordon  test  of  personality  to  assure  that 
panel  members  would  be  reliable.  The  potential  panel  member,  after  taking  this 
test,  was  further  screened  by  taking  the  Seashore  Test  of  Musical  Ability.  This 
test  provided  data  on  sensory  capability  in  the  areas  of  loudness,  rhythm,  tonal 
memory,  timbre  and  sense  of  time.  All  panel  members  accepted  had  clinically 
normal  hearing.  With  these  subjects  a  test  series  was  undertaken  to  answer  the 
following  questions  in  a  precise  manner: 

Is  perceived  loudness  a  function  of  peak  power  density,  average  power 
density,  or  both? 

what  is  the  required  energy  density  for  perceptual  threshold? 

Is  there  a  minimal  or  optimal  pulse  width? 

The  psychophysical  technique  of  magnitude  estimation,  a  well  used 
technique  in  the  auditory  area,  was  selected  for  use  in  these  experiments. 

Four  well  trained  subjects  provided  the  data  reported  herein.  Each  subject  was 
tested  individually  within  the  rf  chamber.  Th«  R  sat  or.  a  vuodan  stool 


10 


^*^^WCk*<  -W.^**«v.  - 


with  his  bad',  to  th?  hern  antema.  The  subject's  head  was  fixed  in  space  by 
having  him  place  his  chin  on  an  acrylic  rest  mounted  on  a  vertical  wooden  pole. 
The  subject  held  in  his  band  a  multi-key  hand  switch  to  signal  to  the  e^eri- 
menter  a  number  as  a  report  of  the  loudness  that  he  perceived.  The  s\:'-'c-ei  was 
told  that  the  first  sound  he  would  hear  would  be  a  reference  sound  tl./ :  v..s 
assigned.*  the  number  100,  He  was  further  told  that  the  second  sound  he  heavct 
would  be  variable  in  loudness.  It  was  the  S’s  task  to  assign  a  number  to  the 
loudness  cf  the  second  sound  with  reference  to  the  first  sound.  The  reference 
sound  was  relected  as  being  approximately  mid-range  in  loudness. 

In  the  experimental  sessions,  the  experimenter  signaled  the  subject  that  a 
trial  was  about  to  begin  by  use  of  a  brief  dim  light  signal.  After  a  variable 
period  of  up  to  five  seconds  the  reference  rf  sound  was  presented  for  two  sec¬ 
onds.  After  a  silent  period  of  approximately  five  seconds,  the  variable  loud¬ 
ness  rf  sound  was  presented  for  two  seconds.  The  S  would  then  use  the  hand 
switch  to  indicate  the  number  he  assigned  to  the  loudness.  On  some  occasions, 
in  order  to  account  for  the  possibility  of  false  positives ,  no  rf  sound  was 
presented  at  the  time  that  the  variable  rf  sound  should  have  been  presented. 
Before  starting  a  session,  the  subject  was  given  two  warm-up  trials.  The  vari¬ 
able  rf  parameters  thao  were  used  are  presented  in  Table  IV.  Each  test  condi¬ 
tion  number  is  defined  by  a  specific  peak  power,  average  power,  pulse  width, 
and  pulse  repetition  rate.  The  order  of  presentation  of  these  sets  of  rf  para¬ 
meters  was  randomized  by  use  of  a  table  of  random  numbers .  Th-  re  were  tin  se 
randomized  repetitions  of  the  series. 

The  primary  results  are  presented  in  Fig.  5.  The  point  plotted  at  each 


test  condition  number  represents  the  median  of  ell  subjects  and  all  repetitions. 
The  plot  shown  in  Fig.  5A  was  derived  from  a  test  series  in  w/.ich  ve  studied 


Table  IV 

Rf  Parameters  Used  at  Each  Test  Condition  Humber  Shown  in  the  Figures 


Peak  power  varied  condition 


Test  con<iition  number 

1 

2 

3 

1» 

5 

6 

Sa 

Peak  power  (mw/cm^ ) 

90 

105 

125 

210 

315 

630 

630 

Average  power* 

(v/cm2) 

0.32 

0.32 

0.32 

0.32 

0.32 

0.32 

1.26 

Pulse  width  (ys) 

70 

60 

50 

30 

20 

10; 

h0 

Pulses  per  sec 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

59- 

50 

Average  power  varied  condition 

Test  condition  number 

1 

2 

3 

k 

5 

6 

O 

Peak  power  {aw/cm  )* 

370 

370 

370 

370 

370 

370 

Average  power 
(mv/cm2 ) 

0.19 

0.37 

0.55 

0.93 

1.11 

1.29 

Pulse  widths (ps) 

10 

20 

30 

50 

60 

70 

Pulses  per  second 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

50 

*  Constant  values  shown  were  rounded  for  clarity. 


12 


iaaaaas^affisii 


function  of  power  density 


the  effect  of  varying  peak  power  while  holding  average  power  constant.  The 
average  power  was  held  constant  by  varying  pulse  width.  The  plot  shown  in 
Fig.  5B  was  derived  from  the  results  obtained  in  a  series  of  tests  in  which  the 
average  power  was  varied  while  the  peak  nower  was  held  constant.  The  data  ob¬ 
tained  were  stable  as  is  typical  from  trained  subjects  in  psychophysical  expi ci- 
ments .  A  consideration  of  the  two  plots  indicte  that  once  a  minimum  pulse 
width  is  used,  perceived  loudness  is  a  function  of  peak  power  density.  The 
curves  fitted  to  the  data  ore  estimated  and  are  intended  only  as  a  guide  to  the 
reader's  eye.  The  ordinate  is  not  labeled  since  the  units  are  arbitrary  and 
could  be  misleading. 

Note  should  be  taken  in  Fig.  5A  of  the  point  plotted  for  test  condition 

number  £’.  Its  location  is  inconsistent  with  what  would  be  expected. 

The  average  data  represented  by  this  point  were  obtained  when  a  lOps 
pulse  width  was  used.  Since  a  consideration  of  all  the  data  shown  in  the  fig¬ 
ures  indicates  +hat  this  pulse  width  is  outside  the  optimal  pulse  width  band 
for  loudness,  we  tested  the  possibility  that  the  apparent  inconsistency  is  due 
to  the  use  of  a  non-optimal  pulse  width.  We  tested  by  obtaining  data  using 
the  same  peak  power  but  with  a  pulse  width  within  the  optimal  band,  i.e.,  ^Ops . 
The  average  of  the  data  so  obtained  is  represented  by  the  square  .labeled  A  in 
figure  5B.  It  indicates  that  the  apparent  fall  off  in  perceived  loudness  as 
peak  power  is  increased  at  test  condition  6  is  due  more  to  the  pulse  width 

being  less  than  optimal  for  full  perceptual  effect  than  to  an  actual  drop  off 

in  perceived  loudness  at  the  higher  peak  power  levels.  -Tote  should  also  be  taker, 
that  the  data  plotted  in  ?ig.5B  suggests  that  beside  ai.  apparent  minimum  pulse 
width  for  perceived  loudness  there  nay  also  be  a  maximum  p’.ilse  width  definin'* 
a  band  of  optim.il  pulse  widths  for  perceived  loudness.  It  also  appears  that 

lh 


average  power  does  not  determine  loudness  except  insofar  as  it  is  incidentally 
involved  due  to  the  need  for  a  minimum  pulse  width  for  optimal  effect. 

The  required  energy  density  for  perceptual  threshold  was  derived  by  simply 
extending  the  curve  in  Pig.  5A  to  the  abscissa.  In  this  manner,  a  threshold 
peak  power  density  of  80  mw/cm^  was  derived.  This  threshold  was  not  derived 
with  the  use  of  optimal  rf  parameters  and  is  clearly  not  the  lowest  value  that 
can  be  obtained  for  threshold.  The  average  power  density,  though  convention** 
ally  given,  is  not  particularly  meaningful  with  this  phenomena.  In  this  case 
it  was  approximately  0.3  mv/cm^  but  could  have  Just  as  easily  been  3  yv/cra^. 

We  need  only  have  reduced  pulse  width  and  pulse  repetition  rate. 

With  this  full  set  of  data  on  perception  as  effected  by  the  various  rf 
parameters,  we  were  able  to  begin  constructing  rf  sounds  that  might  be  meaning¬ 
ful  to  the  subjects.  In  our  quest  to  generate  meaningful  sounds,  it  was  found 
that  by  externally  modulating  the  microwave  source  with  one  or  two  pulse  genera¬ 
tors  it  was  possible  to  generate  rf  "sounds"  that  people  could  recognize  as 
having  meaning.  These  sounds  included  bongo  drums,  lawnmower  engines, small 
model  airplane  engines,  electric  saws,  crickets,  knocking  on  doors,  and  tapp¬ 
ing  of  a  pencil. 

To  create  these  rf  sound  perceptions,  it  was  first  necessary  to  determirv. 
what  characteristics  the  acoustic  sound  in  question  had,  e.g.,  sharp,  piercing, 
dull,  flat,  fast,  slow,  repetitive,  etc.  This  was  done  using  pulse  generators , 
a  speaker  and  several  musically  trained  subjects.  The  subjects  thin*  o listed 
the  experimenter  in  the  creation  of  a  perceptually  similar  rf  sound.  The  gen¬ 
eral  rule  of  thumb  was  found  to  be  that  any  sound  that  could  he  created  using 
the  pulse  generators  and  the  speaker  could  be  created  as  an  rf  sound  with  know¬ 
ledge  of  its  acoustical  characteristics  and  the  knowledge  we  had  obtained  on 


15 


rf  sound  characteristics.  After  the  rf  sound  had  been  created  to  the  best  of 
the  experimenter's  ability  and  within  the  limitations  of  the  rf  equipment,  it 
was  listened  to  individually  by  several  subjects.  Each  subject  would  evaluate 
the  sound  and  give  his  impressions  of  it.  The  parameters  of  various  sounds 
are  listed  in  Table  V. 

With  this  rather  substantial  base  of  information,  we  felt  prepared  to 
create  a  meaningful  sound  without  the  time  consuming  use  of  subjects.  We  chose 
to  create  the  sound  of  an  incoming  bullet  as  a  sound  to  test  our  knowledge.  We 
obtained  a  tape  recording  of  such  sounds  and  analyzed  this  tape  thru  the  use  of 
our  oscilloscopes.  We  then  set  out  to  create  an  rf  sound  which  might  yield  a 
comparable  perception  to  our  subjects. 

To  achieve  an  incoming  sound  it  was  necessary  to  use  an  AEL  pulse  gener¬ 
ator  to  trigger  an  SCR  circuit  which  controlled  an  rf  pulse  generator.  This 
was  done  as  follows:  The  secondary  of  a  12  volt  step  down  transformer  was 
placed  in  series  with  the  output  of  the  AEL  pulse  generator.  This  in  turn  was 
connected  to  the  gate  of  the  SCR,.  With  the  AEL  generator  off,  the  circuit  was 
so  adjusted  so  that  the  SCR  would  fire  at  full  potential.  When  the  AEL  was  on, 
the  output  opposed  the  voltage  flowing  into  the  gate.  In  this  way  when  the 
AEL  was  firing  the  voltage  to  the  gate  was  reduced  which  in  turn  reduced  the 
output  at  the  SCR  circuit. 

The  output  of  the  SCR  circuit  was  fed  into  the  microwave  source's  power 
supply.  The  power  supply  stepped  up  the  voltage  then  rectified  and  smoothed 
the  voltage  to  a  DC  level  which  was  selectable  between  0  -  5000  volts.  This 
0  -  5000  volt  DC  level  controlled  the  output  power  at  the  microwave  source. 

The  circuit  is  shown  in  Fig.  6. 


•'*>  «z! 


SCR  Circuit  ^ici’ovave  Power  Supply 


the  microwave  power  supply. 

To  generate  an  incoming  sound  it  was  necessary  to  use  this  circuit  to 

♦ 

change  the  rf  amplitude.  The  pulse  width  and  renetition  rate  were  fixed  at  12  , 

Vis  and  8U7  pps  respectively.  The  amplitude  of  the  rf  signal  had  to  have  a  rather  * 

low  level  of  sound  for  about  b  seconds.  Ther  an  abrupt  rise  in  sound  for  0.5  sec. 

To  do  this  the  AEL  pulse  generator  was  set  to  generate  a  train  of  pulses  b  sec¬ 
onds  long  with  a  0.5  second  silent  period  before  another  train  started.  Within 
this  train  were  positive  going  pulses  at  a  frequency  cf  50  pps.  This  would 
create  a  low  level  output  from  the  SCR  circuit  for  b  seconds  with  a  0.5  second 
high  period. 

When  the  low  output  of  the  SCR  circuit  was  fed  into  the  power  supply  the 
internal  circuitry  of  the  supply  would  change  the  low  level  to  about  1500  VDC. 

When  the  0.5  second  high  output  of  the  SCR  circuit  was  fed  into  the  power  supply  •  j 

circuit  the  internal  circuitry  would  change  the  high  level  to  about  5  KV  DC. 

« 

j 

N  ] 

18  I 

i 

li 


^gaaP9gj»X3g^ggrin.ycn^ WgjgagBSag^TO^^^?^^  I  mm  u  a wamatm 


cfasr 


t’hen  the  0.5  second  high  level  ■:•  ”n  letea  the  5  KV  voltage  would  decay  ex¬ 
ponentially  due  to  a  smoothing  capacitor  in  the  circuit.  This  made  the  rf  incom¬ 
ing  ?'sourid"  appear  to  have  passed  the  listener*  A  typical  waveform  at  the  rf  source 
is  shown  in  Fig.  7. 


Fig*  J  Typical  rf  waveform 

The  subjects  reported  that  the  rf  sound,  though  low  in  intensity,  sounded 
like  the  tape  recorded  incoming  bullet . sound,  This  effort  established  that 
meaningful  rf  sounds  could  be  constructed.  It  also  showed  that  an  rf  source 
with  unique  control  circuitry  would  have  to  be  designed  and  built  for  the  crea¬ 
tion  of  specific  meaningful  sounds.  Although  we  were  able  to  design  and  build 
control  circuitry  to  accomplish  what  we  wished  with  a  standard  rf  source,  it 
was  a  marginal  situation  in  getting  it  to  operate  and  maintaining  operation. 
PHASE  3 

Having  established  that  a  specific  sound  could  be  created,  ve  entered  into 
phase  three  of  the  project.  From  the  data  obtained  to  this  point  it  was  clear 
that  because  of  the  nature  -of-rf  -sound  transduction,  the  acoustic  procedure  used 


I 


ii’  vocoders  could  not  be  applied.  The  quality  differences  and  timbre  character-  ' j 

istiv'jj  of  rf  sound  diccovered  to  be  a  function  of  repetition  rate  would  not  allow  *  j 

%  * 

the  construction  of  speech  from  simple  buzzes  and  hisses.  A  buzz,  for  example,  ; 

would  not  retain  its  character  as  frequency  was  changed  for  tonsil  components  ] 

! 

would  enter  into  the  perceived  "sound11  with  the  rf  sound  phenomena.  j 

‘  1 

Thus,  we  explored  the  possibility  of  using  the  periodicity  pitch  phenomena 
from  acoustics  as  a  means  of  generating  the  perception  of  speech  sound.  In 
acoustics,  presentation  of  a  train  of  acoustic  pulse  pairs  to  a  subject  results 

i 

in  the  subject  reporting  the  perception  of  a  tone  whose  frequency  is  primarily  a  j 

\ 

function  of  the  time  within  pulse  pairs.  This  is  the  periodicity  pitch  phenomena.  j 

We  tested  to  determine  if  there  is  an  analogous  situation  with  the  rf  sound.  The  j 

test  series  was  run  double  blind  with  our  musically  trained  subjects. 

Binploying  the  data  supplied  by  Bilson  and  Ritsma  on  periodicity  pitch  and 
the  specifications  of  Ritsma  dealing  with  residue  pitch  (a  related  phenomena), 
we  chose  the  ten  signal  conditions  and  ten  expected  tonal  matches  which  are  pre¬ 
sented  in  Table  VI.  Repetitive  rf  pulse  pairs  were  used.  We  define  t  as  the 
period  of  each  pulse,  x  as  the  interval  between  the  onset  of  pulses  in  a  pulse 
pair,  and  T  as  the  interval  between  the  onset  of  pulse  pairs.  To  clarify  these 
value- s ,  we  note  that  t  is  less  than  t  is  less  than  T.  The  objective  was  to  pre¬ 
sent  the  Ss  with  trains  of  pulse  pairs  with  defined  t,  x  and  T  and  predict  the 
acoustic  sound  that  they  would  report.  The  experimenter  asked  the  subjects  to 
match  the  rf  sounds  with  a  pulsed  acoustic  signal  to  determine  the  Ss  perception 
of  the  rf  sound.  The  pulse  width  of  the  acoustic  signal  was  1.5  milliseconds. 

Once  the  best  repetition  rate  audio  match  to  the  rf  sound  had  been  obtained,  v 

the  experiment t-  .isked  the  S  to  match  the  same  rf  sound  to  a  pulse  modulated 
audio  signal  having  the  repetition  rate  specified  as  above  by  the  S  but  wit.. 


20 


Rf  Parameters  for  the  Pitch  Study  Along  with  Expected  Results 


Condition 

t{ys) 

T(ms) 

T(ms) 

Expected  Tonal  Match 

1 

25 

5 

ho 

200  Hz 

2 

25 

3 

20 

333  Hz 

3 

50 

5 

h0 

200  Hz 

h 

50 

10 

ho 

Unmatchable  buzzing  sound  or  100  Hz 

5 

25 

5 

200 

Unmatchable  or  200  Hz 

6 

12.5 

5 

hO 

200  Hz 

7 

17-5 

2 

20 

500  Hz 

8 

12.5 

1 

20 

1000  Hz 

9 

12.5 

7 

hO 

lh3  Hz 

10 

37.5 

7 

hO 

lh3  Hz 

a  varying  pulse  width.  E  recorded  the  S's  natch  for  both  repetition  rate  in 
pulses  per  second  and  audio  pulse  width  in  milliseconds.  The  audio  match  was 
obtained  by  utilizing  audio  signals  of  approximately  the  loudness  of  the  rf 
sound.  The  order  of  the  rf  conditions  under  investigation  for  periodicity  pitch 
were  varied  throughout  the  study  by  use  of  a  table  of  random  numbers. 

The  general  procedure  was  as  follows.  An  S  would  take  a  seat  in  the  rf  an- 
echoic  chamber  with  his  back  to  the  horn  antenna.  The  S  would  be  presented 
with  an  rf  sound  for  2  seconds  and  then  would  listen  tc  an  audio  sound  and  in¬ 
struct  the  investigator  as  to  how  the  audio  sound  had  to  be  changed  to  compare 
with  the  rf  sound.  The  E  had  control  over  the  modulation  characteristics  of 
the  audio  sounds  and  could  vary  these  characteristics  according  to  the  verbal 


21 


instructions  g?.ven  by  the  S.  After  switching  back  and  forth  between  the  — f 
and  the  a::dio  several  times  tne  subject  would  verbally  give  his  impressions  of 
the  rf  sound  and,  if  possible,  assign  a  note  to  it.  1b  facilitate  the  finding 
of  a  note  the  subject  was  given  a  pitch  pipe.  To  help  with  the  assigning  of  °n 
octave  the  3  could  listen  to  a  note  played  on  a  piano  at  10  octaves. 

The  subjects  were  told  ti  e  following:  You  are  going  no  help  us  to  determine 
the  pitch  of  a  sound  by  trying  to  match  up  an  rf  sound  to  an  acoustic  one.  This 
will  he  done  by  first  listening  to  an  rf  sound  then  listening  to  an  audio  sound 
speaker  over  your  head  (out  of  the  rf  field).  At  this  point  you  will  instruct  me 
whether  or  not  to  charge  the  pitch  of  the  ^.udio  sound.  VJe  are  only  concerned 
with  pitch,  all  other  qualities  such  as  loudness  and  sharpness  of  the  two  sounds 
should  be  ignored.  After  a  match  has  been  established,  if  possible  try  and  tell 
me  the  frequency  of  the  pitch  that  you  hear.  You  nay  either*  rebate  the  pitch 
to  a  note  whose  pitch  is  known  to  you,  or  you  may  Just  tell  n«,  i.he  exact  fre¬ 
quency  of  the  pitch." 

The  audio  match  supplied  by  each  of  the  three  subjects  to  each  of  the  10  con¬ 
ditions  is  illustrated  and  compered  with  the  expected  values  in  Tables  VII  end 
VIII. 


As  may  he  seer,  the  audio  pulse  width  tine  (ta)  does  not  relate  to  any  of 
the  variables  «hich  describe  the  rf  signal.  In  particular,  ta  is  not  related 
to  the  pulse  width  time  (t)  of  the  rf  signal,  nor  to  the  pulse  repetition  tine 
within  groups  ?t).  00“  to  the  pulse  pair  repetition  time  (!).  Apparently  the 
repetition  pitch  phenomenon  is  not  a  characteristic  of  rf  sound. 

As  a  further  test  of  the  repetition  pitch  phenomenon,  subjects  had  been  ask¬ 
ed  to  provide  a  note  and  octave  match  to  the  rf  sounds  that  they  perceived.  In 
many  cases ..  the  subjects  stated  that  they  could  not  provide  such  a  match.  When 


itiono  along  with  expected  and  actual  time  between  pulse  pairs  (T) 


subjects  did  provide  a  natch,  they  were  not  consistent.  Two  subjects  do  not 
associate  the  seme  tone  with  the  same  rf  condition,  and  they  were  never  satisfi¬ 
ed  with  a  match.  Finally,  in  cases  where  we  would  expect  the  matched  tones 
to  be  higher  than  other  cases,  based  on  the  repetition  pitch  phenomenon ,  ve  fourd 
that  whether  the  tone  match  was  higher  or  lower  was  a  matter  of  chance. 

Thus,  the  periodicity  pitch  phenomena  is  not  the  path  to  pursue  in  order  to 
generate  speech  sounds.  We  could  conclude  from  this  phase  three  data  that  it 
would  he  necessary  to  have  a  better  understanding  of  the  rf  sound  transducer 
and  its  mechanism  before  it  will  be  possible  to  generate  speech  sounds. 
C0NCLUSI0K5 

In  the  first  phase  of  the  experimentation,  we  assembled  a  portable  rf 
sound  demonstration  unit.  This  was  successfully  used  to  demonstrate  the  phenom¬ 
enon  and  its  characteristics.  In  phase  two,  we  determined  what  rf  parameters 
are  relevant  to  generating  the  perception  of  r?  sounds  of  significance.  We 
learned  enough  in  this  phase  to  successfully  create  a  perceived  sound  that  ve 
desired  to  create.  In  phase  three,  we  explored  the  possibility  of  determining 
if  the  perception  of  speech  could  be  induced.  It  was  found  that  aspects  of 
vocoder  technology  could  not  be  used  to  generate  speech.  It  was  also .found  that 
perceived  rf  speech  can  not  be  generated  using  the  rules  of  the  periodicity 
pitch  phenomenon.  It  would  appear  that  meaningful  sounds  can  be  created  if  de¬ 
sired.  The  possibility  of  creating  speech,  however,  is  uncertain.  The  creation 
of  speech,  if  it  is  possible,  will  require  additional  knowledge  of  the  mechan¬ 
ism  of  the  effect. 


!  5 


25 


SELECTED  BIBLIOGRAPHY 


Frey,  Allan  H. ,  Behavioral  Biophysics.  Psychological  Bulletin,  Vol.  63, 

He.  5,  May  1965,  ;§32^337. 

Frey,  Allan  H. ,  Biological  function  as  influenced  by  lov-Pover  modulated  Rf 
energy.  IEEE  Transactions  on  Microwave  Theory  and  Techniques,  Vol.  HTT-19 
Ho.  2,  Feb.  1971,  153-16U. 

Frey,  Allan  H. ,  Human  auditory  system  response  to  modulated  electromagnetic 
energy.  Journal  of  Applied  Physiology,  Vo.  17,  No.  If,  July  1962^.  689^692, 
Ritsma,  R. J. ,  Existence  region  of  the  tonal  residue.  Journal  of  the  Acoustical 
Society  of  America.  Vol  3*f,  No.  9,  Sept.  1962 
Schouten,  J.F. ,  Ritsma,  R.  J.  ,and  Cardozo,  B.  L-.  Pitch  of  the  reside.  Journal 
of  the  Acoustical  Society  of  America.  Vol  3^»  No.  8,  Sept.  1962. 


