.DOE/ER/10035-2

AS,1.g

Environm•etaL As.sessmentfor thew.-Satellite
WC
Po
Development and
Evaluation ProgramMiórowave Héãltti ah.
Ecological Effects

November 1980

Prepared for:
U.S Department of Energy.
Office of Energy Research
Solar Power Satellite Project Division
Under Inter-Agency Agreement A101 -79ER 10035

DOEI NASA
SatelhtePower System
Conçe pt Deve'opment
and
EvaIution Program

IZTI1BUThN OF TfIIDOCUNT 1S'OWJ*5[

DOE/ER/10035-2
Dist. Category UC-41,97

Environmental Assessment for the Satellite
Power
System-Concept Development and Evaluation
Program-Microwave Health and
Ecological Effects

November 1980

Prepared by:
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Research Triangle Park, NC 27711
Under Inter-Agency Agreement AI01-79ER10035

Prepared for:
U.S. Department of Energy
Office of Energy Research
Solar Power Satellite Project Division
Washington, D.C. 20585

NASA/DOE
Satellite Power System
Concept Development
and
Evaluation Program

Tff 7-,

o : TM, U1Wi

TABLE OF CONTENTS

1.

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1-1

1.1 The Problem .......................1-2
...... 1-4
1.2 Data Base and Literature Selection . .
1.3 Eastern European Bioeffects Literature ........1-5
2.

PRESENT CLIMATE AND CONTEXT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2-1
2.1 Proliferation of PFR Sources . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2-1
2.2 Measurements 01 Environmental Levels of RFR
in Se1ecLd Cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2-2
2.3 Exposure Standards ..................2-4

3.

ANALYSIS OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3-1

4.

OTHER REVIEWS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5.

PRESENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING PHYSICAL EFFECTS . . . 5-1

4-1

5.1 Interactions of RFR with Biological Entities .....5-1
5.1.1 Thermal Interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5-2
5.1.2 Dose-Rate Con3iderations............5-7
5.1.3 Qtianum Interactioni . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5-15
5.1.4 Interactions of Modulated RFR . . . . . . . . . 5-17
5.1.5 Interactions of Pulsed RFR . . . . . . . . . . .
5-18

6.

5.2 Instrumentation for Densitometry and Dosimetry . . .

5-19

PRESENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS .

6-1

6.1 Epidemiology .....................6-.
6.2 Genetic and Cytogenetic Effects and Cancer
Induction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6-11
6.3 Studies on Teratogenesis and Developmental
Abnormalities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6-15
6.4 Ocular Effects ....................6-25
6.4.1
6.4.2

Anirnais . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Humans .....................

6-25
27

6.5 Nervous System Studies ................6 30
6.5.1 RFR Hearing Effect . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6-30
6.5.2 Calcium Efflux ..................-34

6.5.3 Blood-Erait Barrier Effects
6.5.4 Histopatlio!ogy of the Central
Nervous System
6.5.5 EEC. SLudie ..................
65.6 Concliislons
. . . ..............
6.6 Effects on Behavior ..................
6.7 Endocrinoigoical Effects ...............
6.8 Immunological Effects .................
6.9 Biochemical, Physiological. and Cellular Effects .

6-41
6-43
6-46
6-47
6-52

7.

LCOLDC,ICAL ISSUES .....................

7-1.

8.

MISCONCEPTIONS .......................
8-1

9.

EVALUATION ........................

6-37

6-55
6-60

9-1

10. REFERENCES .........................10-1
11.

GLOSSARY ..........................ii-i

LIST OF FIGURES

1-1 SPS Microwave Power Density Characteristics at
Recterina Sites (from TJSDOE, 1980) . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1-3

5-1 Dielectric Dispersion for Muscle Tissue . . . . . . . . . .

5-4

5-2 Variation of Dielectric Constant and Electrical
Conductivity with Frequency for Muscle Tissue . . . . . . .

5-5

5-3 Power £ransmission Factors at Several Interfaces .....5-6
5-4 Penetration Depth versus Frequency . . . . . . . . . . . .

5-8

5-5 Mean SAR for Prolate-Sheroida1 Model of "Average"
Man Exposed to 1 mW/cm' of RFR . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5-10

5-6 Mean SAR for Prolate-S heroida1 Model of "Medium"
Rat Exposed to 1 ' mW/cm of RFR .............5-12
6-1 Production of Fetal ExenLpha1ies in Mice by
Exposure to Microwave Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6-20

6-2 Production of Fetal Resorptions in Mice by Exposure
to Microwave Radiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6-23

LIST OF TABLES

2-1 Canadian Standard of Maximum Permissible Exposure Levels . . . 2.6
2-2 Swedish Occupational Standard of Maximum Permissible
Exposure Levels .........................
2-3 USSR Maximiim Permissible Levelf for Occupational
Exposure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2-8

6-1 Incidence of Exencephalies in Mice Exposed
in Utero to Microwave Radiation on the Eighth
Day of Gestation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6-19

6-2 Incidence of Resorption Sites in Uteri of Pregnant
Mice Exposed to Microwaves on the Eighth Day
of Pregnancy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6-22

6-3 Effects of Microwaves on the Immune System . . . . . . . . . . 6-56

1 INTRODUCTION

The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is considering several options
for generating electrical power to meet future energy needs. One oF
these options, the satellite power system (SPS), would collect solar
energy with a system of geosynchronous satellites in space, each of
which would convert the solar energy to microwave energy and transmit
the microwave energy from a directive antenna to a large, earth-based
receiving/rectifying antenna (rectenna) for that satellite. A reference
system has been described that defines many of the component subsystems
of such a concept (US DOE and NASA, 1978). The potential environmental
impacts associated with constructing and operating the SPS are being
assessed as a part of the DOE's SPS Concept Development and Evaluation
Program.
This report is concerned with the potential health and ecological effects of the microwave beam from the microwave power transmission system (MPTS) of the SPS. The report is written in the form of
a detailed critical review of selected scientific articles froIIL the
published literature on the biological effects of nonionizing electromagnetic radiation, followed by an assessment of the possible

effects

of the SPS, based on exposure values for the reference system (U.S. DOE
and NASA, 1978).
In various parts of the report, radiofrequeney radiation is
referred to as "RFR," "microwave radiation," "microwaves, or "radiation."
Although the terms are used somewhat interchangeab1', "microwaves" or
"microwave radiation" appears most commonly in Chapter 6, where most of
the stidies were performed in the microwave region, and "radiofrequency
radiation" or "RFR" appears most commonly in other chapters, particularly
Chapter 5, where studies include a broader range of the electromagnetic
spectrum.

1-1

1.1

THE PROBLEM
The microwave energy generated at each satellite will be trans-

mitted b y the MPTS to earth In the form of a relatively narrow beam of
continuous-wave (CW) RFR having a frequency of 2.45 GUz. The powerdensity profile of the beam at ground level (and within the troposphere)
is illustrated in Figure 1-1, and the power densities at various locations along the path of the beam are as follows (USDOE and NASA, 1978):
• center of transmitting antenna, 2.2 W/cm2
• edge of transmitting antenna, 240 mW/cm2
• peak near-field pattern density (on-ads, 1600 km
from transmitting antenna), 3.2 W/cm2
• center of rectenna, 23 niW/cm2
• edge of rcctenna, 1 mW/cm2
• rectenna site exclusion boundary, 0.1 mW/crn2
• first sidelobe level (approximately 9 km from center
of rectenna), 0.08 mW/cm
• grating lobe 'evels (at spacings of 440 km), < 0.01 mW/cm
Therefore, the basic RFR exposure situations are:
(a) People may be nonoccupationally exposed for long periods
to power densities generally much less then 0.1 inW/cm2
because they reside or work in population centers near
a rctertna site but outside the exclusion boundary of
the rectenna.
(b) Persons entering t

rectenria site for occupational

reasons could be exposed to power densities of up
to 23 inW/cm2 (and perhaps higher if reflections
are considered) unless suitable safety precautions
are invoked.
(c)

Space workers would be occupationally exposed to
considerably higher power densities (e.g., of the order
of W/cm 2 ) if their space suits 10 not include adequate
shielding from RPR.

1-2

2

POWER DENSITY IS 23mW/cm2
AT RECTENNA CENTER

POWER DENSITY IS lmW/cm2
/ AT RECTENNA EDGE

0.02 m W/cmt
.08 mW/cm2

10 km EAST- WEST

13 km NORTH -SOUTH
'
AT 350 LAT.

< POWER DESITY IS
0.1 mW/cm t AT RECTENNA
SITE EXCLUSION BOUNDARY

FIGURE 1-1 SPS MICROWAVE POWER DENSITY CHARACTERISTICS AT
RECTENNA SITES (from USJJOE, 1980)

1-3

(d)

Airborne biota (birds, flying nonhuman mammals, insects)
within the main MPTS beam will be exposed to power densities uf up to 23 mW/cm 2 for durations that depend an
whether they are transient or indigenous to the rectenna
site.

(e)

Humans flying through the iriairi beam in airplanes will be

exposed to power densities generally much lower than 23 mW/cm2

skin of the fusilage.
It is possible that flFR will enter the fusilage through

because of R1R shielding by the metal

windows. }k.wever, the maximum tncident power inside the

cabin will not exceed the maximum value just outside the
aircraft because the cabin and its contents (including the
humans) will corstic.te an extremely lossy (low Q) multimode
resonant cavti.
(f)

Plants gro:'
power da

ie rectenna area will be exposed to
ranging from 0.01 to 1.0 mW/cm 2 . Plants

growing outside the rectenna area will be exposed

to

power densities of up to 0.1 mW/cm 2 , but generally much less.
(g)

oti.-airborne animal species will be exposed to power
densities of 0.1 mW/cm 2 or less outside of the rect:enna
area and between 0.01 and 1.0 mW/cm 2 within the area,
provided that they remain below the rectenna. 11 they
climb on top of the rectenna, they will be exposed

to

23 mW/cm2.

1.2 DATA BASE AND LITERATURE SELECTION
Many sources were used in acquiring a working data base for this
assessment, including reference bibliographies provided in previous
reviews of the literature; a comprehensive bibliography prepared by
U.S. Government personnel; published proceedings of recent seminars
and meetings on the biologic effects of KFR; the computerized
base on Biological Effects of Electromagnetic

1-4

data

Radiation (BEER file)

of the Mead Technology Corporation, Dayton, Ohio; and compilations of
articles published by the Franklin InsLitutL. Cons idration was also
g1en to recent symposia on the biological effects of RFR.
Several criteria were used in sulet , ting articles for iflf 1.tiion
in this review. Preference was given to iomp I'LL?

p'rs published in

scientific journals or proceedings of soi,-ntifli , symposia. Where
details of the procedures and findings were sificit.nt1y clear and
complete, abstracts of presenLLions at recent c1cnL1f±c svmpos.La
were also used. Considerations jtic.1 ticjd the da t Of pubi L;tLion (more
.ecenr articles were preferred beiui

of improvements in the tcchnc'iogy

of exposure and dose measuremer), the ir(Iuncie of
frequencies close 10

LhL RFR (especially

of St., but also .)thers In the gen.ri1 range

from 10 1111z to 1. GUz as a p propriaLi), and the significance of the
findings to human health (e.g., stt1ies of human populations to
ascertain whether Lhe occurrence of specific , effects is statistically
higher in population samples exposed to RFR than in similar population samples not exposed, and experiments Lnvo1vLn long-Lerm exposure
of anirnais). Other criteria included the relevance of an article to
others on the same topic and possible relevance 10 concerns e'pressecI
by citizens' groups. The number of articles seIectd was IK'eessariiy
limited because of the large numuer of references on thu biologic'
effects of RFR. However, the articles selected are represntntive
of the entire body of lite rature on this subject.

1.3

EASTERN EUROPEAN BIOEIIFECTS LITERATURE
Probably the most controversial aspects of resarrh on

the

biological effects of RFR are the large discrepancies heLwion results,
at low levels of RFR, reported in the Eastern European literature and
those obtained in Western countries such as the United States, and the
basic differences in phi1osop1y between the two groups of countries
in prescribing safety standards or guidelines for the protection of
humans against possible hazrds from exposure to RFR.

1-5

From the end of World War 11 to about the late 1960s, few of
the scientific reports on bioeffects research in the USSR (or other
Eastern European countries) were amenable to critical review because
they lacked essential information. In the early 1970s, starting
essentially with an international conference on the bioeffects of RFR
in Warsaw in 1973 under the joinL sponsorship of the

World Health

Organization (WHO), the U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare (HEW), and the ScienLifLc Council to the Minister of Health
and Social Welfare of Poland, international interchanges cif information
increased materially, and translations of Eastern European articles
became easier to obtain. T3ecadse most of the Eastern European documents
prior to 1973 (and many since then) are merely abstracts that contain
no details of the experimental method, number of subjects, or analytical
approach used in the study, evaluation of them proved difficult. More
recent Eastern European studies contain more detail and z, number of them
are ciLr'd in the bibliography.

1-6

2 PRESENT CLIMATE AND CONTEXT

2.1 PROLIFERATION OF RFEt SOURCES
The SPS concept has been introduced in a general climate of
widespread proliferation and usage of RFR-emitting devices and systems.
Demand for the services and faeiiftis of these devices is reflected
by the foliowing figures for the United States (McRee, 1978). During
1976 sales of communications and 1ctronics products are estimated to
have totalled $38 billion. The FCC, as of 1977, had authorized transmissions by over 9 million transmitters. Between 1971 and 1973 there
was an increae of 87 in the numhcr of FM stations operating in the
88-108 11112 band. The National Institute of Occupational Safety and
Health (NIOSII) has estimated thaL over 35 'U1ion industrial RF sources
fnr heating and drying are in use

111 the

p1aics, paper, and oth.r

industries. App:oximatt . 1y 5 million microwave ovens have been in':i1ed
in homes in the United States (McConnell, 1978). As of 1979, abnut 30
milli.cri citizen band (CB) radios are licensed, with those operating in
the 27-MHz band capable of emitting up to 4 watts. Domestic and business
satellite communications systems are burgeoning. Air and maritime navigation makes widespread use of fixed and mobile radar systems.
Thus, there is a widespread climate of acceptance of the benefits
of RFR devices fcr communications, radar, and industrial processes. On
the other hand, there are concerns whether the proliferation of usage
of RFR devices including SPS may be associated with sorne as-yet-undefined
hazardous biological effects. The purpose of the present document is
to address such concerns as they pertain to the SPS.

2-1

2.2

MEASUREMENTS OF ENV1RONMENTAL LEVELS OF RFR IN SEACTID
U.S. CITIES
The 1nvironrnt?nta1 Protection Agency (EPA) is rnQasuring the

environmental field intensities at selected locations within various
U.S. ciLiis. Tell and NanLiply (1980) and Janes (1979) discuss the
ri'suitH for the 15 citjc!s (Lotal of 486 sites) studied so far. The
sits In each city we-e selecLed so as to permit estimations of curnula-

Live fractions of Lhe total population being exposed at or below various
average power densities, based on the population figures for the 1970
census enumeration distriets.

Field intensity measuroments were made at 6.4 m (20 ft) above
ground aL eub si 1:e in the fol Lowing frequency ranges (Janes et al., 1977)
0.5 to 1.6 1llz (the standard A1-radio broadcast band), 54 Lo 88 fflz

and 1:74 1:0 21.6 MHz (the VHF-TV bands) , 88 to 308 N11z (tile standard
FI-radio hroadc'ast wind), about 1.50 aiid 450 MHz (land-mobile bands)
and 470 Lo 890 M117. (Lile IJ1I1-TV bands). The signals in eaeli band were
received with sepir:iio antennas designed specifically for each band.
itowever, the measurements in the standard tN-radio broadcast band were
not included in the ;iriaLyses because this band is below the 10-M}lz lower

frequency limits or the present U.S. radiation protection guideline
(M1, 1974).
The measured fleLd sLrengths at each site were integrated over
the frequency hands from 54 to 890 MHz included in the analyses and

converted into equivalent average power densities. The site values in
each city were then used with Llie population figures in the various
census enumeration districts In a statistical model designed to estimate
the popuin Lion-wuLghted median exposure value for that city and to
calculate other sLatistics of interest.

The popuiaLion-wighteJ median value for a city is defined as
the average po•r density at or below which half the population of the

city is being exposed. The results are based on the assumption of
continuous exposure of people where they reside; they do not Lake into
account population changes since the 1970 versus, population mobi1ity,

exposure at heights greater than 6.4 m, attenuation of signals by
2-2

buildings, or periods 02 time when any of the contributing RFR sources
are not transmitting.

These median values range from 0.002 iiW/cm2

(for Chicago and San Fraclsco) to 0.020 PW/cm 2 (for Portland, Oregon).
2
The population-weighted median for all 15 cities is 0.0048 VW/cm
Also, the percentage of the population of each city exposed to less than
1 iiW/cm 2 ranges from 97.2% (for Washington, D.C.) to 99.99% (for
Houston, Texas), with a mean value for all 15 cities of 99.4%. The
major contributions to these exposure values are from the FM and TV
broadcast stations.
EPA also made measurements at siLes close 10 single or multiple
RFR Sources, e.g., at the bases of transmitter towers and at the upper
stories (including the roof) of tali buildings or hospital complexes
close 10 transmitter towers. At the base of an FM tower on Mt. Wilson,
for example, the fields ranged from 1 to 7 inW/cm 2 (Tell and O'Brien, 1977,
cited in Janes, 1979), but such values are believed to be uncommon.
Most measurements in tall buildings close to FM and TV transmitters
yielded values well below 100 jjW/cni 2 , but a few values were close to or
slightly exceeded 200 1IW/cm 2 (e.g., 230 uW/ern 2 on the roof of the Sears
Building, Chicago).
Janes (1979) also discussed the field intensities c1os to groundbased transmitters of satellite communications sysLelns, radars used for
air-route surveillance and other activities, microwave radio relay
transmitters, microwave ovens, and personul radios (CBs). He also
mentioned other sources such as those used for medical apiications
(diathermy, electrosurgery) and for industrial applications (heating,
drying, and sealing).
Because rectenna sit2s are likely 10 be distant from major population centers such as those analyzed in these studies, the increases
in population exposure values in these and other densely populated
regions due to operation of SPS are likely to he very sinall. However,
when the locations of the rectennas are specified, it would be pertinent
to determine the ambient exposure values over the entire RFR frequency
spectrum due 10 the SFS and other RFR sources in the municipalities
closest to each site.
2-3

2.3

EXPOSURE STANDARDS
The term "exposure standards" is generally applied to speciflca-

ti

or guidelines for permissible occupational and/or nonoccupational

xposure of humans to electromagnetic fields. The standards are expressed

as maximum power densities or fLeid intensities in specific frequency
ranges and lor Lndicated exposure durations.
The present U.S. standard is based on average power densities
and is essent-taIly the same u the American National Standards Institute
Radiation Protection Guide ANSI C95.1 (ANSI, 1974). Under this standard,
which applies to the frequency range From 10 MJfz to 100 GfIz, none of the
fo1.1iug values, when averaged over any exposure period of 0.1 hour,
should be exceeded
• Power density: 10 MW/Cm 2
• Square of electric field strength (E2rm):
• Square or magnetic field 3Lreng0h (11 2 rrns)
• Incrgy density: 1 rnWh/crn2.

0,000 V2/in
2
0.25 A 2 Im

The values of H2rins and 112rn1s above are approximately the "free—space
equivalents" of 10 mW/cni 2 (100 W1111 2 ) power density--i.e.,
r ni s
rrn s

(Z) x

(/z) X

([00 W/rn 2 )

(1)

(100 W/m 2 )

(2)

where Z represents the "impedance" or value of E/l1 for free space, but
rounded off From 377 ohms to 400 ohms to yieldErms
11rms = 0.5 A/m instead of values to more than one

200 V/cu and

significant figure.

Where only one type of field is present, the appropriate value of
maximum field applies. Where both types of Iie1d are present (e.g.,
from

separate sources of magnetic and electric fields), the maximum

energy—density value above represents an additional condition that the
total contributions from both fields, averaged over any 0.1—hour period,
should not exceed the equivalent of 10 mW/ctn 2 . The standard states that
these maximum permissible levels are appropriate for exposure under
moderate environmental conditions (temperature and humidity); lower
values should be used under environmental conditions that induce
significant heat stress.

2-4

The 10-mW/cm2 values originated from (a) the physiological consideration that whole-body exposure of a human to levels from about 100 mt/cm2
upward would produce a iniid to severe increae in theriiial load (depending
on the level) and (b) the application of a safety factor of 10 to Lhe
lower limits of this power-density range.
The U.S. standard does not contain specific enforcement or punitive
provisions for violations. It has been promuigatd by the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) as a radiation protection guide
for occupational exposure and has been adopteci by a number of organizaLioris, including the Department of Defense. The principle underlying
Lhis guideline was the

belief, based on the then available scientific

evidence, that nearly all workers can be exposed to such a level during
the normal series of working days without adverse offects. The guideline
thus rccog p Lzed that electromagnetic fields might cause biological effects

that have no medical con-sequences, or that the workers could readily
accommodate to Lite effects.
Based on recent experimental and theoretical results, the EPA, the
NIOSFI, and the ANSI are considering possible revisions to the U.S.

sLrtridard. A provlsionai frequency-dependent standard based on an average
SAR lirniLs of OJi W/kg in exposed tissue is under discussion by Lhe ANSI
Subcommittee C95.4 to be applicable to both occupational and non-occupational
exposure. However, environmental levels of electromagnetic fields are
very tnuuh lower than occupational levels, and the question of environmental
standards for the general (nonoccupational) population is stili under
consideration by the EPA.
Since other countries may be exposed to the sidelobe RFR from
U.S. SPSs, a discussion of the standards of other countries is pertinent.
Present standards in the United Kingdom, France, and West Germany
are essentially the same as the current ANSI guideline (Stuchly and
Repacholi, 1978). This was formerly true for Canada also. However,
the Canadian federal government has recently revised its standard
along the lines shown in Table 2-1, The maximum permissible general
(nonoccupational) level for continuous exposure is 1 mW/c , applicable
to frequencies in the band from 10 MHz to 300 GUz. For occupational

2-5

Table 2-1
CANADIAN STANDARD OF
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LEVELS
Exposure

Frequency
(GIi)

Maximum Level*

CcneraI public

0.01 to 300

1 mW/cm224

h

occupational

0.01. to 1

60 V/m (1 nM/cm2 ),
0.1.6 A/m (1 mW/cr& )
1 niW/cm2

8h

1.

1 to 300

Duration

to 25 nM/cm2t(min)
60/P
P power density

5 m\4/cm28

h

1 to 1.0 mW/cm2t(min)

300/P

10 to 25 nM/cm2t(min) = 60/P

Values in parentheses are approximate "free-space-equivalent''
power denstties.

2-6

exposure, the maximum levels are frequency- and duration-dependent.
For example, for the frequency range from 1 to 300 GHz the new standard
permits exposure to 5 mW/cm 2 for a maximum of 8 hours/day, up to 10 rnW/cm2
for 6 minutes or less, and up to 25 mW/cm 2 for 2.4 minutes or less.
The Swedish standard, which formerly was essentially the same
as ANSI C95.1, was revised in 1976 as shown in Table 2-2 (Stuchly and
Repacholi, 1978). Again, the new maximum occupational exposure levels
are about tenfold lower than they were. The new standard is assumed to
apply to the general (nonoccupational) population as well.
Presumably, the reductions of maximum permissible levels in the
Canadian and Swedish standards were engendered in part by consideration
of some of the relatively recent research results indicative of bioeffects due to chronic exposure at power densities in the range from
1 to 10 rnW/cm 2 . For similar reasons, it is likely that the U.S.
standard may also be comparably reduced.
In the USSR, the maximum level for 24-hour exposure of the
general population is 5 pW/crn2 (Shandala, 1978; McRee, 1979). The
occupational standard is summarized in Table 23 (Stuchly and Repacholi,
1978; McRee, 1979). It specifies higher maximum levels than for the general
population. For example, in the frequency range from 300 MHz to 300 Gflz,
it permits levels from 10 pW/cm2 for a full working day to 1 mW/cin2
for 20 minutes of exposure. However, the Soviet military services and

establishments are specifically exempted from such standards. The
process by which the USSR standard was arrived at is unknown, because
the Council of Ministers that sets standards does not publish its
proceedings. Nevertheless, we can surmise that the standard is based
in part on the claimed existence of "nonthermal tT

effects and on the

philosophy that exposure to Any power-density level is potentially
harmful, leading to the application of large safety factors in formulating maximum permissible levels (but exempting the military from such
standards, as mentioned above).

2-7

Table 2-2
SWEDISH OCCUPATIONAL STANDARD OF
MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE EXPOSURE LEVELS

Frequency
(01L)

Maximum Power Exposure
Duration
Densiçy
(nlW/cmL )
(li)

Remarks

0.01 to 0.3

5

8

Averaged over 6 min

0.3 to 300

1

8

Averaged over 6 min

0.01 to 300

25

Averaged over 1 s

Table 2-3
USSR MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE LEVELS FOR OCCUPATIONAL EXPOSURE

Frequency
(CHz)

Exposure
Duration

Exposute
Limit

Remark

0.01 to 0.03

20 V/rn (100 I.1W/cm 2 ) Working day

--

0.03 to 0.05

10 V/m (25 PW/cm2 ), Working day
0.3 A/m (4 mW/crn2)

--

0.05 to 0.3

5 V/m (6 iiW/cm2 )

-

0.3 to 300

10 pW/cm2Working

Working day
day

Stationary antennas

100

Working day Rotating antennas

100 J.1W/cm2

2 h

1 mW/cm22

h

Stationary antennas
Rotating antennas

9

1 i4/m

20 min

Stationary antennas

* Values in parentheses are approximate "free-space-equivalent"
power densities.

2-8

3 ANALYSIS OF SCIENTIFIC INFORMATION
In an environmental effects assessment, the interpretation of
winL1Fic information presents some novel problems that Ile outside
or the ordinary ra1m of scientific investigation. In traditional
cienLi.fic procedure, a statement

Or PrPosition

1S COflSiClCred

true

i1-and only if--it can be proven by objective evidence and can be
related logically and theoretically to the existing body of scientific
1ir.w1edo. Speculation about whaL cI.s.' might be true 15 appropriate
L5 the

next step 111 the advancement of scientific knowledge, but in

LrdiLi.ona1 science, speculation is clearl y distinguished from established
1L and

usable Lheory. Expansion of scientific knowledge ordinarily

((1{lI..?S from

invesLigatiori 01 quesLions st13geted by the rot1ts of

post (tisunll ly recent) discovery hence the direction of sc ienLific
Lnvstigatiofl is usuaLl y controlled by the resul ts achieved, rather
Uiiii by specific inforrniLion desired.
An environmental effects assessment, or any assessment of
potential technol ogical hazards Lo mankind, departs from tradi t ional
$;(' 1 ent if ic procedure in t .:o significnnt ways. First, the d irer

L ion

of

ivo-tigaL Lan is controlled by tlw need for specific kinds of information, often formulated by agencis that do not conduct the investigation.

ond, tiio investigation is often d irec teJ at establ iiiiiflg the absence,
oI harmful

or deleter ious effects. 'rhL first de parture sometimes

results in the ineffic.ien L use of scientific nanpower and resources:
Llw second requires proving a negative statement, which is :iet1iodoLogic'al ly
impossible. The only feasible accommodation to proving the absence
of hazardous effects

18 to

establish a batterv of standardized laboratory

Lets to which an agent or chemical must bo subrnitLod, and to designate
iL as hazardous if it shows effects in any of the tests. Proper applica-.
Lion of such a principle also requires that the ben:fits and

COSLS of

tbe test system must he wei1ied against the benefits and costs of the
environmental agent in question.

3-1

The foregoing problems apply to any kind of risk assessment,
whether it be for the Food and Drug Administration, the Environmental
Protection Agency, or a private insurance company. In the case of this
survey on the environmental assessment of effects of radiofrequertcy
radiation, the historical development of a field of study has incorporated two problems that seem to be peculiar to this type of environmental agent. These problems are considered briefly in the following
paragraphs.
ihe first problem involves the long-standing debate over thermal
versus nont±ermal effects. The technical aspects of the question of
thermal versus nonthermal effects is discussed in some detail in Section
5 of this document. What is discussed here is the philosophical aspect
of the problem as it relates to the evaluation of the available scientific information. Based on review of the literature, it seems that
the problem constitutes a misdirection of scientific effort. Because
most of the absorbed energy of radiofrequency radiation is deposited
in the form of heat, it is virtually impossible to prove that a given
effect 15 "nonthermal" even though it is obtained at a power-density
level that appears to be ton low to induce a rise in temperature in the
irradiated subject. Even the absence of the effect when thermal load
is induced by other agents (i.e., hot air) does not prove the nonthermal
nature of the effect, since the rate of absorption and distribution of
the thermal load will differ from those induced by radiofrequency
radiation. In this assessment, the question of thermal versus nonthrma1
as a basis for the mechanism of an effect is largely ignored, and the
attention is directed instead to the power-density level and duration
or repetition of exposure that produce or fail to produce the effect.
The second problem involves the question of the thousandfold
difference between the USA and the USSR in standards for permissible
occupational exposure to microwave irradiation. This difference is
often considered to be evidence for (unspecified) deleterious effects
of microwaves that officials in the USA have failed to recognize.
However, occupational or environmental standards for exposure to any
agent involve at least two independent factors: 1) the scientific

3-2

fnirinLt:ic1n available for making a d e cision and 2) the regulatory
philosophy on which the bureau charged with
With regard Lc' the First ficLor,
th' preparer y of this

all

setting

standards operates.

scientific information available to

1Se4sflWflL has been reviewed carefully by reason-

ably strict standards of scientific competence, With regard to the
second laeior, Lher y is i profound difference in regulatory philosophy
between the two countries ('/ L

1111118, 1974)

In the USA, effects are

L1SUl 1 v recogni ztd as hazardous In Lorrns of their frank pathological
naLurt or Lh d isco pilorL experienced by exposed subjects. In the

any ellecL rc'-u 11. Ing i n a change in any physiological function
by Iltort 1 haii

two standard deviations from the norm in any individual

is regarded aw u1laLe1p Ln bi e. It is 1 uappropria Le to discuss the merits

of Lhe LWO philosophies
o'-.ophi.os in detail, but two points in the philosophical
jg; i t un oF the USSR may be 110 ted

1 1. rS L , hiuc hernica 1 and physiological

iiurIfls oF Lhe hiimin population ra ri ly have peri' eci Gaussian distribuLions
with w 11 -(1(1 i.ud standard (IVV lil i iofli ; hence, application of the
cr iterion

o hazard btw nws difficult. Second • human experience shows

LhUL LIiert ar y few slII)tJI1e(s or agents tliz1L have no significant
vfFpcl

on the euL [re population. Even

natural foods Lhai man has

(lt{Il for i1urisands of Years may provoke violent allergic reactions in
a 1w individuals. Hence, an y er.ilerion of absolute safety is illusory.
In divlop 1 ng the allRomsmenL that follows, the main areas of
)ni.(rr1 have been thec red ibility and rellabl.lity of the scientific
claia avallubiv for review and the information

011 physiological meihanisms,

do-resin'nsu curves, and power-detisi Ly or dose thresholds.

.L1e1iL 101 [8 also

gIVYI2 10 t hP qIIPSLIOLI of whuther specific effects may

hi' rc'l vaiIt to human sa luLy and heal Lli, but these are subjective matters,
and eihersmi g i L disagree with the assessment. Finally, speculation

about what H 1 &rt s inLjit occur 18 restricted to narrow areas of physioI egv where there are well-defined mechanisms that could lead to
f icv Ls that. havo no 1 \'t. been observed or recorded.

3-3

61anK

3.9

4 OTHER REVIEWS

This section contains descriptions of representative general
reviews of the literature on the bioeffects of RI'R, including Lwo

)V

Eastern European authors (Baranski and Czerski, 1976; Sudakov and AntLmuLy,
19'3) and two of Eastern European research by an American (NcRce 1971),
1980). The bibliographies in these reviews served as additional sir'
of possibly relevant literature citations, thereby ensuring adequate
coverage of the literature. Although the conclusions and opinions of the
authors of these reviews were carefully examined, the conclusions
stated in this assessment of the SPS were derived independently by
analyses of the primary research literature on each bioefferts topic.
Two useful recent compendia are

the issue of the Bulleti n

New York Academy of Medicine (1975) that covers the "Symposium un
Health Aspects of Nonionizing Radiation" held at the Academy in Ai1
1979 and the Proceedings of the IE1E, Special Issue onBin1ciraiftt-tand Medical Applications of Electromagnetic Energy (1980). Both puI H
cations contain reviews of specific RFR bioeffects topics as wU n
reviews of the entire field. The presentations in the I3uiIetin ar
directed primarily toward acquainting physicians about the status

Ct tTht

field, whereas those in the Proc -ee-dings are primarily for the nonI.i:1it.
In addition, the Proceedings contains first pubileation of some rc"it
research results. Only the general review articles in those i&uthose selected from earlier publications are considered in this

;iiiLi

sectJn.

In the Proceedir, Michaelson (1980) presents an overview that
includes brief discussions of principles of hiologicai experimentation
and interpretation of results, the necessity for and the problems
associated with scaling and extrapolating results on animals to humans',
and some basic physiological considerations involved in exposure to RI'R.
Be then summarizes the current state of research on all of the rnair
bioeffects topics. He concludes that most of the experimental (1;t

4-1

indicate that the reported effects of RFR exposure are primarily due to
temperature increases or internal changes in temperature gradients, but
recommends further research in areas where there are substantial
uncertainties and disagreements, particularly on the effects of chronic
exposure to low levels of RFR. Michaelson cites 99 references. An
earlier review by Michaelson (1978) covers much of the same

subject

matter and provides 209 reterence citations.
In both the jProceedings , and the Bulletin, t1cRee (1979, 1980)
reviews the difficulties in assessing the Eastern European

liLerature

on bioeffects of RFR prior to about 1972, anci he discusses the inception
of the cooperative agreements between the USSR and the USA. He also
indicates that the initial stages of the cooperative program primarily
involved exchanges of information (and Interchange vis.Lt). TL 1)Qcwne
evident that most of the USSR research involved

chronic exposures to

average power densities of about 500 pW/cm 2 and lower, Whereas the
U.S. research involved relatively short exposures to about 5 iuW/rrn2
and higher. This situation led to an agreement to perform duplicale
experiments in the two countries. In th dup1cate experiment that MRee
describes, rats were exposed at 500 ijW/cm 2 for 7 hours/day, 7 days/week
for 3 months, and specific behavioral and biochemical tests were perfotnied.
The U.S. study found a decrease in sulfhydryl activity and blood
cholinesterase, as did the USSR study, and blood chemical analyses at
the end of the 3-monLh exposure period showed aldosteronisrn in the
exposed animals, relative to controls, due to vcuo]ated and hypertrophied zone glomerulosa of the aurenal glancis. Also, significant
differences in the same direction as the USSR results were found in
all behavioral parameters studied (increased threshold in footshock
detection, decreased activity in an open field, and poor retention
of an avoidance response). In both reviews, McRee also summarizes
effects on humans and animals reported by Soviet, Polish, and
Czechoslovakian scientists, and he discusses the safety standards in
these and Western countries in the Bulletin. McRee cites 33 references
In the Proceedings and 5 references in the Bulletin.

4-2

In the Bulletin, Cleary (1979) presents n brief overview, with
emphasis on reported effects of exposure at low average power densities.

Pe indicates the difficulties in making quantitattve comparisons of
results and extrapolating from data on animals to effects on humans.
He cites 22 references. In a more compreh n .ive, earlier review
(Cleary, 1977), he analyzes the results of 12 studies on various
aspects of RFR bioeffects and includes references to 100 other articles.
He discusses the physical characteristics of RFR, the mechanisms of
interaction of RFR with biological systems, and whole-body dose rates
and dose-rate distributions within actual and model biological systems.
He then reviews the major physiological and behavioraL effects of RFR.
Carpenter (1977) gives a critical, coinprhensive

presentation

of RFR and its effects, emphasizing RFR as an environmentaL agent.
Sections deal with physical characteristics and propertins of RFR,
effects on tissue, ttheimaluI and "nontherma1 effects, exposure levels,
biological effects of RFR on human beings and experimental animals, and
RFR effects on the eye, the testes, the nervous system, and on
development. Carpenter cites 110 references.
Two reviews, one covering RFR biophysics and the other discussing
biological and pathophysiological effects of exposure to RFR, are contained in the transactions of a short course held in Ottawa,

Canada,

in June 1978. Lin (1978) presents an assessment of ihe urrenL knowledge
about RFR interactions with biological systems, with emphasis on the
dielectric properties of tissue materials, propagation and absorption
of RFR in tissues, and basic physical mechanisms of interaction. He
cites 76 references.

Stuchly (1977) reviews potentially hazardous RFR sources, citing
38 references. The review discusses those sources judged to have
potential for producing hazardous levels of RFR under normal operating
conditions and under possible ma1functio1, and considers satellite
communications systems and microwave-power devices for generating heat.
Dodge and G1ase (1977) assess international

trends in research,

development, and occupational health and safety, concentrating on

4-3

events since 1975. Some 25 references are cited. Sections discuss

exposure standards, resQarch on biooffects, effects of RFR on humans,
and U.S. federal RFI( health and safety prograrns.
A very comprehensive Eastern European presentation of the then
current literaLure and research results is the 234—page book by
(trarisiaion by
Buranski and Czerski (1976) published in English (translation
Cvrskt). The book contains references to 614 articles, with wide
representation given Lo WesLern, as well as Eastern European,
investigations. The seven chapter headings are:
Iii Lroduc tion
Physi ' ;ii Characteristics of Microwaves
Interaction of Microwaves with Living Systems
Biological Effects of Microwaves. Experimental DFiLa
Health StaLus of Personnel Occupationally Exposed to Microwaves Symptoms of Microwave Ova-exposure
Safe Exposure Limits and Prevention of Health Hazards
Final Comments
Sudakov and Antmoniy (1973) provide an extensive review (224
references) of the neurophysiology and behavior of animals and
humans, in an English translation of the original Russian article by
Ole joint Publications Research Service. The authors appear to accept
that
as tncontestabie the premise
RFR has direct effects (denoLd by
Lhein as nontllernlaitr) en the nervous system of animals. The review
is in two main sections. The first is concerned with biological
aspects of the eff..ts ot RFR on the central nervous systeln (CS) of
inimais and man; it contains subsections on natural RFR as a factor
in evouLion, the sensing of RFR by living organisms, and the effects
of natural RFR on animals and man, on Lhc activity of the CNS, and on
Lhe behavior and conditioned activity of animals and man. The second
main section is concerned with neurophysiological mechanisms oi action
of RFR, with subsections on bioelectrical activity of Lhe brain during
exposure to RFR, morphological and funetional changes in the CNS 011

exposure to 1FR, and selective action of RFR on structures of the CNS.

4-4

PRESENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING PHYSICAL EFFECTS

5.1 INTERACTIONS OF RFR UITI-I BIOLOGICAL ENTITIES
Iccrntsi of the frequent usage, in the literature, of "thermal''
and tl nonth 0 rnlnh ur to characterize interactions of RFR with biological
intities and the controversy and confusion engendered by such usage,
it is appropriate 10 introduce working definitions of these terms,
willt the recognLtion that the boundary between these types of interactions is not sharp.
The iL1LerL1L.t1oLl of UR with a biological enLity can be

characterized as thermal if Lhc energy absorbed by the entity is
transformed into heat at the absorption site. Implicit in this
def-tniLion is that "heat" is a macroscopic quantity involving many
molecules. Heat absorption, in turn, is defined in classical thermodynamics as either an increase in the mean random speed (or kinetic
at
the absorption site (a local increase in
twry) of the iiioiccu1.es
temperature) or an increase in the disorder or randomness of the
molecular motion at the site without an increase in temperature (a
1 irt-orer phase change), or both.
Energy can also be absorbed by an entity at specific discrete
frequencies in the form of energy packets or "quanta," each of which has
an energy proportional to one of the discrete frequencies. Although
large numbers of molecules can he involved, quantum absorption is
essentially a microscopic phenomenon in that the constituents and
configurations of the various molecular species composing the entity

(1QLc'r1ntnc the specific frequencies or characteristic spectra at which
quantum absorption can occur. The kinds of interactions involved are
numerous and of varying degrees of cpmplexity. They include alteraLions of molecular orientations and configurations that do not change
the basic LdenLities of the molecules, disruption of intermolecular o
intramolecular bonds, and excitation of atoms or molecules to higher

5-1

electron states (including ionization). Such interactions can be
characterized as "short-range" processes. There are also cooperative
interactions among subunits of molecules within biological cells, in
cell membranes, and in extracelluiar fluids. Cooperative interactions
are often characterized as "long-range" because absorption of energy
at one specific site in a structure (e.g., in a membrane or in a
biological macromolecule) can affect a process elsewhere in the
structure, or a function of the structure as a whole can be triggered
by the re?.ease of energy stored in the structure, thereby producing
biological amplification.
Conceptually, all such quantum interactions can be characterized
55 "nontherrnal. tt However, if most of the energy thus absorbed is subsequently transformed locally into heat (as defined above), the distinction between nonthermal and thermal is blurred. Pragmatically,
therefore, characterization of an interaction of RFR with a biological
entity as nonthermal requires that the interaction give rise to a
frequency-specific effect that is experimentally distinguishable from
heating effects due to thermalizaL-ion of the absorbed RFR energy.

5.1.1 Thermal Interactions
Consider now the incidence of continuous-wave (CW) RFR on a
human or an animal. The relative magnetic permeability of most organic
constituents is about unity. Therefore, thermal interactions (as
defined above) can be described primarily in terms of the dielectric, electricalconductivity, and thermal properties of the body organs, tissues, fluids,
and so forth, as well as the characteristics of the RFR (frequency,
power density, polarization). These properties have been measured for
various mammalian tissues, blood, cellular suspensions, protein molecules,
and bacteria over the spectral region from about 10 Hz to 20 GHz
notably by Schwan and coworkers (Schwan and Foster, 1980; Schwan, 1963,
1957; Schwan and Piersol, 1955; Schwan and Li, 1953), as well as others
(Lin 1975; Cook, 1951, 1952). In general, the dielectric constants were
found to.vary with frequency in a separate characteristic manner or each
of three parts of that frequency range ("alpha," "beta," and ttgamniaht

5-2

dispersion regions), as shown for muscle tissue in Figure 5-1. These
dispersion regions are ascribed to different predominant relaxatio
mechanisms each characterized by specific time constants (Schwan,
1957). In the low and intermediate frequency ranges (about 10 Hz to
about 100 Mt;z). encompassing the "alpha- and beta-dispersion" regions,
the properties of cell membranes, which have large specific capacitances
(about 1 microfarad/cm 2 ), predominate. In the range above about 10 CHz
("gamma-dispersion" region), membrane impedances are negligible and
the behavior of the water and electrolyte content are most predominant.
In the frequency range from about 300 MHz to about 10 GI-lz, the
dielectric constants of skin, muscle, and blood vary relatively little
with frequency because the transition between the beta- and gammadispersions occurs in this range. (This behavior is illustrated in
Figure 5-2 for muscle.) The mean dielectric constants for these three
constituents are about 40, 50, and 60, respectively; the differences
in values are largely ascribable to the proportion of water in each
constituent, water having a dielectric constant of about 30.
Because the index of refraction of any material is related to
its dielectric constant, electromagnetic fields are reflected and
refracted at the air-surface interface and at internal boundaries
between constituents of widely different dielectric properties (e.g.,
at interfaces between the skull and the dura or between a body cavity
and adjacent tissues), thereby affecting the internal field distributions.
Figure 5-3 displays plots of the power transmission factor at airmuscle, fat-muscle, and air-fat interfaces over the frequency range
from 100 MHz to 10 CLiz. It is seen that at an air-muscle interface,
for example, only about 44% of the incident power density of 2.45 GHz
RFR is transmitted (the remainder being reflected). The corresponding
value for the air-skin interface is approximately the same. The
fraction entering a body is progressively attenuated with depth because
of energy absorption.
The attenuation constant (rate of energy absorption with
distance) of any material is proportional to the square root of its
electrical conductivity. The concept of "penetration depth" (inverse

5-3

For Muscle Tissue
106

4)

a

10 5

ra

4)
0

()

Un

cu

10 2

Y

1

10
10

102

10

1
104

10

106107108
Frequency - Hz

FIGURE 5-1 DIELECTRIC DISPERSION FOR MUSCLE TISSUE

10

10 101(h1

140

140

130

130
For Muscle Tissue

120

120

110

110

Cr

100

lon

E
0

(fl
0

Uj

4-,
(1)
0
(-)
U
tM

4-,
0
w

1

90
80

90 .
r
F
80

70

70

60
50
40
30
20
10

OL_
0.01

_1

0.02

0.05

0.1

0.2
Frequency

0.5

1.0

2.0

GHz

FIGURE 5-2 VARIATION OF DIELECTRIC CONSTANT AND ELECTRICAL CONDUCTIVITY WITH
FREQUENCY FOR MUSCLE TISSUE

5.0

10.0

0

1.0

0.8
0
L)
LL
0

0.6

r
Ln

E
Ln

0.9

'J1

0
0.2

0.0
0.1

1.0
Frequency - GHz

FIGURE 5-3 POWER TRANSMISSION FACTORS AT SEVERAL INTERFACES

10

of ittenuat Lon eons1mt) is OfLQn used. For homogeneous StCirn0flS,
the penetration depth is defined as the distance a t wbftli the electric
field amplitude is 1/e (37) of its value or LIio power density is 1/e
(14) of its value jusL within Lite surface. The electrical conductivities
of skin, muscle, blood, and other constituents of the body i ncrease
slowly with freq ueney up to zibou t 1 GlIz and rapidly From about 1 (I-1z
upward. (See, for example, Figure 5-2.) The penetration depths for
these three constituents are shown in Figure 5-4. At

2.45

(11z, for

example, the penetration depth for muscle Is about 1-3/4 em, whereas
at about 10 GHz and higher, £ Ield penuLraLion is confined to the skin

5 L2 Dose-Rate Considerations
In the literature on 1)ioeIfetts of RI r R, t1ierni1 energy absorption from an electromagnetic field is usually charocter tzed by the
Specific Absorption Rate (SAR) , defined as We ra Le of energy absorption

111 a

small volume at any locale

ided by the
wi tit in an entity, divided

mean density of the constituents in that volume. SAR is exp ressed in
Cerrns of W/kg or tnW/g. The numerical value u[ SAR in any small region
with u biological entity depends on the characteristics of the Inc idcnt
field (power density, frequency,

poi ar ia 1 i.on) as well as on the

properties of the entity and the location of the region. For biological
entities that have complex shapes and inlernal disLribut iotis 01
constituents, simtial variations of SAR are not readily calculated.
Therefore, L he c L)ncOp 1 of ''mean SAR, which rep i-es on t - the spatial
average value for the body per unit of incident power density, i Men used because 11 is a quant 1 t y that can be measured experimentally
(e.g., by calorinieiry) without requiring information on Lhe internal
SAR distribution.
Many investigators have studied relatively simple geometric
models, including homogeneous and inul 1 iTayered spheroids, ellipsoids,
and cylinders Lhat have weights an:I dimensions approximately representative of various Species, including huinans. Such models were
actually--or were assumed lo he----irrad iaied with linearly polarized

5-7

70

7.

60

6.
0
0
ri

E

50

5.0

Ca

t-I
0
4-4

4.
ai

0

LA

0
).

r

Cd

ai
ai

0
41
1-.

2.

1.

10

0
0.1

0.2

0.6

1.0
Frequency GHz

FIGURE 5 14 PENETRATION DEPTH VERSUS FREQUENCY

2.0

5.0

10.0

plane waves to determine the dependence of mean SAR on frequency and
orientation of the object relative to the polarization direction of the RFR.
Many of the significant data have been included in a compendium (]Durney
et al., 1979, 1978) that is useful for very approximate frequencyscaling and interspecies comparisons of mean SAR values. An important
result of this work is that the largest value of mean SAR is obtained
when the longest dimension of each kind of model is parallel to the
electric component of the field and when the wavelength of the incident
RFR is about 2.5 times the longest dimension. The adjective "resonant"
is often applied to the frequency corresponding to this wavelength.
The resonant value of mean SAR for each model is also inversely dependent
on the dimension perpendicular to the polarization direction (and
propagation direction) of tho field--i.e., the model has characteristics
somewhat similar to those of a lossy dipole antenna in free space.
Resonances would also occur for circularly polarized RFR. Such RFR
can be resolved into two mutually perpendicular components, each having
half the total power density. Therefore, an entity exposed to circularly polarized RFR would have lower mean SAR values at resonance than
it would have if exposed Lo linearl y polarized RFR of the same total
power density.
Figure 5-5 shows pints of mean SAR versus frequency for a
prolate-spheroidal model of an " average " man, approximately 5 ft 9 in.
(1.75 m) tall and weighing about 154 lb (70 kg), exposed to 1 64/cm 2 of
plane-polarized RFR in three orientations relative to the polarization
direction. (A relatively sharp peak is obtained at resonance for the "E"
orientation) in which the long axis of the prolate spheroid is parallel
to the polarization direction (electric

vector) and perpendicular to the magnetic

vector and propagation direction. (In the "H" orientation, the long
axis is parallel to the magnetic vector and perpendicular to the
electric vector and propagation direction; in the "K" orientation, the
long axis is parallel to the propagation direction.) It is seen that
for this model of man, the resonant frequency (ir. the E orientation) ±5
about 70 MHz; at this frequency the mean SAR is about 0.2 W/kg for 1
mWIcm2 incident power density, or about 1/6 of his resting metabolic

5-9

100

10-1

H
E

0)

io_2
Ln

K

101

10210

10

F (MHz)

FIGJRE 5-5 MEAN SAR FOR PROLATE-SP HERO IDAL MODEL OF "AVERAGE" MAN
EXPOSED TO 1 mW/crn 2 OF RER
5-10

10

exercise ranging from walking to sprinting (Ruch and Patton, 1973).

Similarly, the resonant frequency for an " average " woman out 5 ft
3 in. tall is about 80 MHz, and her mean SAR is about the same as for
the average man. The resonant frequency for a 10-year-old is about 95
MHz; for a 5-year-old, about 110 MHz; and for a 1-year-old, about 190
MHz. The resonant mean SAR values for such children are about 0.3
W/kg for 1 mW/cm 2 . The presence of a ground plane or other r2fiecting
surfaces shifts the resonant frequencies downward and can produce higher
values of mean SAR at the lower resonant frequencies (Haginann and
Gandh. et al., 1979; Gandhi et al., 1977; Gandhi, 1975).
Below resonance in the E orientation, the mean SAR is approximately proportional to f 2 ; above resonance, the mean SAR is approximately
proportional to i/f for about one decade of frequency and then it levels
off. (These relationships of mean SAR to frequency constitute the basis
for the physical aspects of the Exposure Protection Guide currently
being considered by the ANSI 095.4 committee.)
Figure 5-6 presents similar data for a prolate-spheroidal model
of a "medium" rat (0.2 m long and weighing 0.32 kg). It is seen that
not only is the resonant frequency (approximately 650 MHz) higher than
the values for humans, but also the resonant mean SAR is larger (about
0.8 W/kg for the rat, versus about 0.2 for man, per inW/cm 2 of incident
power density). Therefore, scaling of data from experimental animals
to humans must also consider such differences of mean SAR as well as
frequency.
The foregoing discussion of mean SAR is also largely applicable
to modulated RFR (including pulsed RFR) at corresponding carrier
frequencies and time-averaged incident power densities.
To illustrate how the concept of mean SAR could be interpreted,
consider the mode]. man. Absorption of energy as heat by exposure of
such a model man at his resonant frequency (73 MHz) in the E orientation
2
to an average power density of 1 mW/cm
(SAR of 0.2 W/kg) for 1 hour
would produce a mean body temperature rise of only about 3.2°C if no
heat removal mechanisms are present and if no first-order phase changes
are involved. At 2.45 GHz, the mean SAR is about 0.04 W/kg per

5-11

10

H
E
1111

1<

io2

(7)

0)
(d
(1)

r

10

-3

101

10

2

10

3

104

F (MHz)

FIGURE
;i.iU i 5-6 MEAN SAR FOR PROLATE-SPHPR() 1 DAL MODEL OF "MEDIUM" RAT
EXPOSEP TO 1 mW/crn 2 o 1 k'R
5-12

105

for the [1 orientation and about 0.03 W/kg per mW/cm 2 for the E orientation, as eri in Figure 5-5. Therefore, exposure of the model roan to
the same power density for the same duration, but at 2.45 G1Iz, would
produce mean temperature rises of only about 0.04°C or 0.03°C for the
H and E orientations, respectively. By contrast, exposure of the model
of the medium rat to 2.45 GHz in cither orientation (SAR of about
2,
0.2 W/kg per mW/cm
as seen in Figure 5-6) for 1 hour at 1 mW!cm 2
would yield a mean body temperature rise of about 0.2°C, which is about
fivefold larger than for the model man at this frequency.
Numerical calculations of internal spatial distributions of
SAR have been performed on "block" models, in which the shape of the
body is approximated by an appropriate arrangement of inarty cubical cells,
with each cell assumed to be biologically homogeneous and to have
constant internal field over its volume when the model is exposed to
RFR (Haginann et al., 1977). Block models, as well as homogeneous and
multilayered spheroidal and cylindrical models having appropriate
electromagnetic and thermal characteristics, have also been used to
represent various parts of the body, such as the head and limbs (Gandhi
et al., 1979; Massoudi et al,, 1979; Rukspollmuang and Chen, 1979; Wu
and Lin, 1977; Neuder et al., 1976; Kritikos and Schwan, 1975, 1976;
Lin, 1975; Weil, 1975; Jothes and Spiegel, 1974).
Probabiy the most significant finding for spherical models of
the isolated head assumed to be exposed to plane-wave RFR has been the
discovery of local regions of relative maximum SAR values. The
locations of such regions depend on the size of the head, the electromagentic characteristics of its layers, and the wavelength of the
incident field. These regions have been conveniently dubbed "hot spots,"
even for combinations of incident power density and exposure duration
that would produce biologically insignificant temperature rises at such
spots. An analysis of a homogeneous lossy spherical head model (Kritikos
and Schwan, 1975) indicates that hot spots are inside spheres having
radii between 0.1 and 8 cm, and in the frequency range from about
300 MHz to 12 CH , for larger radii and other frequencies, there are
internal hot spots, but the hottest spots are at the front surface (facing
5-13

the RFR source). Similar results were obtained for muitiiiyered
spherical. models (Kritikos and Schwan, 1976; Weil., 1975). Specifically,
Kritikos and Schwan (1976) analyzed two such models, one with a radius
of 5 cm and the other, 10 cm. For the 5-cm head, the hot spots are
internal over the frequency range from about 400 MHz to 3 (IIz

The

highest relative maximum SAR occurs near Lite center of the head at a
frequency of about 1 GHz, and has a value of about 9 W/kg for an incident
power density rf 1 mW/cm 2 , At 3 GUz, the hot spot is at the front
surface and has an SAR or about 5 W/k. (01 course, the mean SARs
are considerably lower.) By contrast, for the head or 10-cm radius
(about that for an adult human head), there are no deep internal hot
spots at any Frequency; the hot spots are always at or just beneath
the front surface.
Rukspollmuarig and Chcn (1979), starring with a block mode]. of
a multilayerud spherical. head, found qualitatively similar results.
They then studied a block model having a shape and internal structure
more closely approximating that 01 the human head (including eyes, nose,
skull hone, and brain) and found that much of the energy within the
head would he absorbed by the skull. Specifically, for Frontal exposure
of this model at 918 MHz (near head .esonance), the maximum SAR for the
brain region is about about one-third that for the brain rei.in of a
7-cm-radius multilayered spherical model. Also, for frontal exposure
of the more accurate model to 2.45 GFIz, the induced field is concentrated
primarily near the proximal surface and therefore energy dissipation
within the brain would he relatively low. Based on these analyses,
thermal brain damage Is unlikely to occur in the adult human head at
2.45 GHz unless the incident power density and exposure duration are
sufficient to heat the entire head to well above normal.
Results of theoretical analyses of simple geometric models have
been varified experimentally by constructing physical models from
synthetic biological materials that have approximately the same electromagnetic characteristics as their corresponding biological constituents,
then exposing such models to sufficient power densities to obtain readily
measurable temperature rises, and measuring such rises 10 temperature

5-14

immediately after irradiation. Although much useful information has
been obtained from models that have relatively simple geometries, human
and animal configurations are far more complicated and are different
from one another. Therefore, SAR distributions in animal carca .es
and figurine-shaped physical models have been determined experimentally
(Gandhi et al., 1977 Guy et al., 1976a). Calorirnetry has been used to
measure whole-body mean SAR values (Alien and Hurt, 1979; Gandhi et
al., 1979: Kinn, 1977; Hunt and Phillips, 1.972). A widely used technique
to determine internal field distribution is to section a carcass or
physical model along parting planes of interest, then reassemble and
expose it. The spatial temperature distribution over each
plane is then measured with scanning infrared thcrmography immediately
after exposure. However, such Spatial temperature distributions should
not be regarded as the corresponding in vivo internal temperature
distributions, because the heat-transfer characteristics of such
carcasses and physical models are significantly different from those
of live animals and do not have the Lhermoregulatory mechanisms of the
latter. Instead, such measured temperature distributions represent
approximations to the internal field or SAR distributions.
Among the interesting qualitative results with human Ligurines is
that at frequencies near resonance, the local fields can be much higher
for certain regions (such as the neck and groin) than for other body
locations. In addition, field distributions for nonprimates are quite
different from those for primates; this point should be given proper
consideration when the analyst attempts to exLrapolate experimental
findings on any laboratory animal species to humans, or to compare
experimental results on different laboratory species.

5.1.3

guantum Interactions
Regarding quantum interactions of CW RFR, the activation

energies for short-range effects at the molecular level extend from
about 0.08 eV (1.3 X iü20 J) For hydrogen-bond disruption to about
10 eV (1.6 X1F 18 J) for ionization. The corresponding quantum
frequencies range from about 19 to 240 TIlz (1 Tllz
1.0 3Cllz) (Cleary, 1973).

5-15

However, an electromagnetic quantum at I CIlz has an energy of only
about 10

eV (1.6 > 10 -24 J) or approximately 1.2 x 10

of the energy

required for hydrogen-bond disruption, the latter being at the lower end
of the energy-activation range cited above. AL 100 CTlz, the quanta are
still more than two orders of magnitude too low to cause hydrogen
bond disruption.

Therefore, the existence of non therrna 1 biological

effects of CW RFR ascribable to such short-range molecular interaction
mechanisms is extremely doubtful.
Biological generation of fields having Frequencies in the EL
range (below 100 Hz), such as the el.eeLroencephalogram (EEC), is regarded
as evidence for the occurrence of cooperative or long-range quantum
interactions. Several theoretical models of rieuronaL membranes (e.g.,
Schmitt and Samson, 1969; Fröhlich, 1975a, 1975b; Crodsky,
1976) indicate that activation energies or frequencies for cooperative

processes can be much lower than those for short-range interactions.
The thermal energy corresponding to the physiological temperature
37°C is about 0.027 eV, the spectrum of which encompasses the quantum
frequency range for cooperative processes. Consequently, the question
has been raised whether postulated effects
Ls f weak RIR 011 cooperative
processes, based on Lhooretical models, would be distinguishable from
effects that are spontaneously induced thermally. AlLernat.Lvely,
separation of such RFR interactions from those thermally induced may
require that the rates of occurrence of the former exceed 1110 rates
for the latter. This requirement implies that for manifestation 01
such effects of RFR, the intensity of the incident field must exceed
minimum values or thresholds related to the specific processes.
Because predictions from various theoretical models and related considerations conflict to a significant extent (see Acley and Bawin,
1977; Taylor and Cheung, 1978), the issue of whether weak external
fields at frequencies well below the infrared range (i.e., RFR) can
alter biological processes is not yet resolved.

5-16

5.1.4

Interactions of Modulated RFR
Precise usage of the term CW RFR implies the presence of only a

single frequency and of unvarying power density. Although the RFR incident
from an SPS at a rectenna site and its surroundings is essentially CW,
the presence of the rectenna and reflective objects in its vicinity
produces spatial variations of power density. Moreover, a biological
entity that moves through this spatially varying field will thereby be
exposed to a time-varying or modulated field. Consequently, possible
biological effects ascribable to the modulation characteristics per se
(as distinguished from the effects of time-averaged power densitv) must
also be considered. The occurrence of such effects would require
demodulation and filtering, by the biological entity.
Although stu1ated nonlinear interaction mechanisms (e.g., Adev,
1980; Adey, 1975

Adey and Bawin, 1977) are conjectural, in vitro effects

ascribed to cooperative processes have been reported, notably fie1d-induL'd
increases and decreases of calcium-ion binding to cell membranes of iso1atd
neonate chick brains, a phenomenon called "calcium efflux" (irrespective
of the directiorF the change). Specifically, lower calcium efflux was
reported for chick-brain hemispheres excised, incubated in physiological
solution, and exposed for 20 minutes to fields in the ELF range than for
similarly treated but unexpcsed hemispheres (Sheppard et al., 1979;

Blackman et al., 1979; Bawin and Ade y , 1976b). Statistically significant
results were reported for modulation frequencie q from 6 to 20 Hz, with
highest response at 16 Hz. This phenomenon was not observed wiLli CW
(unmodulated) RFR at 147 MHz (Bawin, Kczmarek, and Adey, 1975) or with
CW (ijnmodulated) RFR at 450 MHz (Bawin, Sheppard, and Adey, 1978a); however,
higher calcium efflux was reported for brain hemispheres exposed to ELFmodulated RFR at these carrier frequencies. The iatter effect was
observed for incident average power densities within the range from 0.1
to 1 mW/crn 2 but not below or above this range, indicating the existence
of a power-density window.' Bawin et al. (1977b) also reported preliminary

results of increased calciuin efflux from the cerebral cortex of the
paralyzed awake cat exposed to 16 Hz-modulated 450 MHz RFR at an incident
power density of 375 iwIem2
The likelihood that a biological entity that moves through the
rectenna area would engender the modulation frequencies and exposure
durations necessary for the calcium efflux phenomenon is negligible.
5-17

5.1.5

Interactions of Pulsed RFR
Although the RFR from an SPS is CW (or quasi-CW If the afore-

mentioned spatial variations within and near a rectenna site are considered), the effects of high pulse power densities at low average power
densities are dLscussd herein because they are often cited as being
"nonthormal" effects.
The Lmpornture rise of any given region within a biological
entity cluc to tho arrival of a single RFR pulse would be small, because
of the relaLively large thermal time constants of biological materials
and the operation of heaL-exchange mechanisms. However, if the region
contains a boundary between layers of widely different dielectric
properties, then the temperature gradient (rate of change of temperature
with distance) can be large at such a boundary even though the mean
temperature rise ot the region is small.
One single-pulse effect known to occur in vivo is the phenomenon
of"microwave hearing" (Frey and Coren, 1979; Frey, 1961) or the
perception of single or repetitive short pulses of RFR as apparently
WON clicks. In human volunteers subjected to pulsed fields at 3
CHz, pulse durations of the order of 10 iis and longer and minimum
pulse power densities of 300 mW/cm 2 were needed for perception (Cain
and Rissnwn 1978), The Interaction mechanisms involved are not yet
compLvtelv understood. However, most of the experimental results tend
to support the theory that pulse perception occurs because of transduction of the electromagnetic energy into sound pressure waves in the
head and normal deLction by the auditory apparatus. In one group of
suggested mechanisms, transduction is postulated to occur at a boundary
between layers that have widely different dielectric properties (e.g.,
at the boundary between the skull and the skin or dura). The energy
in a pulse arriving at such a boundary is converted into an abrupt
increase in momentum that is locally thermalized, producing a negligible
volumetric temperature rise but a large temperature gradient across
the boundary. Under such conditions, rapid local differential expansion
would occur, giving rise to a pressure (sound). wave. This effect is
often characterized as nonthernial because the power density averaged
5-18

over two or more pulses can be miniscule. For example, consider two

successive pulses, each 20 ps in duration and having 1 W/crn 2 pulse
power density (i.o., values well above the threshold). The timeaveraged power density would be proportional to these values but
inversely proportional to the time interval between the arrival of the
pulses at the perceiver. This interval could be indefinitely long
WIthOUL affecting the perception of each pulse. Therefore, the timeaveraged power density has no relevance to perception. Irrespective
of how the microwave-hearing phenomenon is characterized, the significant
point is Lhat the preponderance of experimental evidence indicates that
the pulses are converted into actual sound in the head, rather than
received by direct RFR stimulation of the auditory nerves or the
brain.
As discussed in Section 6, pulsed RFR has been ieported to
produce other effects, such as alterations of the blood-brain barrier
and behavioral changes. However, neither the auditory effect discussed
above nor these other effects are likely to be of concern relative to
tI1( SPS.

5.2 INSTRUMENTATION FOR DENSITOMETRY AND DOS IMETRY
Much of the early laboratory research on bioeffecrs of IFR
suffered from lack of adequate instrumentation for measuring incident
fields or energy absorption rates (e.g., as internal temperature rises
at high incident levels) within biological entities. Moreover, the
availabie instrumentation was often incorrectly used or was the source
of significant errors in numerical values or of spurious biological
finding-; (artifacts) traceable to perturbations introduced by the
presence of the sensors. For these reasons, many of the early results
should be viewed as questionable, at least from a quantitative standpoint.
During recent years, however, major advances have been made in instrumentation, hoth for determining incident-field intensities for biological
research and for determining internal energy-absorption rates.
Considering first the instrumentation for determining incident
fields, a representative device for measuring average power densities
5-19

is the commercially available broadband isotropic monitor (Aslan, 1972).
In

enors con s ist of linear arrays of thermocouple elements, each array

comprising a 1os$y antenna of relatively small length and capable of

ad e quate re s ponse over the frequency range from 300 MHz to 18 GIIz, for
w hi c h a calibration curve is provided by the manufacturer. Isotropic

response is obtained by incorporation of three mutually perpendicular
snsor arrays. To minimize errors in the direct-current output values
of the sensor as s embly caused by possible induction of spurious RF
'irrtit- in the lead wires the wires used are of very high resistivity
(ab o ut 200 kilohms/M). Also, the sensors are only lightly coupled to
Llw incldeni field, so that perturbations of the field caused by
soc a ttering are minimal. The sensors respond to the mean square 01 only
the o l ec tri c component of the field. Nevertheless, the USC of the
instrument for measuring average power densities in the far-field region
is fully juiLified because the ratio of the amplitudes of the electric
,aid ma ^,net j r components has essentially the same value (377 ohms, the
tmpedun" of free space) at all points in that region, and the insLrunant calLhraLed Lo read total average power density. The most sensit ivo model of this instrument has a full-scale range of 200 pW/cm2.
A more recently developed instrument is the National Bureau of

Siiiidard (NBS) Model EDtI-2 Electric Energy Density Meter, designed
lor the 10- to 500- MHz range (Belsher, 1975; Bowman, 1974). Its
sinor consists

of three mutually perpendicular integral dipole-diodes

respond only to the electric component of the
fitd. An 118-inch handle from the sensor contains high-resistivity
1ctc1 wires Lo minimize field perturbation and spurious pickup. The
nit A ensitive range of the instrument is 0.003 uJ/m3 full-scale (equi-.
val nL Lo approximately 176 pW/crn 2 ), and its response time (rise time
plus fall Lime) is about 1 ms in this range.
("ri-ctenn") that also

Field survey instruments of this kind have been analyzed for
possible sources of error (Wacker and Bowman, 1971). Because of the
relatively long response times of such instruments, they cannot be
used for measuring the pulse power densities of short pulses. Therefore,
in research programs on possible bioeffects of pulsed fields, incident

5-20

pulse power densities are usually calculated from measurements of
average power density and duty cycle (or pulse duration

and pulse

repetition frequency) made with commonly available and readily
calibrated components and instrumentation. The use of sophisticated
equipment for directly measuring pulse heights (c;r instantaneous pulse
power densities) at low average power densities in bioeffects resirch
is relatively rare.
fagnetic-field probes have been developed for relatively low
frequency ranges, as exemplified by the two devices developed at NBS for
near-field measurements in the Industrial, Scientific, and Medical
(ISM) bands within the range from 10 to 40 MHz (Greene, 1975). The
probes consist of single-turn, balanced-loop antennas of 10'-cm and
3.16-em diameter for the amplitude ranges of 0.5 to 5 Alm and 5 to 50
Alm, respectively. (The free-space equivalent power density is proportional to the square of the amplitude. For example, the power-density
equivalents to 0.5 and 5 A/m are approximately 10 mW/cm 2 and 1 W/cm4,
respectively.)
The dve1opment of assemblies of electric dipoles and magnetic
loops for simultaneously measuring both components in the near f:eld
for frequencies below 300 MHz was reported from Poland (Babij and
Trzaska, 1976).
Regarding methods for determining whole-body dose rates for
biological entities and dose-rate distributions within such entities
calorimetry for the former and scanning infrared thermography for the
latter (previously discussed in Section 5.1.2) continue to be important
techniques which are applicable primarily to animal carcasses and physical
models of various species constructed from synthetic biological materials.
It is important to note that temperature distributions measured within
a carcass by infrared thermography do not represent the in vivo
temperature distributions for that animal; rather, they correspond to
the incident internal-field distributions.
Probes have been implanted or inserted to measure local RFRinduced temperature changes or fields within animals during irradiation

5-21

in vivo, often with the introduction of artifacts. However, recent
developments of probes have largely diminished the problem of perturbation of the temperature or local field caused by the presence of the
sensor and its lead wires. Such developments have also reduced the size
of readout errors caused by pickup of the incident field in the lead
wires and by the presence of spurious potentials at junctions between
sensors and lead wires. The miniaturized isotropic dipole-diode
probe developed by Bassen and co-workers (Bassen et al., 1975, 1977),
the liquid-crystal/fiber-optic probe developed by Johnson and co-workers
(Johnson et a1., 1975), and the nonmetallic thermocouple developed by
Olsen and Molina (1979) are representative examples of such progress.
Efforts are also being made to reduce errors and artifacts in
measurements of biologically generated fields and potentials--such as the
EEC and the electrocardiogram (EKG)--in the presence of the incident
RFR. Chou and Guy (1979) have developed electrodes that can be Implanted
in the cortex or subcortex for measuring the EEG during chronic exposure
to RFR. These electrodes are made of carbon-loaded teflon that has an
electrical conductivity close to that of tissue, and they have been
shown to be nonpolar, thereby minimizing field perturbations and
spurious local potentials. The electrodes have also been shown to have
good tissue compatibility by histological examination after 4 to 6
months of implantation. Several high-resistivity electrodes have also
been developed by Tyazhelov et al. (1977).
The use of RFR for imaging internal organs is being developed,
notably by Larsen and co-workers. For example, using a pair of waveguide antennas (one for transmitting and the other for receiving)
submerged in water, Larsen and Jacobi (1979) were able to obtain
images of the internals of an excised canine kidney with a resolution
of about 5 mm. The kidney was suspended between the antennas, and the
antennas were slowly moved together in a successive line pattern (raster)
relative to the kidney by a stable electromechanical scanning system.
The frequency used was 3.9 GHz, which corresponds to a wavelength of
about 8.5 mm in water. The use of submerged phased-array antennas to
decrease the scanning time is currently under development.

5-22

6 PRESENT STATE OF KNOWLEDGE REGARDING BIOLOGICAL EFFECTS
6.1 EPIDEMIOLOGY
Several epidemio1oic studies have been done

termine

whether one or more health-related conditions can be associated statistically with chronic exposure to RR. Representative examples of
such studies are presented below. Although none of these studies
involved well-defined RFR. characteristics or exposure durations, they
do represent recent information on possible effects of human exposure
to RFR.
The U.S. Embassy in Moscow has been subjected to RFR since 1953,
the year after the U.S. moved its chancery to Chekovsky Street (Pollack,
1979). Prior to 1963, the presence of RFR was detected intermittently
during routine surveillances of the building, at which time continuous
monitoring of the signals was instituted. A study of the health of
U.S. personnel assigned to the Moscow embassy during the period from
1953 to 1976, compared with the health of those assigned to other U.S.
Eastern European embassies, was conducted by Lilienfeld et al. (1978).
The signal frequencies ranged from 2 to 7 GHz (Pollack, 1979), but
the modulation patterns were not specified. The maximum incident
average power densities and exposure durations varied with the period:
5 pWfcm for 9 hours/day from 1953 to May 1975; 15 pW/cm 2 for 18 hours/day
from June 1975 to February 7, 1976; and less than 1 pW/cm 2 for 18 hours/day
thereafter. The highest average power density reported was 18 pW/cm2
in one part of the southeast corner of the building, where beams from
two sources converged.
After considerable effort spent in tracing employees and
dependents, 1,827 employees and 1,228 dependents were identified as
having been at the Moscow embassy during the 1953-1976 period. The
control population consisted of 2,561 employees and 2,072 dependents
assigned toembassies and consulates in Budapest, Leningrad, Prague,
6-1

Warsaw, Belgrade, Bucharest, Sofia and Zagreb during the same time
period. Periodic tests for RFR at the control sites showed only background levels.
Medical records were reviewed for 1,209 Moscow employees and
834 depnckiiLs. Tho corresponding numbers for the control group were
1,882 and 1,507. FleatLIi questionnaires were returned by 969 Moscow

employe.- and 1,179 conLrol employees. The number of completed
dependent questionnaires is not cftariy specified in the report.
The aiiL1ior of IlLiS stud y recognized and commented on the
Imitations placed on the study b y their inability to acquire complete
n ot, of m'J !-i1 records, dit h irt i licates , and returned health

1 iiniui i rs, and by the imprecision 01 the classification of the
inih'idiiiI frnplDVC5 according to probable extent of radiation exposure.
!iirLhi'rT11ore, Lhv noted that rhe highest exposure levels were recorded

and thr1ore, for the subgroup with the highest
pour, th p period of time during which health effects might become
y
apparenti was tho shorteNt. The also no recl that the size of the study
life iri tho study

lmI)nhnt lim was 1 n,1J1 11 r- j

t< T1Ltc t excess risks that were less than

twofold for uunv of the mod.a1 conditions studied. However, despite
these acknowledged 1inii,tion, the authors were able to draw the
f0 lowing conclusions.
Ther' weri no di irni1i.).. differences between the Moscow and
cini rol groups in 1 a 1 mn ri 1 1 1v or mortality Zrom specific causes,
nor ., ero there dif t (rn(

in mrt-a1 1 tv between the Moscow and control

crt1ps of dependent children r adults. With the exception of caucer-

rc1;ttt.u1 doiths among 1rn.i1v omployee groups (both Moscow and control),
rnortai ftv rate
ratew
the U "

14)r both Mo s cow and control groups were less than for

ipiiLition it largo. Although the study groups were subject

to i 1 i rg' viriotv

ofli 1 1i pr h 1 tms, on the basis of the medical.

r.eord- LIiP prohl , mw --r- shird nearly equally bv both Moscow and

th p Moscow mate employees had a
nq protozoal Infections, and both men

control p routi q with Iwo ex€ption;
thro-frid• O"k

-i Y

Q

'

w

q,

.Erp

found to have slightly higher

6-2

frequencies of most of the common kinds of health conditions reported.
However, the authors could not relate these two exceptions to RFR
exposure. From the health questionnaire information, the authors
reported that there were some excesses in the Moscow employee groups
as compared with the controls: more correctable refractive eye problems,
more psoriasis in men and anemia in women and more frequent cases of
depression, irritability, difficulty in concent rating, and memory 1o.
However, the authors noted that "In view of the possibil:fties which
had been publicized of

the increased danger to their health and that

of their children, it is not at all surprising that the Moscow group
might have had an increase in symptoms such as those reported. However,
no relationship was found between. the occurrence of these symptoms and
exposure to microwaves; in fact, the four symptoms mentioned earlier,
which showed the strongest differences between the Moscow and Comparison
groups, were all fc. 'rid to have occurred most frequently in the group
with the least exposure to microwaves."
For dependents, the authors found no differences between the
adult Moscow and control groups. Moscow dependent children had twice

as high a frequency of mumps as the control children. The incidence of
congenital anomalies occurring in children born after arrival of the
parents at the duty station was comparable for the Moscow and control
groups.
Finally, the authors summarized as follows: "With very few

exceptions, an exhaustive comparison of the health status of the State
and non-State Department employees who had served in Moscow with those
who had served in other Eastern European posts during the same period
of time revealed no differences in health status as indicated by their
mortality experience and a variety of morbidity measures. No convincing
evidence was discovered that would directly implicate the exposure to
microwave radiation experienced by the employees at the Moscow embassy
in the causation of any adverse health effects as of the time of this
analysis."

6-3

Two studies have been made of the possible relationship between
the occurrence of Down's syndrome (Mongolism) in Baltimore and presumed
exposure of the fathers to RFR from radar& during military service
(Sigler et al., 1965; Cohen et al., 1977). The first study involved
216 rn.rngoloid children and 216 control children matched for hospital
of birth (or at home), sex, date of birth, and maternal age at birth,
covering the period from January 1946 to October 1962. The data for
this study were derived from Baltimore hospital records and interviews
with the parents. These data showed that 63.1% of the case fathers and
56.6% of the control fathers had been in the military, but that 8.7%
of the case fathers and only 3.3% of the control fathers had reported
close association with radars (both within and outside of military
service), a statistically significant difference. The authors concluded that "the only truly puzzling association is the suggested
relationship between Mongolism and paternal radar exposure," and that
"one can only speculate concerning possible mechanisms, but the
association between Mongolism and radar exposure deserves further
investigation.
In the second study (Cohen et al., 1977), the data from the first
study, denoted as the "Original Series," were examined together with
data regarding 128 addtiona1 matched pairs, denoted as the "Current
Series." More detailed questions about RFR exposure and military
service were incorporated in the Current Series questionnaires and
service record information on the fathers was acquired. An attempt was
made to acquire similarly detailed data on the fathers of the Original
Series. In addition, a chromosome study of the fathers was undertaken
to determine whether there was any detectable residual damage in the
chromosomes of the peripheral blood. After considering the inorci
detailed exposure information, the following findings were reported
for the Current Series: 15.7% of case fathers and 21.3% of control
fathers had received radar exposure; combining the probably-exposed
with the definitely-exposed groups, the corresponding values were
26.07. and 28.37.. The re-evaluated Original Series values for definitelyexposed fathers were 18.6% for case fathers and 15.2% for controls,
6-4

and when probably-exposed fathers were added the values were 20.6%
and 15.7%.
When the data from the Original Series and from the Current
Series were combined, the values for case vs control fathers were 17.4%
vs 17.5% for defir tely exposed and 22.7% vs 20.6% when " some " exposure
was included. None of the foregoing comparisons showed statistically
significant differences. The results of the chromosome studies have
not been reported yet.
The authors concluded that the Current Series did not confirm
the suggestions of the Original Series that there was either an excess
of radar exposure or a larger proportion of fathers with military
service prior to the conception of the cases of DOWfltS syndrome. The
authors note that "in view of the suggestive findings of the original
series with regard to a possible radar association, it was certainly
necessary to investigate this question further. The initial steps
were taken. A replication study was the simplest and least expensive
immediate approach. Supplementing it with the independent search of
service records added an objective approach eliminating any possible
differential in parental responses. These methods having been attempted
with inconclusive findings, it is now necessary to look to the prospective, longitudinal, surveillance studies to resolve the issue.."
In a study of personnel who had served in the Navy during the
Korean War (Silverman, 1979; Robinette and Silverman, 1977), a group
of approximately 20,000 persons was selected and classified as riaving
had occupational exposure to RFR on the basis of their titles of
Electronics Technician, Fire Control Technician, or rcraft Electronics
Technician; another group of about 21,000 persons was class '-U OS
not having had occupational expoEure because of their ti:
Radarmart, or Aircraft Technicians Mate, For brevity, tF..
was referred to as the control group, even though these p
have had some RFR exposure--presumably much less than the L ' ; .rc -.
Although comparisons with an unexposed group would have strengthette.I
the study, the two groups selected were presumably similar in terms of

6-5

non-RFR factors. The study utilized only extant records, covering
1955 to 1976, of mortality and morbidity (both in service and later
in Veterans Administration hospitals), and of both granted and
disallowed requests for disability compensation.
The report by Robinette and Silverman (1977) provides only
mortality results, which show 619 deaths from all causes for the
occupationally exposed group versus 579 deaths for the control group,
with the difference being not statistically significant. It was noted
that these death rates for both groups were lower than those for the

comparable age group in the U.S. population at large. Examination
of these decedent data in more detail showed a significantly higher
death rate from trauma in the exposed group; however, many of the traumaassociated deaths resulted from military aircraft accidents, and a
higher proportion of the exposed group had subsequently become flyers.
The incidence of deaths associated with arteriosclerotic heart disease
was significantly lower in the exposed group. No significant differences
were noted between the two groups in terms of total mortality or in
terms of mortality from any of about 20 assigned categories of causes
of death.
Although the later report by Silverman (1979) does not furnish
details regarding inorbicll.ty and other 1:'•a1th-re1ated aspects, she did
state:
"Differential health risks associated with potential occupational exposure to radar in the Navy more than 20 years ago
are not apparent with respect to long-term mortality
patterns or hospitali'.ed illness around the period of
exposure, two endpoints for which there is virtually
complete information for the total study group. Later
hospitalization (in Verrans Administration facilities
only) and awards for service-connected disability, the
two other endpoints examined, provide incomplete information.
While some significant differences amon g the occupational
groups classified by level of potential exposure have been
fcind with respect to all the endpoints studied, the
differences could not be interpreted as a direct result
of microwave exposure."

6-6

Peacock et al. (1971) reported that an initial examination of
birth certificates filed during the period from July 1969 to November

1970 from Dale and Coffee Counties, Alabama, in which Fort Rucker is
located, indicated that the number of clubfoot cases among white
babies was much larger than the expected statewide incidence. A more
detailed study of this and other congenital anomalies in the six
counties surrounding Fort Rucker (Calhoun, Henry, Butler, Jefferson,
Dale, and Coffee) showed a higher rate of anomalies among babies born
to military personnel than for the state as a whole. However, for
non-white populations, only Calhoun County had a significant departure
from the expected incidence. No interpretation in terms oF causal
factors for the excess incidences was given.
Burdeshaw and Schaffer (1977) re-analyzec1. the Alabama birth
record anomaly data for 1968-1972, but instead of using statewide
averages as control data, they compared the Coffee and Dale County
data with those of each of the other 64 Alabama counties on a score
and rank basis. In addition, to acquire more detailed information on
hospital characteristics and reporting procedures, they sent questionnaires to 46 Alabama hospitals. They used that information to predict
expected values for Lyster General Hospital . The y found that the two
highest hospital anomaly rates were from Fort Rucker and Mnxwel 1 AFB
(both military aviation centers) and that 13 of 17 Alabama counties
with anomaly rates in the upper quartile were in a contiguous band
from southeast to west-northwest Alabama, which indicited the existence
of a geographically distributed anomaly problem. 'However, the y also
found evidence against the conclusion that there was an unusually high
anomaly incidence rate specifically in the Fort Rucker area: overall
rates for Coffee and Dale Counties ranked only sixth and eighth among
the 67 Alabama counties; at least five other Alabania Iiosptais reported
anomaly incidences that were 1101 significantly lower Lhan for Lystti
Hospital; Lyster's overall rate was wiLIiiri predicted limits for
hospitals with its characteristics; there was no clustering of residences
of mothers with anomalous children in the vicinity of radar sites;
carefully controlled surveys from other (non-Alabama) hospitals
revealed anomaly incidences consistent with Tyster's; and significant
time-clustering of anomalies at J..yster indicated a high reporting rate
for one or two particular physicians. I Lu11_1Ui0fl, th±y stat i!
6-7

that on the basis of the birth record data, it could not be concluded
that an unusually large number of infants with congenital anomalies
were born to military personnel at Fort Rucker or to other residents
in the immediate area.
Siekierzynski (1974) compared the causes of unfitness for work
and incidences of lens translucency and of several neurotic disturbances
in 507 Polish male radar station workers occupationally exposed to
more than 200 pW/dm2 with those for a group of 334 men at the same
radar stations exposed to less than this value for periods ranging
from 2 to 16 years. No correlations were found between the degree of
exposure or the duration of employment and any of the criteria of
effect. The author states that no appropriate control (unexnosed)
group was available and that the two groups were highly matched except
for exposure intensity.
Kalyada et al. (1974) related narrative clinical evidence
indicating that several symptoms were observed in people occupationally
exposed to "non-thermal intensities" of RFR at 40 to 200 MHz for
periods ranging from 1 to 9 years. The symptoms were described as
vegetative dysfnnction of the CNS, thermoreguiatory pathology, cardiovascular changes, elevation of plasma cholesterol, and gastritis and
ulcers. The authors referred to statistically significant changes,
but did not present any actual statistical data. They also referred
to control subjects, but the incidences of these symptoms in exposed
workers were not compared with those in the general population.

6-8

Klimkova-Deutschova (1974) surveyed various industrial worker
populations, including metal welders, steel factory workers, plastic
welders, technicians operating radio or television transmitters, and
people working in research institutes and other industries that involve
exposure to RFR. Miscellaneous administrative staff members were
studied for comparison. Frequencies varied according to the place of
exposure, ranging from 1 to 150 MHz, 300 to 800 MHz, or 3 to 30 GHz.
The power densities, where specified, ranged from 100 to 3,300 ijW/cm2.
The observations involved 530 people. The findings included electroencephalographic disorders (consisting of synchronized waves of high
amplitude and slow rhythm) and biochemical changes (such as elevation
of fasting blood glucose, serum beta-lipoprotein, and cholesterol).
Changes in brain-wave patterns and in blood sugar, protein, and
cholesterol levels were described as more pronounced in the people
exposed in the 3-30 GHz range.
Sadclkova (1974) summarized data for two groups of USSR RFR
workers; 1,000 people who were subjected to up to a few thousand
microwatts/cm 2 and 180 workers who were exposed to up to a few tens of
microwatts/cm2 were compared with a group matched for age and character
of work but not exposed to RFR. (Note that although the Soviet
occupational standard for exposure to RFR is 10 microwatts/cm2,
Sadcikova was able to locate 1,000 people exposed to up to several
hundred times this level.) Of 16 kinds of symptoms reported, the
incidences were higher for the higher-power-density group in five cases,
higher for the lower-power-density group in nine cases, and essentially
equal in two cases. Values of symptoms for the control group were
less than those for at least one of the two exposed groups in all
16 cases. Symptoms reported included fatigue, irritability, sleepiness,
partial loss of memory, bradycardia, hypertension, hypotension, cardiac
pain, and systolic murmur. A table in the report describes 100 cases
of "microwave sickness," and the text predicts little chance for
recovery unless the patient is removed from the work environment.

6-9

Pazderova (1971) reported on the results of a battery of medical
evaluations carried out on 58 employees of Czech television tilnsmitter
stations. Exposure frequencies were estimated to range from 48.5 to 230 MHz
at field intensities equivalent to 0 to 22

with a mean exposure

1urati..n of 7.2 years (10.6 hours/workday). Electrocardiograms, heart and
lung X-rays, erythrocyte sedimentation rates, urinalyses, and liver
function tests were conducted as well as hematologic, serologic,
ophthalmologic, neurologic, gynecologic, psychiatric, and psychologic
examinations. The only statistically significant finding was that the
mean plasma protein levels were higher than UflOt1lI values taken from
the literature, a finding that even the author finds unexplainable.
The appropriateness of the use of literature control values is highly
questionable, and the author notes the desirability of a control group
matched for "age, way of life and educational background."
The U.S., Polish, and Czechoslovakian studies offer no evidence
of detrimental effects associated with exposure of the general population
to RFR. Consistent with the voluminous, earlier Soviet literature, the
Soviet studies offer findings that occupational exposure to RFR at
average power densities less than 10 riW/cm 2 does result in various
symptoms, particularly those associated with CNS disorders. Because
the USSR symptoinatology has never been reported in Western studies
and because there are marked differences between Soviet and Western
publications in the procedures used for reporting data, any prediction
of possible RFR hazards based on the USSR epidemiological studies
would require acceptance of these Soviet findings at face value.
Overall, the epidemiological evidence does not offer any reliable
evidence that the ordinary level of exposure of humans within the rectenna
area of SPS (0.01 to 1.0 mW/cm 2 ) would cause any harm. The major
exception is that persons required to climb above the rectenna system
might be exposed to as much as 22 rnW/cm 2 , and for this level of exposure
there are no human data

6-10

6.2 GENETIC AND CYTOGENETIC EFFECTS AND CANCER INDUCTION
Although a number of papers published over the last 30 years
have claimed that microwave irradiation at various frequencies can
produce mutations, chromosome aberrations, and cancer, a careful review
of the various papers indicates that all of the reported effects are
probably due to temperature rise, faulty experimental procedure, or
other incidental causes.
Direct mutation studies have been conducted in bacteria, fruit
flies, and mice. The study in bacteria (Blackman, 1976) involved
exposure of E. coli WWU to 1.70 or 2.45 GHz at 2 to 50 mW/cm 2 for 3 to
4 hours. The results were negative--there was no increase in mutations
over controls. Two separate studies in Drosophila (Mickey, 1974;
Dardalhon, 1977) also had negative results. A third study (Pay and
Beyer, 1972) found no evidence of microwave-induced mutation in
Drosophila and also found no consistent evidence of an effect of microwaves on reproductive capacity of Drosophila. Two studies of
mutagenesis in mice, osing a dominant lethal assay, gave conflicting
results. In tha first study (Varma et al., 1975a, 1975b), male mice
were exposed to microwave radiation (1.7 CHz, 50 inW/cm 2 , 30 min, or
10 mW/cm 2 , 80 min; and 2.45 GHz, 100 mW/cm2 , 10 min, or 50 mW/cm 2 for
3 X 10 min in one day or 4 X 10 min in 2 weeks) and then bred to
unexposed females once a week for the next 7 to 8 weeks. The females
were killed on the 13th day of gestation, and the uteri were removed
and examined for numbers of implants and early embryonic deaths. The
authors concluded that the 1.7-GHz radiation was mutagenic at both
power-density levels, but that the 2.45-GBz radiation was mutagenic
only for the 100 mWIcm 2 power-densiLy level. In the second study
(Berman and Carter, 1978), mice were exposed to microwaves (425 MHz
and 2.45 GHz, 5 to 28 mW/cm 2 ) in repeated daily exposures for periods
of up to 3 months. The authors found no evidence of either dominant
lethai mutations or reduced fertility. Review of the first study
shows that there was a discrepancy in the rate of occurrence of
spontaneous mutations in control mice for the two power-density levels

6-11

(1% vs 5%) and an error in the statistical ccnnputation. Taken as a
whole, the study indicates that there might have been a marginal
increase in early fetal deaths (dominant lethais) at 1.7 G1z; however,
because of the discrepancy in control values at the two frequencies,
the result can be considered unproven. Considering both Ltudies
together, it appears likely that mutagenic effects ir mi'e, if they
exist at all, are the result of temperature rise in the testes rather
than showing any intrinsic inutagenic potential of the microwaves.
Cytogenetic studies have included observation of chromosome
aberrations in a variety of cell types and sister chromatid eehange
in Chinese hamster ovary cells. In the study r sister chromatid
exchange (Livingston et al., 1977), exposure ' .o3)..s in vitro to
2.45-GHz microwaves did cause a rise in nuil :

xchaTges, but the

effect was clearly the result of a rise in tLe ternpeature of the
medium. Two studies reported observation of chromosome aberrations
in cells following microwave exposure of the cells in vitro. In the
first study (Chen et al.,, 1974), Chinese hamster cells and human
amnion cells were exposed to 2.45-GHz microwaves at 200 to 500 mW/cm2
for 1.5 to 20 minutes. There was no significant difference iri the
incidence of chromosome aberrations between control cultures and
cultures exposed at any dose level for either cell type. In the
second study (Stodolnik-Baranska, 1974b), human lymphocyte cultures
were exposed to 2.95-GHz microwaves at 20 or 7 nW/cm 2 . Exposure at
20 mW/cm2 caused a rise in temperature of the culture medium and an
increase in the number of chromosome ab'rrations, but neither of these
effects occurred on exposure at 7 mW/crn.
Chromosome aberrations have also been reported

in cells of

garlic root-tips and in lung and bone marrow cells and spermatogonia
of Chinese hamsters exposed to microwaves in vivo (Helier, 1959;
Mickey et al., 1975). The dosimetry is described very poorly in both
reports, and the experimental procedures are de..cribed very poorly
in the second report; hence evaluation of the work

±8 rather

difficult.

However, the studies involved exposures in the region of 10 co 30 GHz

6••-12

at power-density levels ranging up to 600 mW/cm 2 for long periods of
time. Again, it appears doubtful that microwaves actually caused any
chromosomal aberrations. Considering all of the studies together,
the results indicate that, where the reports are reliable, the cytogenetic effects of microwave radiation are solely the result of heat
produced by the irradiation and do not indicate any intrinsic tnutagenic
potential of microwaves.
Although mutagenic effects of environmental agents are considered
potentially deleterious, the principal reason for concern about mutagenesis at the present time is that it may indicate carcinogenic
potential (Ames et al., 1979). A review of the literature reveals
only three papers indicating the possibility of cancer induction by
microwave irradiation. The first paper (Zaret, 1976) stated that the
incidence of cancer in the human population of the Karelia district of
Finland had increased following installation of an extensive rath:r
warning system in an adjacent region of the USSR. Since the statement
was not supported by any data on cancer incidence, it can be disregarded.
The second paper (Prausnitz and Susskind, 1962) reported a somewhat
higher incidence of leukosis in mice chronically exposed to microwaves
(9.27 GHz, 100 mW/cm 2 , 4.5 minutes/day, 59 weeks), which was described
as "cancer."
In reviewing the reported finding, the following points have been
noted:
• Tissues from a number of animals dying during the study
were lost because of autolysis. Hence the finding of
leucosis is based on incomplete groups.
• Leucosis means an abnormally high leukocyte count in
the circulating blood, and can arise from a variety of
causes, including—possibly—action of microwaves on
the immunological or endocrine systems.
• Some of the mice in the study were sacrificed, and
sections of spLen were examined for presence of leukemia.
Thete was no difference in leukemia incidence between
experimental and control animals.
6-13

• The authors noted that the survival of the microwaveexposed animals was somewhat longer than that of the
controls, and speculated on whether a brief daily
exposure to microwaves might actually be beneficial
to animals.
The third paper (Dwyer, 1978) is a review of the potentially
carcinogenic properties of microwave irradiation prepared for the
Nacional Institute of Occupational Safety and Health under contract with
the Franklin Institute. The review covers most of the papers reviewed
in this section, but contains no critical analysis of power density
levels, sources of data, reliability of conclusions, or validity of
experimental procedures; hence no inference about potential carcinogenicity of microwaves can be drawn from it.
In conclusion, there is no reiiabble or systematic evidence that
microwave irradiation can induce any type of mutation in living systems
other than—possibly—by induction of heat in the tissue under examination. The mechanism by which temperature rise could induce apparent mutagenic effects is not understood. Possibly an increase in temperature
accelerates the rate of spontaneous mutagenic processes in the tissue.
There is no evidence that microwave irradiation induces cancer. On the
whole the specter of mutation or cancer from microwave irradiation can
probably be laid to rest as nonexistent.
Since there appear to be no intrinsic mutagenle or carcinogenic
effects of microwaves, the problem of such effects can be dismissed
for the ordinary level of exposure of humans within the recterrna area of
SPS (0.01 to 1.0 mW/cm2 ). For persons who might occasionally be
2
exposed above the rectenna to the full beam power (22 mW/cm
), it is
hypothetically possible that heai-induced mutations or cytogenetic
eifects might occur. Uowever, only one out of seven biological studies
reported mutations, and all of the cytogenetic studies involved isolated
cells that lacked any capacity for control of temperature rise, such
as would be found in mammalian tissues in vivo. Hence, induction of
mutations or cytogenetic effects in humans by the full beam power of
SPS must be considered highly improbable.

6-14

6.3 STUDIES ON TERATOGENESIS AND DEVELOPMENTAL AENOLMPLITIES
In the narrowest sense of the word, teratogenesis refers to the
production of anatomical aberrations in a developing fetus. The term
is most often applied to development of mammalian fetuses, but studies
of development of eggs of birds and the pupae of the darkling beetle,
Tenebrio mo]3.tor, have also been performed with microwave radiation.
Although the term usually refers to anatomical anomalies, studies have
also included observation of fetal death and/or resorption and of
physiological and cellular abnormalities in the offspring observed
postpartum.
Two critical remarks are pertinent to studies of
teratogenesis in general. First, the ordinary mechanism
by which terata are usually produced involves alteration
(often temporary) in the rate of growth of a particular tissue under
development. Development of the entire fetus is a complex process
requiring that individual tissues develop within a preset time frame,
and interruption of this timing will result in abnormalities because
a particular tissue or organ fails to complete development on schedule.
Because of this, production of abnormalities is highly dependent on
time in the gestation sequence when the agent is applied and an the
species of animal under study. The second remark is that there is a
difference in experimental circumstances in studying development of
birds' eggs or insect pupae, as contrasted with thj study of mammalian
teratogenesis. In the former instance, the experimental mat:eriai is
exposed to the whole environment without any protection; hence the
studies must include rigorous control of all environmental parameters,
including temperature. In the latter instance, the developing fetus
is isolated from the environment to some extent by the dam; however,
influences of the noxious agent on the dam must be considered as a
potential indirect source of teratogenic effect.
A number of studies have been conducted on the induction of
teratogenesis in pupae of Tenebrio. The two most recently published
studies (Green et al., 1979; Pickard and Olsen, 1979) will be discussed

6-15

here. These studies reviewed previously published work and commented
on the variability and inconsistency of results. Green and co-workers
showed that teratogenic effect was partly dependent on the humidity
of the environmental chamber, which affected the rate of loss of water
from the pupae during irradiation. They observed that there was
slight increase in incidence of terata with increasin g applied microwave
power (2-hour constant exposure) up to 40 mW of applied power. At
80 mW there was a decrease in teratogenic frequency, and at 160 and
320 mW there was a further increase in teratogenic frequency, accompanied
by an increase in death of pupae before completion of development.
The authors attributed the apparent "power window" at 80 mW to an
antagonism between nonthermal teratogenic effects and protective effects
caused by the rise in temperature. The second study showed that the
incidence of teratogenesis in the pupae depended on a number of factors
including the source of the larvae, the diet on which they were raised,
and the conditions under which the pupae were maintained during
development.
Taken together, the studies ir1icaLe that teratogenesis in
Tenebrio pupae depends on such a wide variety of environmental influences
that the use of such a model for studying microwave teratogenesis is
questionable. The existence of the "power window" at 80 mW is quite
interesting, but the effect canbe explained by a number of possible
causes other than that offered by the authors. In the first place,
the assertion of nonthermal effects below 80 mW is unproven, since
the authors show (Figure 5, p. 169 in Green et al., 1979) thac 40 mW
of power produces a rise in temperature. One possible explanation is
that at 80 mW under the conditions of the experiment, the irradiation
induces a water loss from the pupae to a level that renders the pupae
relatively resistant to teratogenesis.
Fisher et al. (1979) studied the development of chicken embryos
during a 4- or 5-day continuous exposure to microwaves (2.45 GHz, 1.4
and 6.2 inW/cin 2 ). The eggs were exposed to a gradient of incubator
temperatures from 32 to 36°C, and the stage of development of the

6-16

embryos was observed at the end of the exposure. In the control eggs,

the rate of development was dependent on the temperature; however, this
was not so for the microwave-exposed eggs. The authors observed no
difference in incidence of sterility or premature deaths between the
two groups. From the description of the method it is difficult to determine whether the temperature of the microwave-exposed eggs were actually
measured or whether possible differences in temperatures of microwavexposed eggs might have existed because of inhoinogeneity of the microwave field. Finally, the significance of the 1 iuding in relation to
possible human hazard is unclear, since the embryos were not carried to
hatching.
In Japanese quail embryos exposed to continuous microwave radiation
(2.45-GHz, 5 mW/cm 2 ) during the first 12 days of development, there
were no gross deformities at hatching (McRee and Hamrick, 1977), The
investigators did find a slight increase in blood hemoglobin and a slight
decrease in monocyte count in the exposed birds, as compared with
controls. A further study (Hamrick et al., 1977) showed that exposed
male birds were sligh.. :.y smaller than control birds at 4 and 5 weeks of
age. The

nificance of these findings for human health is questionable.

Teratogenic effects of microwaves have been reported for a number
of studies in rats and mice. The subject was reviewed recently by
O'Connor (1980), who observed that, because of the high power density
levels employed, the probability of killing the dam was somewhat larger
than the probability of producing a teratogenic effect. The only major
study in which a significant number of terata were produced without
significant mortality 01 the dams was that of Rngh et al. (1975). These
researchers exposed pregnant CF-1 mice on the eighth day of gestation
to 2.45-GHz radiation at a power density level of about 120 mW/cm for
two to five minutes. Mice were sacrificed on the 18th day of gestation,
and the fetuses were examined for gross abnormalities and evidence of
resorption. The authors described several visible abnormalities, but
reported only on the incidence of exencephaly--an abnormality in which
the skull fails to close, leaving the brain exposed. There appear to
have been no controls; however, exencephaly is a comparatively rare

6-17

anomaly, so the absence of control incidence is, in this study, probably
inconsequential.
The authors claimed that microwave radiation did not produce a linear
relationship between exencephaly and absorbed dose, and that there was no
evidence cf a threshold effect. To test these statements,we extracted
the data or incidence of exencephaly (Figure 8, page 232 of the paper)
and re-analyzed them. The doses and incidences of eencepha1y were
determined for each point in the figure and, from the litters showing
exencephaly, the numbers of affected pups and litter sizes were calculated. Litter size could be determined only from the litters showing
partial response, but the mean value of 56 such litters as 10 pups per
litter. This value was used in all subsequent calculations.
The microwave doses in the experiment were spread out more or
less on a continuum from 3 to 8 Cal./gram. To facilitate analysis, we
grouped the litters by dose intervals of 0.5 Cal./gram, and the mean dose
of the interval. Some inaccuracy may have arisen in the count of the
number of zero-responders, because points for these litters were plotted
quite densely along the X-axis of the figure. Where the plot was
represented by a solid line, we assumed that there was one litter for
each 0.045 U. /rn dose interval. It is doubtful that the uncertainty
of litter count would significantly affect the conclusions of our
analysis.
The results of this analysis are presented in Table 6-1 and
Figure 6-1. When the results are considered in terms of fraction of
litters showing e, cncepha1y, the incidence increases with increasing
dose to a level of about 50% of the litters, after which there is no
systematic inciease. When the results are considered in terms of the
fraction of the total pups affected, the incidence rises linearly with
increasing dose over the entire range. From both viewpoints of
analysis, there is an apparent threshold at slightly less than 4 Cal./
gram. From a linear regression of the points for fraction of

6-18

T&'le 6-1
INCIDENCE OF EXENCEPHALIES IN MICE
EXPOSED IN UTERO TO MICROWAVE PADIATION
ON THE EIGHTH DAY OF GESTATION

Dose Range Mean Dose* No. of
Cal./g - Litters
Cal./g

No. cf
Pups

Litters with
Exencephaly
Fraction

Pups with
Exencephaly
No. Fraction

3.0-3.45

3.32

6

60

0

0

0

0

3.5-3.95

3.72

10

100

0

0

0

0

4.0-4.45

4.24

13

130

2

0.154

2

0.0154

4.5-4.95

4 72

15

150

4

0.267

6

0.0400

5.0-5.45

5.27

15

150

5

0.333

7

C.0467

5.5-5.95

5.74

22

220

11

0.500

17

0.0773

6.0-6.45

6.27

20

200

9

0.450

11

085')

6.5-6.95

6.75

22

220

12

0.546

7.0-7.45

7.18

16

160

8

0.500

21

0.1313

7.5-7.95

7.61

11

110

5

0.454

12

0.1031

0.0773

* Extracted from Rugh et al. (1975). Standard deviation range:
0.10-0.16.

6-19

w
Q
-= v,
4' w
V)
L- .
0
4-' L)
4J

r-

1.00

0.50

Uj

0.25

0

4-r
o-

0.12

CL

wu
0.09
rd 4-

4'

0.06

o•r- 0)
CL

u.o
9s-w

1..>

0

2.0

4.0

6.0

80

Mean Microwave Dose (Cal ./g)

FIGURE 6-1 PRODUCTION OF FETAL EXENCEPHALIES IN MICE BY EXPOSURE TO
MICROWAVE RADIATION (adapted from Rugh et al., 19759
Figure 8, page 232)

6-20

affected pups an dose, the apparent threshold dose was calculated to be
3.6 Cal./gram.
The incidence of resorption sites in the uteri of microwave-exposed
mice (Figure 8, page 231 of the paper) was also analyzed by the procedures
described above.

The results of the analysis are presented in Table 6-2

and Figure 6-2. Whether the incidence of resorptions is considered in
terms if fraction of the number of litters affected or fraction of the
total number of implantations affected, the result is the same: the
incidence rises linearly with increasing microwave dose. Again,

there

is a suggestion of a dose threshold, calculated to be between 1.5 and
3.5

Cal./gram.
Another extensive study of teratogenesis in mice was conducted

by Berman et al. (1978), who exposed mice to 2.45-GHz microwaves at
power-density levels of 3.4 to 28 mW/cin 2 for 100 minutes per day during
most of the period of gestation. The study found 27 anomalies among
3,362 live fetuses exposed to microwaves, as compared to 12 among 3,528
sham-irradiated controls. Overall, this would indicate a marginal
teratogenic effect of the microwaves. Because of the small incidence
of each individual anomaly and the absence of a consistent doseresponse pattern, it is impossible to demonstrate conclusively that the
anomalies result from the microwave exposure.
Several studies have been conducted or are in progress (Reiter,
1976; Rosenstein, 1976; Kaplan et al., 1978) to determine effects of
microwave exposure in utero in the power-density range of 0.1 to
10 mW/cm on the neurological and behavioral development of animals
following parturition. Full reports have not been available for review,
but abstracts or summaries have indicated negative results.
In summary, teratogenic effects of microwave radiation appear to
occur reliably only at relatively high power-density levels, probably
greater than 28 mwlc in
2 . In relation to the problem of SPSS, IL appears

6-21

Table 6-2
INCIDENCE OF RESORPTION SITES IN UTERI
OF PREGNANT NICE EXPOSED TO MICROWAVES
ON THE EIGHTH DAY OF PREGNANCY

Dose Range Mean Dose* No. of
Cal./g
Litters
Cal./g

No. of
Pups

Litters with
Resorp tions
!9.• Fraction

sobed
No. Fraction
Pups

3.0-3.45

3.27

1

10

0

0

0

0

3.5-3.95

3.72

16

160

5

0.312

7

0.0438

4.0-4.45

4.23

17

170

6

0.353

10

0.0588

4.5-4.95

4.76

23

230

12

0.522

32

0.1391

5.0-5.45

5.30

29

290

20

0.690

43

0.1483

5.5-5.95

5.70

32

320

24

0.750

91

0.2844

6.23
6.0-6.45

20

200

15

0.750

64

0.3200

6.70
6.5-6.95

25

250

23

0.920

74

0.2960

7.20
7.0-7.45

16

160

15

0.938

65

0.4062

7.59
7.5-7.95

8

80

5

0.625

25

0.3125

* Extracted from Rugh et al. (1975). Standard deviation range;
0.08-0.15.

6-22

1.00

0
(1) 4-

0.5

cu S0
4J u
(ii
.
tl
Q)
0 s-

0.50

o

0
.,4-°
U
rW

0.25

0
0.4
0

-0 .-

0.3
w
re:, V)

I—O-

0.2

0)

Q

'a

0.1

to p1

0
0

2.0

4.0

6.0

8.0

Mean Microwave Dose (Cal./g)

FIGURE 6-2 PRODUCTION OF FETAL RES0RPT0NS IN MICE BY EXPOSURE TO
MICROWAVE RADIATION (adapted from Ruqh et al . 1975,
Figure 7, p. 231)

6-23

very likely that neither the ordinary level of exposure of humans
(0.01 to 1.0 inW/cm 2 ) nor the maximum level (22 niW/cm 2 ) would cause any
teratogenlc effect in humans.

6-24

6.4

OCULAR EFFECTS

6.4.1

Animals
During the past 30 years, various investigations have been

conducted on the effects of RFR exposure an the eyes of live experimental animals. Many of the results indicate that lntraocular temperature increases of about 5°C or more are necessary for eye damage (Guy
et al., 1974; Williams at al., 1955; Daily et al., 1952; Richardson
at al., 1948). Also, lens opacifications caused by RFR exposure
alone were not produced at the same average power density when the eye
was cooled (Kramar at al., 1975; Baillie at al., 1969a, 1969b).
Many of the results of RFR exposure indicate the reciprocity
(inverse relationship) between average power density and exposure
duration for cataract formation and the existence of a threshold
average power density of about 150 mW/cm 2 for single or multiple
exposures for tens of minutes or more (Carpenter, 1977; Ferri and Foti,
1977; Guy at al., 1969; Williams at al., 1955). As a representative
example (Guy et al., 197), for average power densities decreasing
from about 500 to 200 mW/cm 2 , the exposure duration needed for causing
eye damage in the rabbit increased from 1-2 minutes to about 20 minutes.
Also, cataracts were not produced at 100 mW/cm 2 for exposure durations
of up to at least 100 minutes (exposures for longer periods were not
done in this investigation). Thus, curves of average power density
versus exposure duration show that the average power density for
cataractogenesis asymptotically approaches a value of about 150 mW/cm2
(the aforementioned threshold). Cataractogenesis thresholds of comparable magnitude are evident from the experimental results of others
(Carpenter, 1977; Birenbaum at al., 1969; Williams at al., 1955).
Carpenter (1979), in reviewing RFR cataractogenesls from a clinical
viewpoint, presents a detailed description of the post-irradiation
progression of eye changes, based on experimental results with animals.
Kramar at al. (1975) measured intraocular temperatures in vivo
at 200 rnW/cin 2 over a period of 40 minutes by quickly inserting a
thermocouple probe during brief shut-off of the RFR at the end of

6-25

successive fi;-minute exposure periods. They found that the tempttature of the vitreous humor rose from about 37°C to about 42°C during
the first 10 minutes of exposure and remained at 42°C for the re't 9f
the exposure period. Equilibrium between the rates of energy absorption
and heat removal in that region of the eye is believed to be the determining factor in attaining the 42°C plateau temperature. In the orbit,
which is cooled by blood flow to a greater extent than the vitreous
humor, the correspnding plateau temperature was less than 40°C.
Tho efLec's of temperature increases produced by non-RFR
means c,n isolated (in vitro) rat lenses were studied recent 'v by
Stewart-DeHaan et al. (1979). Lenses incubated in tissue u1ture
medium M 199 (containing 10% fetal calf serum) at the normal physiological temperature of 37°C maintained their clarity for up to two
weeks. When ten times the normal concentration of serum glucose was
included in the medium, opacities and associated globular degeneration
of the lens cells developed in ine da y . Similar effects were observed
when lenses were warmed to 39 or 41°C for one hour and then incubated
at 37% for 24 hours. Lenses heated to 60 or 75°C for one hour
did not become opaque. The authors surmise that the lenses became
histologically "fixed." Radioactive tracer studies suggest that
membrane changes may be involved in temperature-induced cataract
formation.
A number of investigators (Ferri and Foti, 1977; Reider et
al., 1971; Richardson et al. 1951) compared the ocular effects of
pulsed and CW RFR at equivalent average power densities. In representative investigations, the average power densities were greater
than 100 m1/cm 2 and the exposures were for about 1 hour/day for several
weeks. No significant differences between the effects of pulsed and
CW RFR were found.
The existence of a cataractogeiiesis threshold of about 150
mW/cm 2 is regarded as evidence that single or multiple exposure for
indefinitely long durations at average power densities well below the
threshold would not cause eye damage to humans or any other species.

6-26

This conclusion is supparled by preliminary results of an inve;3tigation by Chou et al. (1978). They exposed one group of six rabbits to
2.45 CHz CW at 1.5 mW/cm 2 for two hours per day over several months
and another group to pulsed RFR at the same frequency and average power
density (10-1.i s pulses at a repetition rate of 100 pulses/s, comprising
o duty cycle of 0.001 and a pulse power density of 1.5 W/cm 2 ); a third
group was sham-irradiated. Periodic eye examinations for cataract
formation yielded no statistically significant differences among the
three groups. (This investigation also included comparisons of body
weights, EEC and evoked potentials, hematology, and blood serum
chemistry; no significant differences were found among the groups for
these aspects either.)
6.4.2

Humans
Some cases of ocular damage in humans ascribed to occupational

exposure to RFR were reported during the 25 years following the end
of World War 11 (Zaret, 1969; Shimkovich and Shilyaev, 1959; Hirsh
and Parker, 1952). Although the exposure histories of these individuals
could not be ascertained with any degree of certitude, it is likely
that their actual or incipient vision impairment was due to exposure
to average power densities well above the threshold.
More recently, the occurrence of cataraLt. :3 in two editors with
the New York Times was ascribed, in newspaper accounts during 1977 and
1978, to their exposure Lo supposed RFR from the cathode-ray tubes in
video-display terminals used by them (Justesen, 1979).

(Cases of RFR-

induced birth defects and abortions were also linked, in other newspaper
stories, to exposure to video terminals.) The New York Times arranged
for measurement surveys of the terminals in question. These surveys
yielded negative results; the only measurable radiations emitted by the
terminals were well above the RFR spectrum (primarily in the visible
range). Independent surveys of the same t erminals by personnel from the
National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (1977, cited in
Justesen, 1979) confirmed these findings.

6-27

Several retrospective epidemiological studies were performed, notably
by Zatet et al. (1961), Cleary et al. (1965), and Appleton (1973), to
ascertain whether chronic exposure to RFR could cause cataracts.
Zaret et al. (1961) examined a group of 475 persons for eye
defects, who were believed to have been exposed to RFR at 11 military
and non-military establishments, and a group of 359 persons as controls.
The investigators found a slight but statistically significant difference
in defect scores between the two groups, but expressed some doubt
regarding the full validity of the scoring method used.
Cleary et al. (1965) examined Veterans Administration Hospital
records of 2,946 Army and Ar Force veterans of World War 11 and the
Korean War who had been treated for cataracts. A control sample of
2,164 veterans was selected. Based on military occupational specialties,
they classified each individual as a radar workers, oras nonradar
workers, or one whose specialty could not be discerned. In the radar
group, they found 19 individuals with cataracts and 2,625 individuals
without cataracts, whereas in the nooradar group, there were 21 individuals with cataracts and 9,935 individuals without cataracts. (The
remaining 510 individuals were in the unspecified occupational category.)
These differences between the radar and nonradar groups are not statistically significant. Cleary and Pasternack (1966) statistically analyzed
the records of 736 microwave workers and 559 control persons for minor

lens changes, using a scoring range from 0 to 3. They reported that the
defect scores increased with age for persons in both groups, but that
the average score for the microwave group was significantly higher
than for the control group. They suggested that this finding is an indication that exposure to RFR may have an aging effect on the lens.

How-

ever, no cataracts or decrease of visual acuity were found.

In the Appleton (1973) study, which covered a period 01 five years,
military personnel identified as having been occupationally exposed to
RFR from radar and communications systems were matched as closely as
possible in age and sex with other military personnel on the same bases

who had not been occupationally exposed. Several ophthalmologists
independently examined exposed and control personnel (without know1dge

6-28

as to the group to which each individual belonged) for opacities,
vacuoles, and posterior subcapsular iridescence, taken as diagnostic
precursors of cataracts. Because of the complexity of the eye and theunavoidable judtnenta1 aspects in the diagnosis of each exanining
ophLha1nio1ugist each preiursor was scored as either present or absent
in cacti individual, and the binary data thus obtained were used for
rat1stica1 analvses by age group and numbers of persons per age group.
The results indicated that more people 111 older age groups exhibited
these precursors, but he pooled data from several Army installations
showed no statistically significant differences between exposed and
control groups. The p resence or absence of the three diagnostic precursors is only a crude measure of actual or possible incipient eye dama,
useful primarily for statistical purposes. Nevertheless, the findings of
no statisticai differences between exposed and control groups are probably
valid.
The principal investigator recognized the judgmental aspects by
citing the results of two of the ophthalmologists who had examined the
personnel at Tyndall AFB. These ophthalmologists scored the presence
of opacities in 967 of the personnel in the exposed group and 93% in
the control group. However, they also concluded that "o optically
significant opacities were found in either group,' 'ich illustrated
he point emphasized by the principal Investigator that the presence of
any of the precursors did not necessarily mean that significant vision
impairment had occurred.
As with other retroective epidemiological studies, the extent of
the exposure histories (frequencies, intensities, durations, etc.) in
either the exposad or the control groups used in these three studies is
difficult to determine accurately. However, it is quite likely that the
exposed groups did receive more RFR exposure than the control groups.
The results support the conclusion from animal studies that chronic
exposure to RFR at average power densities weli below the threshold Is
not likelv to produce cataracts. The threshold power density indicated
from the animal studies is of the order of 100 mW/crn 2 or more. Within
the rectenna area of SPS, neither the exposure (0.01 to 1.0 m141cm 2 ) nor
the maximum exposure (23 mWJcm 2 ) has any realistic probability of
inducing catarGcts in workers in the area.
6-29

6.5

NERVOUS SYSTEM STUDIES

E.5.1

RER Hearing Effect
Humans In the vicinity of scrne types of pulsed radar systems

have perceived individual pulses of RFR as audible clicks (without the
use

any

electronic receptors). This phenomenon, first investigated

by Fri'v (1961), has attracted much interest---especially in the t1.S.-because it has often been cited as evidence that noritherrnal effects

ca L)(Tur and bicause an initial hypothesis was that onc of the p-fh)
mechanisms For perception is direct stimulation of the CNS by RFR.
Various Lheoretical and experimental studies, the latter with both human
volunteers and laboratory animals, have been conducted to determine the
conditions under which pulsed RFR can be heard and to investigate the
irat' t ion mechanisms involved. Many of the results support LIC
lypoL1ILsis that a pulse of RFR having the requisite pulse power density
and duration can p roduce a transient thermal gradient large enough 0
generate an elastic shock wave at some boundary between regions o
dissimilar die]ectric properties in the head, and that this shock wave
is transmitted to the middle ear, where it is perceived as a click.
Persons with impaired hearing are unable to hear such clicks, and
experimental animals in which the cochlea (the inner ear) has been
destroyed do not exhibit brainstern—evoked responses. Therefore, thi'
phenomenon is unlikely to he attributable to direct RFR stimulation of
the brain. Also, because individual pulses can be perceived, citations

of !ow average power densities based on calculations for two or rnor
wiJel y spaced pulses are not particularly meaningful. Representative
investigations of this phenomenon are summarized below.
White (1963) reported that acoustic transients can be gencrted
in various metals and plastics, in a piezoelectric crystal, and In
liquids such as water by transient surfare—heating with pulses of
FR fo r from an f1eLtron beam). Such transfentR were dttt'tahh• In
barium t1tanate crystal at calculated surKoe temperature rises of
the •'rder o

U.f)UiC.

Fost r and Fiiith ( 197i ) ,u s ing 2.0 GI

RFR, confirmed White's findings that such transients can be produced
in water, and they measured t he audlofreqacnvy pre q survs yvnoraLed b
6-30

several combinations of pulse power density and pulse duration. The
results indicated that the peak pressures would be sufficient to induce
iumtn perception of such RF pulses as auditory clicks. They also showed
that the effect vanished when the water was cooled to 4°C, where its
thermal expansion coefficient is very small. These results support

the rhtrmoe1astic hypothesis.
Lin (1977a, 1977b) has reported an detailed theoretical studies
it the RFR auditory effect. Ile assumed that the auditory sensation
rLsulLs from acoustic waves generated in the tissues of the head by
ripid thermal expansion of the tissues upon microwave absorption, in
consonance with the investigations cited above. His results indicate
that the audio frequencies produced are independent of the frequency
of the RFR, but are dependent on head size. The predicted fundamental
Frequency is 13 kHz for an adult human and 18 kHz for an infant.
Chou, Guy, and Calambos (1977) studied cochlear inicrophoriics
(CM) produced by pulsed 918- and 2450-MHz RFR in guinea pigs and cats.
They found that the CM frequencies correlated well with the long2st
dimension of the brain cavities of the two species, but poorly with other
brLn cavity dimensions. Extrapolation of the results indicates that
CI frequencies in humans should be between 7 and 10 kHz, in reasonable
;igreemint with Lins theoretical calculations.
Chou and Guy (1979b) used 918-MHz RFR to investigate the
thresholds for bralnsLem-evoked responses in guinea pigs. T'Ly found
tliaL for pulse durations of 10, 20, and 30 ps, the tcesho1d incident
(uirgy density was approximately constant (1.56-1.87 iJ/cm 2 per pulse),
corresponding to incident pulse power densities of 156, 78, and 62.4
/im 2 , r.spective1y. However, for pulse durations longer than 70 s,
th iuident pulse power density necessarv for obtaining responses
was ;!pprUxtnlntiy constant (about 90 mW/cin'), representing corresponding
inc it (if incident energy density per pulse with pulse duration.
(uu aud Uuv indicated that their expermenta1 results agree well with
prti ictiers of thu thermal expansion Lhuory.

6-31

Chou and Gaiarnbos (1977) investigated the effects of externalear blocking, middle-ear damping, and middle-ear destruction on brathsiemevoked responses to both acoustic and RFR iUrnu1i. They found tnit
the uinia1 was capable of responding to pal

RFR only if its cochlea

was intact.
Lebovit-z and Seaman (1977) reported on single auditory uni.
(eighth-nerve-related) responses to pulsed 915-M1lz RFR and acoustic
c licks.

They found that the response of a typical single aud LLory

unit was very similar to the response of the uniL to acoustic click
stimuli, differing primarily oniy in amplitude.
Cain and Rissman (1976, 1978) used 3.0-G}lz RFR to study the
auditory effect in two cats, two chinchillas, one beagle, and eight
human volunteers. For the animals, surface or brainstern-implanted
electrodes were (.lRed to mcnsurc' the responses to RI'R pulses and the
u
responses evoked by audio clicks from a speaker, They found that the
threshold energy density for RFA responses ranged from 87 to 14 j.J/rn2

per pulse for the cats, from 7.5 to 2C tJIcm 2 for the chinchillas,
and averaged 5.0 pJ/cm 2 for the beagle. For a pulse width of 10 qs,
these values correspond to pulse power densities of 1.3 W/crn 2 for
both cats, J and 2 W/crn 2 for the two chinchillas, and 300 niW/cm 2 for
the beagle. Me eight humans were given standard audiograms. Because
such audiograms do not test hearing above 8 kHz, binaural hearing
thresholds were also determined for seven of the subjects for frequeicies
in the range from 1 to 20 kHz. Five of the subjects could detect 15-ps
pulses as clicks; the other three required a pulse duration of 20 ps
for perception. No correlation between the results and the audicgrams
was apparent; however, there was a strong correlation between RJ?R
perception and hearing ability above 8 kHz as determined from
binaural thresholds. The average threshold energy density for the
Ohm
per pulse. For 15- p ,% pulses, this value corhumans was 10.6
responds to a p utse power d p oiitv of ibit 00

lonvtr, Lhrte

of the subjects were ah1c to perceive 15- p s pulses st a pulse power
density of 300 rnW/cm2.

6-32

Tyazhelov et al. (1979) reported some peculiarities regarding
auditory perception of pulsed 800-MHz RFR in humans. The pulse widths
used ranged from 5 to 150 ps at pulse repetition frequencies (prfs) of
50 to 2,000 (the latter for short pulse durations). Each subject could
be presented with sinusoidal audiofrequency (AF) sound waves asternately or concurrently with the pulsed RFR and could adjust the amplitude, frequency, and phase of the AF signal to match the timbre and
loudness of the perceived RFR. Using AF sgna1s, the high frequency
auditory limit (1-IFAL) of each subject was tested first. Three of the
subjects had a HFAL below 10 kHz and could not perceive RFR pulses
of short duration (10 to 30 us), whereas only one of the 15 subjects
having a 1-IFAL above 10 kHz could not perceive such pulses. These
results are consonant with those of Cain and Rissrnan. Among the
peculiarities rioted by Tyazhelov et al. was the biphasir dependence
of RFR perception thresholds on pulse width. They also reported that
subjects could detect beat frequencies when concurrently presented
with 8-kHz AF sound and RFR having prfs above or below 8 kHz, and that
when the prf was the same as the AF, the subject ou1d cancel perception
by adjustthg the phase of the AF. Their conclusion is that the therrnoelastic model is inadequate to explain these observations.
Frey and Coren (1979), using dynamic time-averaged interferornetric holography, endeavored to detect tissue movement in successive
layers of heads of animals exposed to pulsed RFR; for comparison, they
used holograms obtained for the sa y-- animals cThtring sham exposure. No
movements were detected. The authors concluded that the locus of
perception of pulsed RFLI is most likely within the cochlea rather
than anywhere else in the head.

6-33

6.5.2 calcium Efflux
Over the last six years, Adey and Bawin and their collcagues have
reported extensively on their studies oC changes of radioactive calcium
lori ( 45 Ca")efflux from neonate chick brain prepar:tThns and isolated
samples of cat cortex under very specif.Lc regimes of amplitude modulation frequencies and power densities for ELF, VIW, and UHF fields
(Adey, 1975a, 1975h, 1976, 1977, 1978, 1979, 1980; Adey and B..iwin,
1977, 1978; Bawin, 1974; Bawin and Adiy, 1976a, 1976b, 1977 Bawin
et al., 1975, 1977a, 1977b, 1978a 1978b; Sheppard et al., 1979).
Extensive details of the experimental protocol are given in two
of the papers (J3awin and Adey, 1976b, 1977). Briefly, following decapitation, forebrain hemispheres of neonate chicks wore obtained by rapid
dissection. The hemispheres were separated; one was used for exposure
and the other as control. Eah was incubated for 30 minutes in a specified physiological solution coi.ainirIg 45 Ca

At the end of incubation,

the samples were rinsed three times with nonradioactive solution.
They were then transferred to new glass test tubes, bathed in 1.0 ml
of solution, and exposed or sham-exposed for 20 minutes. Sets of ten
brain samples (Len exposed hemispheres, ten control hemispheres)
were used simultaneously.

AL the

conclusion of exposure, aliquots of

0.2 ml of the bathing solution were Laken, and radioactivity was
assayed by scintillation counting. Radioactivities (counts per minute,
cpm, per gram) were normalized to the mean value of counts obtained in
control effluxes. All normalized data were compared (by i-tcst) with
matched samples of control values

Adey (1977, 1978) presents data

from experiments with approximately 190 chick brains for 450-1I1lz
exposures. Power densities of 0.05, 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0, and 5.0
2
OW/cmwere used for 16 Hz amplitude modulation of the field.

were seen at 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0
VW/cm 2 , but not at 0.05 2.0 or 5.0 W/O,
for 450-MHz RFR amplitudeStatistically significant increases

modulated at 16 Hz. In a subsequent paper, Bawin et al 1978b)
described experiments aimed at a better definition of the calcium
sites responding to weaR electrical stimulation. Changes in cfflux
were studied with and without imposed CleetroiiiagneL[c CLelds (450 MHz,
16 Hz amplitude modulation, 0.375 or 2.0 mW/cm 2 ) to ascertain the effect

6-34

of calcium concentration in the exchanging medium. Also tested were
pH and bicarbonate-free solutions. They also examined modiEicaLion of
calcium release, by the addition of 1aithanurn

Lo the bathing

solution,

for both no-field and ith-field stimulation conditions. Efflux

of

45 Cain the standard physiological solution was the "control"
these experiments. In any test series, each hall brain was
against the corresponding hemisphere.
The results confirmed the previous findings by Bawin and Adi'v
that amplitude-modulated 450-MUz fields can stirnulate the r1ii
45
preincubated
Cafrom isolated brain tissue. This rolso w;'.'

oI

significantly different, statistically, at extraceliular Ca ++ (o1U'0fl++
trations of 2.16 and 4.16 mM, but not in Ca -free solutions. The
release was enhanced by addition of

if' (0.108 rnM, as NO), even LIioii1i

this did not affect the efflux in the absence of the field, 0rni-itn
of IICO q resulted in a decrease (not statistically significant) in
efflux of 45 Ca.both with and without field stimulation. Addition
to the HCO 3-free solution resulted in a statistically
45
Caefflux (compared with an inrLu'-ft in LIi'
significant decrease in
other cases, above) for an extracellular concentratior. of 2.0 nt
for both no-field and with-field (0.375 and 2.0 mW/crn 2 ) siruitiou.
These results, taken together, are stated 10 support the hypothesis
that a limited number of extracellular cationic binding sites are
involved in the transaction of weak extracellular e1ectri''1 events
and to suggest that the electrosensitive sites in La +++-

ni1

are in the class of sites responsible for the field response in Lhi
"standard" solution.
Bawin et al. (1977b) have also reported on results from a p7vliminary
study involving the monitoring of calcium efflux from the intact t'i rt ox
of 12 awake, paralyzed cats. The methods were silit L-ir to those
utlized in the chick brain experiments. The cats were exposed for 20
minutes to 450-lliz fields amplitude modulated at 16 Hz. Power donsItLe3
were 0.375 or 1.0 mW/cm 2 . Results are stated to be a clear increase
45++
efflux:during and following the exposure in 8 o[ L2 animals.
Ca
in
However, some animals apparently responded to the pteson. e of the
6-35

experimenter during sampling. Further exprirnents are planned to remove
the possibility of artifact and to elaborate an these preliminary
fthdings.
Blackman et al. (1979) conducted experiments that verified and
extended Bawin and Adeys findings for chick brain at 147 MHz. Treated
tissue was exposed in a Crawford chamber to power densities between
0.5 and 2.0 mW/cni 2 and amplitude modulation of the carrier at selected
frequencies between 3 and 30 Hz. They found a statistically significant
increase in calcium efflux (j < 0.05) when the frequency of modulation
was 16 Hz and power density was 0.75 inW/cm2 . (Preliminary findings indicating the existence of the power window, in addition to the frequency
window discovered by Adey and Bawiri were reported by Blackman et al. in
1977.)
The above work on calcium efflux represents one of the very few
cases in which RFR effects have been found at average power densities
in a possibly nontherrnal range (0.1-1.0 mW/crn2).
The incident RFR on the rectenna is continuous-wave, but a
biological entity that moves through the spatial variations of the
rectenna field will experience a time-varying or modulated field. However, the likeiihood that the modulation frequencies and the durations
of exposure to such frequencies will give .,.se to the calcium efflux
phenomenon is negligible.

6-36

6.5.3 Blood-Brain Barrier Effects
The existence of a "blood-brain barrier" (BBB) in most regions
of the brain has been established experimentally, although its specific
morphology is still conjectural. This barrier normally provides high
resistance to movements of large molecules (e.g., proteins or polypeptides) from the blood vessels into the surrounding brain tissue,
presumably to protect the brain from invasion by various blood-borne
pathogens and toxic substances. Sev a1 investigators have reported
that low levels of RFR can increase the permeability of the BBB to
certain substances of large molecular weight. However, others were
unable to confirm such effects, thereby rendering the subject controversial, as summarized below.
Rodzilsky and Olszewsky (1957) found that permeability changes
in cerebral blood vessels could be induced b y various non-RFR means,
including those that produce heat necrosis. Sutton nd co-workers
(Sutton et al., 1973; Sutton and Carroll, 1979), who :.r. interested
in the use of RFR for selective hyperthe.mic treatment of brain
tumors, determined the maximum temperatures an4 expos e durations
that would. not alter the integrity of the 3I3 in the tat. They used
2.45 GHz to induce hypertherniia In horseradish peroxidase (HRP), a

high-molecular-weight protein, as a tracer that is detectable both
morphologically and quantitatively. Heads of rats were heated with
RFR to a brain temperature of 40, 42, or 45°C. They found that BBB
integrity was diminished, in orthonormic animals (37°C), by heating
the brain to 45°C for 10 minutes, to 42°C for 15 minutes, and to 40°C
for 60 minutes. The corresponding durations in rats precooled to
30°C were 15, 30, and 180 minutes, respectively.
Frey et al. (1975) exposed groups of anesthetized rats to
pulsed or CW RER at 1.2 CHz for 30 minutes. For the pulsed RFR, the
pulse and average power densities were 2.1 and 0.2 mW/cm 2 , respectively, and the power density of the CW RFR was 2.4 mWi m2 . Shamexposed rats were used as controls. Alter exposure or sham exposure,
sodium fluorescein was injected into the femoral vein. Five minutes
after injection, the blood of the rat was withdrawn and the brain was
removed embedded in ge l atin, refrigerated, and sectioned. The sections

6-37

were viewed under ultraviolet light for fluorescence, the intensity
of which was sccred by the viewer. Greater fluorescence was reported
for pulsed than for CW RFR, and

some

control specimens also exhibited

1 Lglit fluorescence. The investigators regard these results as evldencc that exposure to RFR alters the BBB.
Spackman et al. (1978) performed a similar investigation in mice,

ui'ig fluorescein and several noriphysiological amino acids as test sub anci's. Croups of mice were exposed to sham, C\, or pulsed RFR at
918 Mhz for 30 minutes. Average power densities of 2.5 and 33 mW/crn2
were used in both the CW and pulsed modes. Also, some mice were exposed
to CW RFR at 132 mW/cm 2 . Aier exposure, the concentration of each
test substance in the brain relative to the concentration of that
subsLance in the blood plasma (the"specific concentration") was deter-

mincd. A HpeuLrofi.uoMIT1uLer and an aulomatic amino acid analyzer wr'
used Lo measure the concentrations of fluorescein and le test amino
aids, respectively. The specific concentrations of all substances
testea in the RFR-exposed animals were found to be in the same ranges
as for the controls. Subsequently, Spaeknau et al. (1979) used whole-

body heating or i.p. injection of glycerol, urea, metaraminol, or
dirnethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as alternative agents to RFR exposure.
They

found that heating mice to 50°C in an incubator for 22 to 25

minutes caused no apparent increase in BBB permeability to the test
substances. The same results were obtained for all of the injected
agents except for )MSO, which produced a significant increase in BBB
permeabiliLy relative to controls.
Albert et al. (1977) also used URP as a tracer ani reported regions
of 1ak.ige in the rnicrovasculaturc of the brains of Chinese hamsters
exposed to 2.45-GHz 1W RFR at 10 mW/crn 2 for 2 to 8 hours. in control

animals, extravztscuthr reaction product was found only In brain
regions normally lacking a BBB. In a later paper, Albert (1979)
indicated that for hamsters and rats exposed to

2.8-GE-Iz CW RFR

at

10 inW/crn 2 for two hours, partial restoation of BB impermeability
occurs within one hour after cessation of exposure and restoration is
complete after two hours. Albert believes that these changes may be
6-38

clinically subacute and probably cause no lasting 111 effects. It
should be noted that the&'e leakages of the inicrovasculature of the
brain occur irregularly. During the formal discussion period following
presentation of a paper by Preston at the 1978 International Symposium
on Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Fields In Ottawa, 27 June
1978, Albert indicated that such leakage is observed In approximately
50% of his exposed animals and in about 20% of his control animais.
Oscar and Hawkins (1977) reported changes In BBB permeability
to D-mannitol due exposure of rats to 1.3-GHz pulsed or CW RFR for 20
minutes at various average power densities. Permeability changes were
measured by the Oldendorf technique; that is 0.2 ml of a mixture of
14 C-labeled mannitol and tritlated water was injected rapidly into each
rat's carotid artery after exposure, the animal was sacrificed 15
seconds later, and brain sections were dissected out and prepared for
assays of radioactivity using a liquid scintillation counter. The
ratio of counts of 14 C--labeled D-niannitol to counts of freely diffusible
tri.tiated water in samples of brain tissue was normalized to a similar
ratio for the injected solution. This norrna1i.. ratio, expressed as
a percentage, 18 defined as the brain uptake index (BIJI). Oscar and
Hawkins found statistically significant changes in the BUI at average
power densities less Lhan 3 mW/cm 2 . They also found that pulsed IUk
could be either more or less effective in altering BBB permeability
than CW RFR of the same average power density, depending on the specific
pulse characteristics used. For pulses of long du ration and high pulse
power density but only a few pulses per second, mannitol permeation
could be induced at average power densities as low as 0.03 rnW/cin 2

heir
T

results also indicated the possible existence of a power density "window,"
i.e., permeabiiity is not altered for power densities a)ove or below
Lhe window.
Merritt (1977) endeavored to repeat the experiments of Oscar
and Hawkins, but did not obtain sliiii.lar results. Data from three of
his experiments indicated that hypertherrnia of the brain is necessary
to alter prrneabi1ity.

6-39

Preston et al. (1978), using methods similar to those of Oscar
and Hawkins, attempted to deteimine whether exposure to 2.45-GIlz CW
RFR increased BBB permeability to 1 C-1abe1ed D-matrnitol. They exposed
rats to 0.1, 0.5 1, or 10 mW/cm 2 , with sham-exposed rats for controls,
and foutid no evidence to indicate that RFR exposure increased the
permeability of the BBB for manriitoi.
Chang et al. (1978) used a technique involving 131I--1abe1ed
albumin to Investigate alterations of the BBB in dogs. The heads of
dogs were exposed to various average power densities between 2 and
200 mW/cm2 . In general, no statistically significant differences were
ound between exposed and sham-exposed animals, but the numbers of
animals used in this study were too small to ascribe a high level of
statistical confidence.
Several investigators have indicated that exposure to RFR may
alter the sizes of vascular and extravascular volumes and cerebral
blood flow rate, thereby yielding changes In the EUI that are not necessarily related to BBB permeability alterations. Blasberg (1979)
reviewed many of the methods previously used for investigating BBB
changas and the problems associated with these methods. Rapoport et al.
(1979) have developed a trethod for measuring cerebrovascular permeability to 14 C-labeled sucrose that yields results that are independent
of cerebral Dlood flow rate. Oscar et al. (1979) have confirmed experimentally that local cerebral blood flow is increased in the rat brain
by exposure to pulsed RFR at either 1 or 15 mW/cm 2 average power density.
Based an recent findings such as those mentioned above, little
quantitative confidence can be placed in the results of early experiments on RFR-induced BBB alterations. Qualitatively, it is clear that
hyperthermic levels of RFR can alter the permeability of the BBB.
However, additional research using current methodology is necessary
to ascertain whether chronic exposure to low levels of RFR affects the
BBB. The present status of this topic was reviewed by Justesen (1980)
and by Albert (1979).

6-40

6. 5. 4 Histlgathp1qpy of

_the CtnLra1

rvuu 3V4ti1

(frequencies 51)0 kHz to 101) 1tz) on a lar, nuiilr
of anima is , preduniinanl ly rats.

1 1' t 1

't

Tolgskaya and Gordon (1 9 73) rtpirLL1! L1 !1'LL

Oppronimaf,l
1

Their so-called dL irnt r ON

to 1 G1-Iz, e xact frequency or 1rc(Iuencies 1101 pvc1fied) i n W10-PAt
below--Lhi sPs !rL1qlli?n(y

oF 2.45 (Hz. Pa t hologivA uffuclK v 1

1

high-i.n Lens 1 L y (20 to 240 niWfcrn') radiation 1 n 1 iidcd muMph
privaocu1ar hemorrhages in the brain and
apical dendrites in the cortex

uLhvv organs,

1 L'fl
t111.11iLi

' loudv swelling of cv1'p.I;i;rn,

shrinkage, formation of vacuoles, unevenness of staining, d ;ir i1r;Il:
of cytoplasmic structures,

ftLtv degeneration, deervasu T H iihmurlpo-

protein, and occasional klryocvtolysi; . The
q(-rn (flhi1' I

0F

'nt

of t1u- nnimals (: 1 ltd

thermia, temperature rises up
hours.

1nLtnsi ti :;

to 42-45%) 111 several ii iflU 1 ('14 to -ilV(

Photographs of the Pxposurearrailgenil- show: ruu .AlL .tI1i!1lI1

exposures at the same time In a room appearing not to have rodfatlunabsorbing material an the walls. It Is like 1 ' LIiaL the pet i 1
absorption rates (SAM) for individual animals under 1 1ise
varied widely and LitaL Al effects

So-call p d

were cie'ir!.v

ni '. 1

E.liet-mai in n;i1 Or&

low-inte.nsi 1'" exposures were also

r;jrr 1 id eLti

The authors define threshold field int ersi 1 les for noIlLllerrll:1l

el krts

("intensity not raising body temperature") for decimeter mi ravr.s
a 40 111141cni2 (To1skava and Cordon,

1973,

Tab 1 e 3, p. 56)

at so-called low intensit y for decimeter wavos were general Iv at or
slightly below 10 iiiW/cin for 6() minutes dail y for 10 1flnt tl-.
Investigation of

Lile animals by ordinary morphological meLf1ud- ruvenled

practically no vascular disorders in the nor is system. °I)e! i.':'Le
elective nourohis Lo.logical methods" (unspecified) showed
of spines from cortical dendrites, the

appearance of beading and

irregular thickening of dendrites, swelling of cytoplasm of individual
cells With appearance of vacuoles) in the basal ganglia and hypoLiialamus, and focal and diffuse proliferation cf niicroglial cells, with
microglial proceuses

showing initial sins of degen'it: h"t

6-41

Many of these low-intensity effects are similar to those described
for the high-irterisity exposures. In view of the exposure levels
(approximately 10 MW/cm 2 ), the previously described exposure arrangement, and the knowledge of the possibility of localized regions of high
SAR, it seems likely Lhat the described effects (more subtle than those

of frank hyperLherrnia) were also thermal in origin.
Albert and De Santis (1975) have also reported changes in the
hypothalamus and subthatarnus of Chinese hamsters exposed to 2.45 GFIZ
radiation either at 50 mW/cm 2 for durations from 30 minutes to 24
hours or z.L 25 mW/ctn 2 for 14 hours/day for 22 days. Changes were
not evLdnt in the hippoeampus, cerebellum, thalamus, or spiral
cord ventral horn. In the discussion printed with this papet,
Guy pointed OUL that his laboratory had measured mean SARs as high as
4 mW/g per incident 1 mW/cm in animals of similar size. Peak SARs

could have reached 40 to 200 inW/g in selected brain regions of
Albert's animals; this range far exceeds what is normally used for
diathermy treatment in 20-minute exposures of patients. Rectal temperature measurement would not necessarily reflect such high SARs in
localized areas.
Albert and De Santis (1976) studied CNS histological effects ii
60 Chinese hamsters exposed

to 1.7 GHz radiation at power densities

of 10 and 25 mW/cm 2 . Cytopathology was obse rved after 30 to 120
minutes of exposure in hypothalamic and subthalamic areas, but not
in other areas. These observed effects were also likely thermal in
origin for the same reasons as above.

6-42

6.5.5 EEC Studies
Many studies have been conducted on effects on the EE( and/or
evoked responses (ERs) of animals exposed to RFR. Some of these have
been carried out with metal e1ec.rodes either implanted in the brain
or attached to the scalp during exposure. Johnson and Guv (1972)
pointed out that such metallic electrodes grossly perturb the fields
and produce greatly enhanced absorption of energy (i.e., field enhancethe vicinity of the electrodes. Such enhancement produces
ment) in the
major artifacts In the biological preparation under investigation.
These artifacts are not to be confused with the recording artifact
that Is produced by pickup of fields by the electrodes and leads during
the recording of EEGs or ERs while the animal is being exposed. In
addition to these cautions concerning methodology, it should be noted
that many EEC studies are pertormed on heavily sedated iriirna1s,
phenobarbital being the usual drug. Hence, the responses reported do
not necessarily reflect those that would be expected in normal, alert
animals.
Tyahe1ov et al. (1977) discussed these problems and painted
out th.t even for the coaxial electt de developed by Frey et al. (1968),
diffraction 01 EM waves is still a major source of error because of
the electrode's metallic nature and large dimensions. They solved the
problems by developing electrodes of high linear resistance (greater
than 100 kilohms/tn) and by proper filtering of the recorded signal.
This paper indicates an awareness in the USSR that questions niav be
raised about the validity of data and conclusions from many experiments
involving animals with indwelling electrodes, both in the USSR and the
United States.
Bruce-Wolfe a,-d Justesen (1979) investigated the effects of
microwave-induced hyperthermia on the visually evoked electrocortical
response (VER) in five female guinea pigs. The VERs were recorded
post-exposure from animals that had been exposed to modulated 2450-MHz
RFR in a multiinode, mode-stirred cavity for durations ranging from
4 to 15 minutes. Such exposures raised rectal temperature to as high
as 43°C and brain temperature to as high as 41°C. The mean latency
6-43

to the H, peak dimI.nisbed from 42.8

4t IniuIMttan

to 37.7 ina for 'craI, temperature Increase of 37.0 to 40.5°C. For
urt h I t 1113L ea t tire above 41.5%, the VER became highly variable,

It

.ind a1mve 43.0°C the animais died. The atithor; recognized the possibility
1 1,,,

fl

brain damage resulting from the ue of implanted

L1I1-,.-Mt.

;ind

metal e1ec.rodes

screws, and state that this aspect is being

In (tirilivr s t udles in Lh ri E and guinea pig.

1 1r4

Iltirn;tiisk 1 I and SIinndaia (1974) reported changes In the blocurr.nt

ill t.h ' iiriin Vortt,x of rabbits after 60 day

(n fl1. • 2.

• 10 ;U) . Changes (vagu1y sperified as "an increase
t -es and

in Hit - rli'.tliui (if slow
.iL WiV.S")

m.

hir • ; ltrh.•' ui1 ir' if their rIecr!n lon

dthi it lve rr L Ique of these retil
nclwv 1 1 ng

Of

a decrease in the rhythm of intermediate

cil4cribd nL 10 and 1 .9 1jW/cm 2 , but not at 0.01

,\l tliuu'li t1ie

lit t

exposure 10 RFR

Lt appears that the use

VILWLrodes run y have contri bLLid artifacts, as described

41 14/

Iii ;i mirv rt'rt presentation, Shanda1i et a 1 . (1976) reported
ii 11hLrv.I

t Ions of rahb ils with implanted EEC electrodes, and again

., im•t1 iltiltv variable—but Statist icaI.'
1 IU ,W/tm txpusurcs

(2. 375

ign.ifleant.---EEC changes

CHz) for 7 iuurs/day for 1. month. The

;im qui&1 [OOH .ihutit implanted electrodes possibly causing arti.factual
tI.itn may he raised.
Goldstein and Clsko (1974) studied the

EEGs

01 sedated rabbits

to ckLtrmf..ne wlwthr RFR exposure would evoke arousal. They used
9."1-(3[z u

0.7 to 2.8 mW/crn 2 .

The EEC of each rabbit was

rLLl4rdr.d for about one hour. After the Iirsc ten minutes, the. rabbit

wai exposed or sham-exposed to the RFR for five minutes. The EEGs
showed no arousal. during RFR exposure but indicated alternations of
arousal and sedation characteristics staing 3 to 12 minutes after
exposure. However, control animals also exhibited alternations, with
shorter arousal durations, rendering interpretation of these results
difficult. These investigators we r e aware of the potential problem
of metals in the pathway of the RFR and claimed to have mitigated it

6-44

by using thin (0.01 inch) insulated, implanted stainless-steel electrodes.
It is unlikely that this reduced the artifacts significantly, if at all.
They also stated that 'under everyday conditions, the EEC patterns of
rabbits are quite variable. The animals oscillate becween sedation
and arousal unpredictably." This variability Is another potential
source of cror ir an" experiments on the EEC of rabbits.
Chou E±L '1. (1978) used implanted carbon electrodes to avoid
the artifactual problems associated with metal ones. Two groups of
rabbits (six animals/group: three males, three females) were exposed
to 2.45 GHz, 1.5 mW/cm 2 radiation. for 2 hours daily for 3 months.
One group received CW, the other pulsed radiacion (10 Vs, 100 pps,
1,500 mw/cn1 2 pulse power density). A similar group of six animals
was sham-exposed. No significant differences were observed

between

groups at the end ui t,trvu months with regard to EEC and evoked potentials.
Kaplan et al. (1978) reperted that from the beginning of the
second trimester of pregnancy, 33 squirrel monkeys were exposed for
3 hours/day in special cavity/cage modules to 2.45 GHz pulsed radiation
at whole-body mean SARs equivalent to those resulting from plane-wave
exposure to 0.1, 1.0, and 10.0 m1/cm 2 and compared with a group
of eight pregnant sham-exposed monkeys. Eighteen of the exposed mothers
were exposed with their offspring for an additional 6 months after
parturition, and then their offspring were exposed alone for another
six months after weaning. No statistically significant differences
were found between exposed and nonexposed adults nor between exposed
and nonexposed offspring on resting EEC and photically driven EEC
parameters. (No chronically attached or indwelling electrode.- were
used.)
Rosenstein (1976) exposed one group of eight female rats to
10 mW/crn2 at 425 MHz for 4 hours/day from the 12th day after
breeding until parturition, and another group of 12 dams to 5 1ni/cm2
at 2.45 GHz for 4 hours/clay from the 6th day after breeding until
parturition. The offspring were then exposed for 92 days. Control
groups having the same population numbers were used for each frequency.

6-45

Evaluation of the EEGs and the visual iLS ot the ofisprirLg al 140 days
of age indicated no significant difference between the exposed and
control. groups. (Again, indwelling electrodes were not used)
In summary, the use of indwelling metallic electrodes in studies
on the effects of RFR on the EEC and !or evoked potentials may be
questioned as a procedure likely to introduce artifactual effects in
the preparation under study, as well as in the recordings themselves.
These artifacts may be minimized by use of electrodes appropriately
designed from high-resistivity materials. Experiments in which such
specially constructed electrodes were used, or in which electrodes
were applied after exposure, show no evidence of statistically
significant differences in EEGs or evoked responses between control
.ind RFR-exposed animals.
6.5.6 Conclusions
In relatioix to the problem of exposure to microwaves within the
rtenna area of SPS, the microwave hearing phenomenon is an effect
only of pulsed radiation. Since the SPS radiation is Continuous, the
microwave hearing phenomenon has no bearing on exposure of workers.
The calcium efflux phenomenon is an effect only of low-frequency
amplitude modulated radiation. While humans moving under the reetenna
could be exposed to modulated RFR fields, the 1

,od that the

rate and duration of their motion would be sufficient to produce the
ralcium efflux phenomenon appears negligible. Changes in blood-brain
barrier have been reported at power-density levels as mw as 3 inW/cm2,
but the evidence is in dispute. Histological changes in the brain
have been reported at power-density levels as low as 3 In/cm 2 , but the
evidence is in dispute. Histological changes in the brain have been
reported at power-density levels as low as 10 mWJcm 2 , but the effects
may have resulted from an unusually high SAR within the skull. Microwaves have no effect on evoked potentials or EEGs. For the ordinary
exposure within the rectenna area (0.01 to 1.0 rnW/crn 2 ) there is little
or no probability of an effect on either blood-brain barrier or brain
10to1ogy. For the maximum exposure within the rectenna area (23 inW/ctn2),
there could be changed in the blood-brain barrier or brain histology, but
.ie pathological significance of tLese changes is not yet understood.

6-46

66 EFFECTS ON BEHAVIOR
The very large number and variety of behavioral studies in animals
exposed to microwaves makes it difficult to present a detailed review.
The papers reviewed in this section are selected as being representative
of the types of behavioral studies that have been conducted. The types
include microwave perception studies, effects of microwaves on learning
and on performance of trained tasks, and interactive effects of microwaves and drugs on behavior.
With regard to perception of microwaves, the microwave hearing

effect discussed in the previous section is, by definition, perception
of microwaves. Other studies of modulated microwaves have been conducted to determine whether they can serve as a behavioral c].ue. King
et al. (1971) showed that 2.45 GHz microwaves, modulated at 60 and 12
Hz, could serve as a cue to warn rats of impending electrical shock.
The effect had a threshold of between 1.2 and 2.4 mW/g. Since the
study was conducted in a cavity system, plane-wave power densities

were not available; however, a reasonable estimate is that the powerdensity threshold would be between 2.5 and 6 rnW/cm 2 . Frey and Feld
(1975) showed that rats exposed to 12 CHz pulsed at 100 to 1000 pulses
per second would tend to avoid the radiation by moving into an RFshielded area. The authors interpreted this behavior to indicate that
the microwave radiation produced a noxious stimulus, but the evidence
indicates that the noxious stimulus was probably the microwave hearing
effect. The avoidance behavior was produced at 0.6 and 0.2 mW/cm2
for the 100 and 1000 pulse/sec exposures, respectively, but exposure
to 2.4 mW/cm 2 CW radiation did not produce any avoidance behavior.
A number of other microwave perception studies were designed to
determine whether animals would avoid CW radiation as a noxious
stimulus. Monahan and Ho (1977) observed that when mice were exposed
for various periods to 2.45-GIIz mictowaves at various power densities
and ambient temperatures, the mice were able to reduce the percentage
of microwave energy absorbed. There was an apparent threshold of
power level at which the effect would occur at ambient temperatures

6-47

of 20 and 24°C, but not at 30 and 35°C. The authors attributed the
effect to the ability of the animals to orient themselves in the
radiation field so as to minimize energy absorption. In a subsequent
study, Gage et al. (1979a) observed rats and mice by closed-circuit
TV during exposure to 245-GHz microwaves and failed to observe
orientation effects. However, comparison of the power levels and
ambient temperatures in the two experiments suggests that the power
density and ambient temperatures employed by Gage et al. may have been
too low to produce the orientation behavior.
A second ap'roach to the question of radiation avoidance (Morthan
and Henton, 1979) involved exposing mice to 2.45 GHz microwaves at an
average SAR of 45 mW/g (90-400 mW/cin 2 ), coupled with a sonic cue.
The mice learned to turn off the microwaves by interrupting a beam of
light; this was interpreted as escape behavior.
A third type of approach involved pairing microwave irradiaton
with consumption of sucrose solution and subsequently testing for
avoidance of the sucrose. In an earlier test (Monahan and Henton,
1977) there was no evidence that the sucrose was associated with a
noxious experience. In a subsequent test (Sessions, 1979), saccharin
(instead of sucrose) was paired with microwave exposure of rats. The
animals developed aversion to the saccharin (indicating association
with a noxious experier.ce) at a power density of 41 nW/cm 2 or greater,
but not at lower levels.
The results cited above are interpreted by the authors as indicating
that microwaves are a noxious or unpleasant stimulus to the animal.
However, the orientation behavior observed by Monahan and Ho (1977)
appears to be at most, thermoregulatory behavior of the animals,
and the saccharin aversion appears to require relatively high power
densities of the microwaves. The escape by interrupting the beam of
light (Monahan and Henton, 1979) also involved relatively high power
densit ;, and in addition, appeared to require the coupled sonic cue.
Grove et al. (1979) observed that rats exposed to nearly lethal levels
of microwave radiation in the absnce of other cues (e.g. sonic cues)
made no attempt to escape; 'ven though the means of escape were readily

6-48

available. Overall, it can be concluded that pulsed or otherwise
modulated microwave radiation can be perceived readily by animals at
moderate-to-low power densities, but that CW microwaves are, at best,
an extremely feeble perceptual cue.
Many studies have been conducted on the effects of mir—wave
radiation on the performance of trained tasks. Animals studied
were rats, rhesus monkeys, and squirrel monkeys, Acute exposures at
power-density levels ranging from 10 to greater than 100 uW/crn2
(Sanza, 1977; de Lorge 1979; D?Andrea, 1977; Lin, 1977; Scholl and
Alien, 1979; de Lorge and Sell, 1979; McAfee et al., 1979) resulted
in somewhat inconsistent results. The overall conclusion is that
microwave irradiation will suppress performance of learned tasks
but that the effect depends upon power density, duration of exposure,
animal species, and the demand characteristics of the behavior. The
studies of de Lorge and Szeul (1979) indicate that suppression of
learned behavior tasks by acute microwave irradiation depends on the
amount and distribution of energy absorbed by the animal.
Chronic microwave irradiation has also been reported to disrupt
learned behavior in animals. Lobanova (1974) reported a weakening
of conditioned reflexes in rabbits and rats, as shown by increased
latency or absence of response and failure to recognize the conditioned
stimulus. Power-density levels in her studies were 1 to 10 rnW/cm2.
Mitchell et al. (1977) reported that rats showed an increase in locomotor
activity and a disturbance of differential responding to operant
behavior over a 22-weak exposure at 2.3 mW/g (' 5-6 mW/rm 2 ). Lebovitz
and Seaman (1979), however, found no disturbance in lever-pressing
performance in rats chronically exposci at up to 2.6 mW/g.
Studies of the effect of microwaves on learning are more recent
and fewer. Schrot et al. (1979) investigated the effects of niicrowav
irradiation on the ability of rats to learn a novel sequence of responses
to obtain food reinforcement. Decrements of learning occurred at power
densities of 5 and 10 mW/cm 2 , but not at 1 inW/cm2 or less. Gage et al.
(1979b) exposed rats daily for four hours to 50 mW/crn 2 from day 6 of
gestation until the age of 126 days, and found no effect of the

6-49

irradiation on the learning of two tasks during the lasC two weeks
of irradiation.
Several studies of interaction of microwave irradiation and
drugs that affect the CNS have been conducted (Monahan and Henton,
1979; Thomas and Maitland, 1979; Thomas et al., 1979; Maitland, 1979).
In the iirsL study, chlordiazepoxide was found to interfere with
raLfnLiun nvoidance responses but chlorproinazine and d-amphetamine
gave vriah1e results. In the other studies the effect of a drug on
animal behavior was tested, and then the effect of the drug and microwave irradiation together was tested. Microwave radiation at a power
density of 1 mW/em 2 was found to enhance the effects of dtxtroarnphetainine,
c1i1rd.Eazepoxide, and pentobarbital. An interesting aspect of these
studies, taken together, is that the drugs have pharmacologicaly
djffercnt. and opposite properties. Dextroamphetamine is a CNS stimulant,
while chh)rdtazepoxide and pentobarbital are CNS depressants, but the
m.Lcrowive radlal:i:iii enhances the effect in either case.
Some of the behavioral studies seem to have originated from
FLudles in the USSR claiming that R1R had direct effects on the CNS
at mw power densities. The association is discussed by King et al.
(1971).

Evidence to support this claim from neurophysiological

studies in the USA is meager, and the behaviorai, evidence also does not
generally support the claim. The studies on microwave irradiation
a noxious stimulus do not show that the animals can perceive microwave
radiation as such. The radiation-avoidance studies appear to be part
of the tliermoregulatory behavior of animals, and under circumstances
where the environment is cold, animals will use microwave radiation as
a source of warmth (Stern et al., 1979). In addition, Adair and Adams
(1980) showed that microwave irradiation enhanced dermal vasodilatation
in the squirrel monkey (a thermoregulatory response). The effect
appeared to be mediated by the CNS, but a minimum of 8 mW/cm 2 was
required to elicit the response. Disruption of performance or learning
appears to have rather high power-density tresholds. Interaction of
microwaves with drugs affecting the CNS appears to be the most sensitive
behavioral response to microwaves, but even these studies do not prove

6-50

direct effect of microwaves on the CNS Overall, the behavioral
studies do not indicate a special effect of microwaves on the r1ervous
system, and the 'nechanism of most of the results remains unknown.
In reference to the SPS, workers in the reclenne area exposed
at the ordinary power density level (0.01 to 1.0 mW/crn 2 ) would probably
not experience any effect on performance of trained tasks or speed of
learning, but workers exposed at the maximum power density level (23
mW/cm2 ) might experience some performance or learning decrement,
particularly if the exposure is of long duration Workers who are on
medication might be subjected to enhanced action of the drugs at either
the ordinary or the maximum power densit'i level. However, the-re
probably will not be any subjective feelings of malaise in non-medicated
workers exposed at either the ordinary or the maximum power dc.sity
levels.

6-51

6. 7

ENDOCRINOLOGICAL EFFECTS
MicrowIvl? Lrrad LaLIOI1 of animals has pjuJ1lf:

Vi.1 h

n gwn,ral,

s isLent effects an the vndnerLnv sysieru of nnrni 1
cfi&cLs produced appear to 1)L reTiLed to either

1

h.iE Ik

cidL'(1 with the irradiation or the sLr.ss lflIL1LL i

IN ahimol
dinet

the Irradiation and, possibly, othvr c'1rif11n1

'100

effccLs niso appear to be rclnLc1 10 i1 E10L 1011 ti lh. cittadki 0 141
by microwaves. There do not appear to be any An i .i,
direct stimulation of the endocrine system or ti

hiq

I

It (1

Lhe CN8.
The heat Load induced by the microwave

i r i id 1i

aFfects the thyroid gland and, to someextent,

1 i i li piNatih
l .

1i n

Nig[n et al. (1977a, 1977b) observed tliai direct

rt

1

thyroids of dogs to 2.45 GIJz irradiation (.II;id iii WrtAm in

1

of release of thyroxine. The amount oL incroaso on4 11•IldCl.1
power-density level, and the auLhors aitrihtited Lln U1 1 tit to tin i 1

in temperature of Lhe 41and.

Lu et al. (1977) r pil td that

1W NL1V

exposure of rats to 2.45 GILz irraditon al: 20 rn1/
hours resulted in a decrease in serum lhyroxinv Juk , is.

11

was associated with a significant rise in rct.fl 1 li:]prttILrt.

L

of rats at Lower power densities or for shorter diirti ltáUi taunccl oul.
minor changes in body tQlv'erature and insignificant dilirt:,.- IW1 1)

thyroxine levels. Travers and Vetter (1978)
.
a13 v,T,rl t d iov, 1.d
serum thyroxine levels in rats vxpomed 8 hours/dito 2 41 ( J[: ri al 1.:!tion for 7 to 21 days.

These authors 4:,l.;1 irn1 eftcats Al•Y

but the report was available only in nItrii 1 1 oini and hvnvp lb,di ti
could net be reviewed.
Stress responses in rats exposed to 2.45 GV Picr oway w
reported by Michaelson et al. (1975), LoLz (1976), LtiI ,irul U Li1 -On
(1977) and Lots et al. (1977).

These sLudies .litid 4:vitliiu

time/power-density thresholds. Rats exposed at 50 Wj lor 30 o r
minutes showed a rise in plasma cnn [eosLcrorie iLVel aud . d&i

I

plasma pituitary growth hormone level, both of which Atc indicator';
of a general stress response. Irradiat:ion at lower power it&itft

for 30 or 60 minutes did not produce any similar response, but when the
duration of irradiation was extended to 120 minutes, plasma corticosterone was elevated at a power density of 20 mW/cm 2 and plasma
pituitary growth hormone was depressed at a power density of 13 mW/ctn2..
Hypophysectomized rats and rats treated with dexamethasone did not
show an increase in plasma corticosterone at any power density, indicating that the microwave effect was mediated through the anterior
pituitary.
Because of the known sensitivity of the testes to heat, there
has been some investigation of the effects of microwaves on gonadal
function. Prausnitz and Susskind (1962) reported that mice exposed to
9.27 GLIz microwaves at 100 mW/cm2 for 4.5 minutes per day, 5 days per
week, began to show testicular atrophy after 4 months of treatment.
More recently, Cairnie and ITarding (1979) reported that exposure of
2
mice to 2.45 OFlz irradiation at 20 to 32 rnW/cm
for 16 hours a day for
4 days had no effect on sperm count or percent of abnormal sperm. No
endocrinological measurements were reported for either study.
Miko1Jczyk (1974, 1975) reported that irradiation of rats to 2.86-2.88
Q1-Iz at 10 mW/cm 2 for 2 to 6 hours a day for 35 days caused a decrease
in the pituitary level of luteinizing hormone. Finally, Lancranjan
(1975) reported that men occupationally exposed to radiofrequency
radiation at levels of up to several hundred rnicrowatts/cm 2 showed
slightly reduced sperm counts, but normal plasma levels of 17-ketosteroid
and gonadotropic hormone.
Effects of low-level microwaves on circadian rhythmwere reported
by Czerski (1974) for the mitotic figure count of bone marrow. Lu et
al. C1977) reported that the circadian rhythm of normal plasma corticosteroid levels had a confounding effect on the assessment of low-level
microwave effects. A subsequert report (Lu et al., 1979) indicated
that high and low power-density levels may have opposite effects on
plasma corticosteroid, with the high power-density effect arising
from stress and the low power-density effect arising from circadian
rhythm changes.

6-53

Al though most of the ef icc Ls Of in ter waves Un OIL' 1i(iorJ iie
system appear to be relatively straightforward and predictable from
physiological considerations, thLtC are still somo details 'nneri ing
the effects of microwaves ori adrmctrt it'al ;teroids that require
further study. Part of the problem appears to arise

f rrn the un ir t a

nature of "stress." IIca(, or LempYratllre rh' 1 is atjtnd to bc!
stress to the animals.

However, L ihurdv (1.979n ) o I

i rrr1 that mice

exposed to warm a i r to produce a temperature r1sv equivalent to that
produced by inLc rwave Irradiation (ltd 1101 Hl)ow a rise 11 plasma s 1 'ro 1
comparable to that produced by

the

microwave irradiation, and did not

exhibit the Iympliopcn ia produ('ed by the microwave Irradiation.
more , a number of other experimentson immunological effects 01 C 1 ro 11

microwave irradiation have produced uffcvtn at powi r-d inH

level1

Loo low to cl Lr 11 stress responses in an a c ute irradiation i tiial on
Finally, there is n substantial accommodation factor in olicltinT,
stress responses
much more prone

Animals that are placed 111 novel

1 liia L bus are

to exh Lb IL stress r e s p onses than are animals LliaL: id't

been adapted t o 1 he situation, a nd the use of i1iam- 1 rrad ia 1 idcontr"li

does not always eliminate
Le the problem.
Mfl.
Workers i n the re teimn area of S F'S exposcd a t the ord 1 ria i"
dc'nsiLy level of microwaves (0.01 to 1.0 mW/eni 2 ) wo' id 1101 be uxptLtd
to show any endocrine changes resulting from the cxl-.ilre.

11 such

all

exposure were repeated regularly, the workers mightL exper L enre 5(}ini

alterations in circad fnii rhythm, but thiss eife( 1 would probably not l-n'
serious. Workers exposed 10 Lhi: q nxlmum power density level (23 mW/1'nr)
would probably show changes in blood th y roxine levels, (111(1 possibly
increases in blood adrenocorticoid levels. The probability of
occorrcnce of such changes would increase with increasingduration
of exposure.

6-54

6.8

IMt4EJNOLOCICAL EFFECTS
The accumulation of reports to date indicates that microwave

irradiation has quite definite effects on the immunological system of
mammals. Most of the reported effects were detected after exposure
at relatively high power-density levels (> 10 mW!cm 2 ); a few have been
detected following exposure to low power-density levels ('.. 0.5 mW/m2);
and in some cases effects obtainable from high power-density exposure
were not found at lower power densities. In most studies the mechanism
for the effect was not investigated, and there is a fair degree of
inconsistency among the separate reports.
To present a reasonable overview of immunological effects, the
principal result.s of a sample of the studies are summarized in Table
6-3. The first four studies were investigations of the abiiity of microwave irradiation in vitro to ac.t as a mitogenic stimulus for lymphocytes. This effect was first reported by Stodolnik-Baranska in 1967,
was repeated (with some difficulty) by Czerski (1975) and by Baranski
and Czerski (1976), but Smialowicz (1976) could not obtain a similar
result. After extensive study, Baranski and Czerski concluded that
the mitogernLc effect depended, in a complex way, on the rise of temperature in the culture medium. On the basis of his ctudy, one would
conclude that microwaves have no intrinsic mitogenic effect on lymphocytes.
The next three studies were investigations of the effect of
rnlcrowave irradiation in vivo on the number of cells of the spleen
forming antibody to sheep red blood cells (SRBC). Krupp (1977)
reported an increase in iiumbcr of anti-SRBC cells following acute
irradiation. Caerski (1975) reported the same following chronic irradiation at low power-density levels, and Smialowicz et al. (1979b) reported
no effect following subchronic irradiation overa wide range of power
densities. The results of Krupp (unfortunately, oly obtainable as
an abstract) indicated that the same effect could be produced by an
increase in the temperature of the animals or by injecting them with
cortisone, suggesting that the effect was a stress response mediated
through tho endocrine system. The results of Czerski indicated that
there was an increase in the number of anti-SRBC cells after six weeks
6-55

Table 6-3
EFFECTS OF MICROWAVES ON THE WMWE SYSTEM
TYpe [it

1 Liti vAuthor

1.yuILpll1)b 1 ilS t
Trap 1i rilia 1 1 ufl

y La r

An Ltiii 1
Spvc 1 (S

lki r: t iun
(h r)

1 otl1 e 1 ty

-

flntt

B 1 s t t rans ftrrni 1 IOU CL- 11 cultures
Blast trans forwuioss Poor reproducibility
8l.t 1rinsfrit kin Temperature
dependence
NeiiaL3ve res1 is
1n'reas in number f Temp. dependence
antibody cells
cortisone indrnib1
iflcrL1Se in number 1 Effect at 6 wk
reversed at 12 wk
zintibudy cells

Iiin

-

-

-

OflcL

LI1

111.6

5-15

-

Once

House

2.45

10

1-4

Oni.

2.6

10-20

juuse
Czurski (1)75)
SniIjItiw1z el j1
t1ouse
(1979b)
ltutkovska
Vat
J.yrnpIIocyttsls or
1 lkns
(1975)
Lyrnphopsnla
11
I'azdcrovaRat
Vejltipkova
(1979)
H1tjenjc SvIinLI1atja W1k tor-Jed rzeezLIk
Mcnise
uE Lymphocytes
el di. (1977)
SniIa1owLz et al.
L.it
(1979a)

lIeaItIi and Disease

Po wer
Dtiii 1 i y
(W/crm1)

S t ud 1 n i k
11 ri n.ki (1967)

J Vitro lriadiu tnu Cztrk.i (1975)
ili r.i risk 1 & (:zi.rs k 1
(1976)
1976)
SIDILI Ii,wii
SIip R1I(' AntIhod1s
1r(L1)l) (1917)

Otluer Studies

Microwave
1rtqttcnt y
(ClL) -

0.425

0.6

Once

-

1)'1tY.
6-12 wk
5 days

1

1' r 1 nc lp.i 1
FI lLd 1 ng

RL.WI rks

Nigar1ve results

Lymphorytosla at
days
No effect at 1
2.74
.
Lympliopenbi
7
0.
Increase of F' and
2.45
11-22
0iic
0.7
( cells
Increase of n[tun
Only longer
Da11y,
2.45
5
4
35-55 d.
responding culls
exposure positive
Reproduction In
0j11y,
Slivadala et i.
Full Publication
Rat
2.315
0.5
7
30 J.
(3977)
number of T cel l s
not available
0 i11y,
Fluctuation in number Time-dependence
1.
2.45
5-15
0.5
Iluaug & k'1d (197
of band T cells
rsptins1veness
1-17 J.
lncr4.'use in nurubers
Once Or
Same effect from
Mouse
6.026
1.lbri1y (1979u)
800
0.25
corticoid Injection
of band T eel Is
20 d.
ScI.igel et al.
0.2 5ltwrease In, rt
Dependence on
Mouse
2.45
Once
(1979)
075
al
L511s
genetic factors
Decrease in number
Daily,
10
Rabbit
2.45
: y et al. (1976b)
23
6 mo.
nf 8 (
Daily,
Elevation of ctrc.
No protection against
Liddle eL al. (1979) Rouse
9
10
2
irntthody titer
5 d.
organism challenge
0ah1y
1 hour exposure to
Stiptression
of
Majde & On (1979)
House
0.148
3,110.5
1
3 d.
anapirylaxls
c1d gave samo e1'fet
Datly,
Enhanced lymphocyte
Lthurdy (1979h)
Unusu
2.5
30.l0
0.5
10 d.
activity against graf
l.IhuirdyMouse
(1979t-)Altered
migration
of
30
0.5
2.5
0ne
T-Iymph4reyts
Szmigletski 01 al.
Daily.
Redu-d rantI1nryce
Rabbit
3
3
6
(1975)
1 6-12 wk
respolss to tuftt1on No animals died
PautrLzcl et al.
L'raL'trton
agatust
Dally.
Mouse
6
U.S.
U.S.
(1975)
lethal infection
6 d.
Praiisnitz & Sussk1nd
Daily,
Dail
y,
Protection a1ns
ineldenr1 obseruat.
9,27
House
100
0.067
(0621
colony Infetb'n
1n ctiou unintended
S-4nr1Le15k 1 et al
Earlier appearan
n1y 20 GAII was
Muse
5,20
2.45
2
1-4 so. I of L•xpt}. turunrs
ftIui•
2.45

100

24.4

L083

Once

1

J ailly.

of irrad1at1on, but that after 12 weeks of irradiation, the effect had
disappeae.i suggesting that the animals had accommodated physiologically
to the radiation.
Rotkovska and Vacek (1975) reported lymphocytosis following a brief,
intense exposure to microwaves, and Pazclerova-Vejlupkova (1979) reiirted
1ymphopinia following chronic mi'rowave exposure at 24 niW/cm 2 . When
Pazderova-Vejlupkova attempted to repeat the work at 1 mWIcm 2 , she

found no effect; the latter experiment was performed in collaboration
with the USSR Academy of Sciences. Lymphopenia was also reported by
Liburdy (1979a) following a single, intense exposure of mice to microwaves. The occurrence of the lymphopenia depended on a rise in core
temperature of the irradiated animals; irraiation at nonthermogcnic
doses produced no response Howver, heating the animals to the same
core temperature produced only a weak 1ymph rutnic response.
Several stuc.es have been conducted on the number of immunologically reactive lymphocytes in the spleen or circulating blood of
animals exposed to microwaves. The most extensive review of the nature
and experimental manifestation of cellular immunity and of the effects
of microwaves on cellular immunity is presented in the study by

Wiktor-Jedrzejczak et al. (1977). The responses were somewhat variable,
with the only certain conclusion being that there were effects. The
results of Sinialowicz et al. (1979b) and of Huang and Mold (1979) indicate that the response may depend on duration of exposure, suggesLing
an effect similar to that of Czerski (1975) with sheep red blood cells.
The results of Schlagel et al. (1979) suggest that genetic factors may
play a role in the response mouse strains having tha hiLocompatibiiiiy
hapiotype were responsive, whereas those bearing the H_2b and
hapiotypes were not. The results of Liburdy (1979a) indicated that the
response was associated witb a rise in plasma corticosteroid hormone
levels and could be produce by injection of synthetic corticosteroid
hormones.
Various other immunological responses have been studied. Liddle
et al. (1979) observed that mce immunized against Streptococcus pneumoniae
had higher circulating antibody titers against the organism after five
days of microwave irradiation. This higher titer did not, however,

6-57

protect the mice from challenge with a xirulent strain of S. 2,umoniae.
Ma l de and Lin (1979) reported suppression of anaphylactic response following
microwave irradiation. A similar effect was observed by Liburdy (1979c).
Madje noted that the same effect could be produced by keeping the
animals in a cold room. This observation is quite interesting in that
exposure to cold is a known producer of stress. Perhaps cold exposure
could he used to identify microwave effects that are stress-mediated
and to distinguish between stress-inediabd and temperature-mediated
effects. Liburdy (1979b) observed that microwave irradiation increased
the potency of lymphocytes for rejecting allografts of ET-4 lymphoma
cells. 1{e also reported that microwave irradiation selectively caused
circulating T-lymphocytes to be trapped in the lungs and to be directed
to the bone marrow, rather than the spleen.
Several studies have been conducted to determine whether microwave effects on the immune system alter the severity or incdern of
disease. This is a relatively difficult area to investigate, and
reliable, consistent results are hard to achieve. Szmigialski et al. (1975)
observed rabbits experimentally infected with Staphylococcus aurcus
following microwave irradiation for 6 to 12 weeks. He reported that
microwave-exposed animals showed a depression in peripheral granulocyte
count, a depression in granulocyte reserve that could be mobilized by
bacterial endotoxin, and an increased 1yozyine activity of serum; he
stated that the irradiated animals appeared "sicker." On the other
hand, Pautrizel et al. (1975) reported that radiofrequency irradiation of mic
conferred protection against an otherwise fatal challenge with Trypanosonia
eguiperdwt. Finally, as noted above, Liddle et al. (1979) reported that
microwave irradiation caused elevation of antibody titer against S.
pneumoniae, but no protection against challenge by the living organism.
Prausnitz and Susskind (1962) observed dring long-term chronic microwave irradiation of mice that the irradiated mice appeared to have
more resistance than controls did to a pneumonia infection accidentally
introduced into the colony. However, this was an incidental observation,
and not a planned experiment. Szmiglelski et 21. (1979) reported that
microwave irradiation of iivtce at 20 mW/cm 2 and simultaneous treatment with

6-58

diethylnitrosainine or 3,4-benzpyrene led to earlier appearance of tumors
from these carcinogens. When the micruwave irradiation was given at
5 mW/cm, however, it had no "promoting" effect on carcitiogenesis.
In summary, microwave irradiation has effects on the immune system
of mammals. Some of the reported effects were obtained at low power-denit
levels, but most of the studies were performed at relatively high power
densities, and in some cases effects obtained at high power density were
not found at lower power densities, suggesting the possibility that
power-density thresholds exist. Some of the reults indicate immunosuppressive
effects, some indicate immunostimulative effects, and some indicate that
the state of the immune system depends on the duration of exposure or the
time--in relation to irradiation--when measurements were taken. The
existing evidence indicates that the immune system effects are probably
mediated through the effect of the radiation on the endocrine system,
involving the general adaptation syndrom to sEz , 3s. It appears dout.u1
at present that microwaves have any direci: stimulatory effect on the
cells of the immune system.
From the viewpoint of the SPS, workers exposed to the radiation at
ordinary power density levels (0.01 to 1.0 rnW/cm 2 ) would probably exhibit
no changes in immunological response, particularly if the exposure occurred
rather irregularly. If the exposure occurred regularly on a five-day-aweak schedule, there might be some changes in immune responsiveness.
Workers exposed to the maximum power density (23 niW/cm 2 ) might show
some changes in immune responsiveness. Again, regular exposure would
be more likely to produce changes than sporadic exposure. Evidence for
potential hazard to humans from immunological changes brought about by
microwave exposure is inconsistent, but there is presently no strong
evidence that harm would probably result.

6-59

6.9 BI0CFtE1ICL, PHYSIOLOGICAL, AND CELLULAR EFFECTS
A number of reports have been publlshed indicating that microwave
irradiation has specific direct effects on biochemical processes, enzyme
systems, cell membranes, and muscle contraction. This section considers
some of the completely published reports on these phenomena.
In a study of mice exposed to 2.45 GFlz in the dose-rate rare of
o to 44 mW/g, Ho and Edwards (1977) found that mice decreased their
oxygen consumption and metabolic rate during exposure. The decreased
oxygen consumption appears when the radiation dose rate exceeded the
basal metabolic rate, and returned to normal when the irradiation was
discontinued. Phillips et al, (1975) exposed rats to 2.45 G1-Iz microwaves at 4.5, 6.5, and 11.1 mW/g for 30 minutes. Colonic and skin
temperatures were elevated at all dose rate levels, and oxygen consumption was reduced at 6.5 and 11.1 mW/g, but not at 4.5 mW/g. The reduced
oxygen consumption at 11.1 mW/g persisted for more than five hours after
cessation of exposure. In a more recent study. Lovely et al. (1979)
found that rats exposed to 2.45 CHZ radiation at 5 mW/cm 2 for 10 hours
per day reduced their food and water consumption without significant
reduction in body weigl't. Both of these effects can be reasonably
attributed to metabolic adaptation to the heat load induced by the
irradiation.
Deficis et al. (1979) exposed mice to 2.45-GHz microwaves continuously
for 60 hours at 3-. 4 mW/cm 2 . They reported that the mice had elevated
levels of serum triglycerides and serum beta-lipoproteins two hours
afte: termination of the radiation. There was some indiation that the
effect might be po'.-er density-dependent. This result may be related to
the study of Pazderova et al. (1974), who reported that workers in
television and radio transmitting stations had decreased serum albumin
levels and increased serum alpha- and beta-globulin levels.

The report

noted that although the changes were significant, the values were still
within the normal human range and the workers appeared to be in good
health.
Although claims have been made that microwave irradiation alters
the permeability of cell membranes, Liu et al. (1979) found no effect
of microwaves on the membrane permeability of rabbit, human, and dog
erythrocytes other than what could be

attributed to a rise in temperature

of the suspending medium. Similarly, Allis and Froinrne (1979) found no
effect of microwave irradiation on adenosine triphosphatase, an enzyme
involved in maintaining the sodium-potassium ba!ance of erythrocytes.
6-60

The calcium efflux phenomenon and the effects of microwaves on the bloodbrain barrier (discussed in Section 6-5) might also be considered
effects of microwaves on membrane permeability. The calcium efflux
phenomenon dependsupon a low-frequency amplitude modulation of the
radiofrequency signal, and hence is probably not an intrinsic property
of the microwaves. The effects of ni1cTOWnVCS on the blood-brain barrier
, remain in dispute at prtsent, but the evidence indicates that the effect
is subject to a power-density threshold.
Several reports have been published indicating that microwaves
affect smooth muscle contraction. McArthur et al. (1977) found that
960- MHz irradiation of post-pyiorr segments of rat gut at 1.5 to 5.5
mW/g caused an increase in perisLaUlc acL L vLLy. The increased activity
could be blocked by treatment of thesegment with atropine. Onthe
other hand, Whitcomb et al. (1979) found no effect of 1-(Hz microwaves
on contraction rate of isolated segments of rat gut.
Reed et al. (1977) found that exposure of the isolated rat heart
to 0.960 GO microwaves at 2 mW/g for 10 minutes caused a slight
bradycardiac (0 5 to 10% reduction below controls.

Pretreatment of

the isolated hearts with atropine and propanol.ol to block the autonomic nervous system also blocked the microwave-induced bra iycardia.
Phillips et al. (1975) observed a bradycardia in IrILaCL rats following
exposure to 2.45 CiIz microwaves for 30 minutes. At an SAR of 4.5 mW/g
the efleci was insignificant; at 6.5 mW/g, IL was mild and returned
to normal within two hours; at 11.1 mW/g, ILT was pronounced, and tachycardia developed after two hours. In addition, seven out of Len rats
at 11.1 mW/g and two out (;f ten at 6.5 mW/g exhibited irregular heart
rhythm. The rh y thm returned to normal within one hour. They calculated
that the plane-wave power density corresponding to 6.5 rnW/g in these
animals was 31 mW/cm2.
In summary, microwave irradiation produces a ntabo1ic adaptation
to heat load and a change in serum lipids and proteins. Continuous-wave
microwaves have no effect on cell membranes o

mcrnbranobound enzymes

except that produced by temperature rise, but modulated microwaves at
low modulation frequency may affect membrane function. Reports of

6-61

effecr ca smooth muscle contractions appear to be inconsistent and, in
any c

, are reported only for isolated preparations and not for

intac animals. Microwave irradiation at high power density levels can
produce temporary bradycardla and irregularities in cardiac rhythm.
Workers in the recterrna area of the SPS would probably show
changes in serum protein levels similar to those reported by Pazdsrova
et al. at both the ordinary (0.01 to 1.0 mW/cm 2 ) and maximum (23 mW/cm2)
power-density levels of exposure. There is no evidence that this effect
would have any significance for human health. In addition, workers
exposed to the maximum (23 mW/cin 2 ) power density level would experience
a significantly increased heat load which could lead to several biochemical and physiological effects that are part of the normal physiological response to heat load. In addition, depending on the SAR in
various locations in the human body, workers exposed to the maximum
power density (23 mW/cm 2 ) could experience temperatures elevated
considerably above the average at specific sites, which could lead to
special compensating mechanisms. Finally, workers exposed to the
maximum power density (23 mW/cm 2 ) might occasionally experience slight,
but temporary, bradycardia and irregularities of cardiac rhythm.

6-62.

7 ECOLOGICAL ISSUES

The ecological effects of the solar power satellite system within
the rectanna area can be considered under several hcadings, e.g.,
effects of construction activity, effects of presence of the rectenna,
etc. This section will consider only the possible effects of the
microwaves from the satellite on the biota within the reotenna area.
The effects of microwaves on the biota can be considered from two
points of view: effects on climate in the region, and direct biological
effects of the microwaves on the biota. Since most of the microwave
energy will be absorbed by the rectenna and converted into electric
energy, the resilual incident power density available for altering the
regional temperature (about 1 percent of 1 to 23 mW/cm 2 ) wili be
essentially trivial, and there would be no expected effect on climate.
Likewise, the rectenna design provides for 98 percent transmission 02
solar energy down to the ground, so there will be no perceptible shading
effect of the rectenna.
Biological effects of the microwave radiation can be considered
for three regions: the region underneath the rectenna, the region
between the exclusion fence and the rectenna, and the region above the
rectenna where insects, birds, and other vertebrates may fly around or
perch on top of the rectenna. The region directly underneath the
rectenna will be exposed to power density levels of between 0.01 and
0.23 rnW/cm 2 , the region between the exclusion fence and the rectenna
will be exposed to power density levels of between 0.1 and 1.0 mW/cm2,
and the region above the rectenna will be exposed to 23 mW/cm2.
There is a general lack of information about the effects of microwaves on the diverse species of the animal and plant kingdom. Based on
the biological studies summarized in Section 6, there are few documented
effects at power density levels significant1 below 1 mW/cm 2 ; hence it might
be reasonably expected that there would be no significant effec t s on the biota
residing and remaining below the rectenna. Between the exclusion fence

7-1

and the recicnnn (0.1 to 1.0 inW/crn 2 ) there might be some biological
cffccts, parLivar1y in the region immediately adjacent to the rectenna.
The naLure of these effects cannot be predicted, but it should be noted
LI1aL, because of the puiieLrat i.rlg nature of microwaves, there could be
some effects relating to the distribution 01 water within the soli and
the plants and insects immediately next to the rectenna.
Abovu the rcLeiina, !)1oi.()g.icai effects of the microwaves would
th1inI Lely b expected, but again, the exact nature of the effects cannot
be predicted. Gary and Weswrdaht (1978) have summarized a variety of
reported eifeci:s caused by exposure of insects to RFR. The direct
QfIe(15 ranged from unrest to death, depending on the level and
duration of exposure and the species studied. More recently, in a
preliminary report submitted to EPA, they noted that brief exposures to
microwaves at power densities ranging up to 50 mW/cni 2 had no significant
effect on the ability of honey bees to return to their hives. Effects
of marininis, birds, and other vertebrates are somewhat difficult to predict.
A preliminary report on effects of microwaves on birds (Arthur D. Little,
1980) consists mainly of a description of experimental design and
fadfl:iLy construction. Probably, one of the major haz'rds would be to
birds in flight over the rcctemta area. These birds would be already
subjcL to a substantial heat stress from the act of flying, and the
additional heat burden from the microwaves might overload thermal
compensating mechanisms in these animals. The problem of vertebrates on
Lop of the L-ertenna is complicated by the possibility that during cold
(aL1i(r these animals iiiiglit seek the Lop of the recterina as a region of
comparative warmth. This could create a problem of reduced energy
absorption and conversion within the rectenna.
In summary, the major effects of the microwave radiation on the
bioLa oE the roctenna area will most likely be found in the region above
the rectenna. Presently available data are insufficient to make exact
predictions of the biological and ecological e.IfecLs in this region.

7-2

8 MISCONCEPTIONS
Several misconceptions regarding the bioeffects of RFR continue
to be expressed in popular accounts outside the scientific 1iteratre on
the subject. Those accounts tend to be sources of some confusion to
the intelligent nonspecialist. The following are representative
examples.
The distinction between RFR and ionizing radiation is often
not made; consequently, the known hazards of the latter are linked--by
implication--with exposure to RFR. In essence, ionizing radiation
(which includes ultraviolet 1ight X-rays, and the emissions from radioactive materials) has sufficient quantum energy (see Section 5.1)
to expel an electron from a molecule, leaving the latter positively charged
and thereby strongly affecting its interactions with neighboring molecules.
Ionization can alter the functions of biological molecules fundamentally
and often irreversibly. By contrast, the quantum energies of RFR are
so much smaller, that their primary* effect is to agitate molecules
rather than ionize them. Also, RFR-induced agitation ceases as soon
as exposure to RFR is halted. At low RFR intensities, the heat that
such agitation represents is well accommodated by the normal thermoregulatory capabilities of the biological entity exposed, and therefore
such effects are generally reversible. At high RFR intensities, the
thcrmoregulatory capabilities may be inadequate to compensate for such
effects, thereby leading to thermal distress or even irreversible
thermal damage. In summary, a single quantum of ionizing radiation
that is absorbed by a molecule alters the properties of that molecule
and thereby may profoundly affect the function of the biological constituent involved, whereas the concurrent absorption of many quanta of
RFR is necessary to cause biologically significant effects.

*
The possibility of long-range quantum interactions, discussed in
Section 5.1.3, is not excluded; however, evidence of their occurrence
in live animals is sparse as yet, and there is no evidence that such
effects could be harmful if they do occur.
8-1

It follows from the discussion above that even if an effect is
produced by RFR, that effect may not necessarily be deleterious to the
entity involved. As an example of a nonhazardous biological effect,
normal levels of light (a form of electromagnetic radiation having
quantum energies above those of RFR but below those of the ionizing
radiations mentioned previously) are absorbed by the skin and converted into harmless heat and, of course, such absorption in the eyes
is necessary for vision. Nevertheless, 11 should be stated that one of
the reasons why the levels of allowable exposure of humans to RFR are
generally lower in Eastern European countries is their philosophicallybased assumption that every effect produced by RFR is potentially
harmful--a view not generally shared by Western countries.
Concerned people often ask whether quarantees can be offered
that chronic exposure to low levels of an agent such as RFR will have
no deleterious effects many years in the future. The frequent ingestion
of small quantities of certain substances that are stored in the body
can result in a large, potentially harmful total dose. Unlike such
substances, RFR energy continually absorbed at low incident power

densities (dose rates) is readily dissipated and does not accumulate
toward the equivalent of RFR energy absorbed at high incident power
densities. This is one of the basic reasons why there are threshold
power densities for the various RFR bioeffects.
Accounts of purported deleterious effects of RFR exposure on
humans sometimes appear that, on investigation, are found to be either
specious or not due to RFR exposure. Moreover, some of these accounts
persist or are repeated well after investigations have shown them to
be incorrect. Examples of such occurrences include the videoterminal
cases discussed in Section 6.4.2 and the often reported Moscow Enibassay
story discussed in Section 6.1. In the videoterminal situation, the

8-2

level of RFR from the terminals was found to be unmeasurable relative
to Lhe environmental level. Regarding the Moscow embassy, rsidenLs
did Lrideed suffer various illnesses, but the occurrence of such
illnesses could not be ascribed to RFR exposure. The intelligent
nonspecialist should examine such popular accounts with caution.

8-3

9 EVALUATION

The potential impact of the solar power satellite radiation can be
considered from four points of view: effects on workers in the area of
the rectenna system, effects on workers in space-building or maintaining
the satellite, effects on the general population, and q ffects on the
ecology within and outside of the rectenna.
A worker traversing the region between the exclusion fence and the
edge of the rectenna would be exposed to between 0.1 and 1.0 mW/cm2.
Once underneath the reclenria and proceeding toward the center, he would
be exposed to approximately one percent of the incident power density,
with a maximum of 0.23 mW/cm 2 at the center (USDOE and NASA, 1978).
Thus, the full range of ordinary exposure of the worker in the area of
the rectenna system would be 0.01 to 1.0 mW/cm 2 . The review of biological
effects in Chapter 6 reveals only a few reported effects at power densities
in this range:
• Clinical studies on occupational exposure of persons 10
radiofrequency radiation over a broad range of frequencies
(Klimkova-Deutschova, 1974; Sadcikova, 1974; Pazderova, 1971).
Pazderova reported that the workers were 111 good health, and
that the only change observed was a statistically (but not
clinically) significant rise in plasma protein levels. The
results of Sadcikova and of Klimkova-Deutschova have internal
inconsistencies that indicate limited application 10 SPS.
The radiofrequericy hearing effect. Since this effect
involves only pulsed radiation, it is not relevant 10 SPS.
The calcium efflux effect, reported by Adey and co-workers.
This involves amplitude-modulated radiation, and hence is not
applicable to SPS, which will be CW.
• The microwave-avoidance effect s reported by Frey and Felt
(1975). This, again involves pulsed radiation, and is

9-].

not applicable to SPS, for reasons stated above.
The drug-microwave interaction effects, reported by
Monahan and Henton (1979), Thomas and Maitland (1979),
Thomas et al. (1979), and Maitland (1979).

The reduced sperm counts in persoos occupationally
exposed to radiofrequency radiation, reported by
Lancranjan (1975).
Immunological effects reported by Czerski (1975) and
by Shandala (1977a).
The medical significance of the non-pulsed effects noted above
remains in ioubt, but the possibility exists that some of them could
appear in some of the workers under the normal conditions of exposure.
The highest level of exposure would occur in traversing the space between
the exclusion fence and the edge of the rectenna (0.1-1.0 mW/cm 2 ), so
if any problems are anticipated, most of them might be avoided by
transporting the workers in shielded vans.
A worker would be exposed to the full incident power of SPS (1.0
to 23 inW/cm 2 ) only if he had co climb on top of the rectenna or enter
an open area where part of the recterina had collapsed. A number of tlw
biological studies have shown effects in this power-density range.
Although few, if any, of the reported effects necessarily imply hazard
10 humans, prudent measures for the protection of workers under those

circumstances of exposure may be appropriate, pending acquisition 01
more iiiforrnation on effects of RFR on humans.
For workers in space, the incident power densities are likely to b
of the order of watts per cm 2 . This level is much too great for a human
10 tolerate for any length of time. Therefore, vehicles, space suits,

a nd other paraphernalia used by workers in the main beam area will have
to be provided with adequate RF shielding, including shielding for the
eyes.
For members of the general public outside the exclusion boundary,
the incident power density will be 0.1 mW/cn 2 or less. There are no

9-2

r1 tnbJ v reports Llmt acuLv or chronic oxposur to such power densities
on humans or Lhi f 1 uru and fwiin of this
1 11 I t .ivu any advursc r f
1

LOlL

III iva1 uit ing thi ImLcnt 1, 11 b lol nicn 1 and 1iin1 tli effects of microwave

r;1(1 la t ion from SPS , the 1 Io1oicn 1

ffcLi rej)orLed In mice and rats 1iav

Iiiii L ri.iL p d as 11 exposure of liumiiis .ti the s1i11c powcr density levels

Jiwtvir , as d Lui$ed in Chap Le r 5
ind rnLN have I,ucly cl 1 1flius LOOM ratherr c10141 1(1 the wave length of

w ' u 1 d produce s1m] 1 i r & 1 1 V{' 1. .
1i

4 ) ( : 11 microwaves, mid, (Dt11Ja r(d to man, the SAR in ru [ce and rats will

lu 1IM1(U 1.0 1 lines gr'. t i r aL this freqtn . ncy .
L1Rr

0I1 Jitnxit

is ;I

Thus, in flS$QSS ii.g effects

ive SLLLy f:i'L&,r of 10, which will. allow

till 11n44rLL LnL 1r-s' In v.ir 1 lt15 1 neE or-, ;iih

1)wLL dnsi ty LIlri•sliulds

!;1jet 1 i; d if rt'ts • and oL1iirs.

onH iderd suparawly for ipccLc's at

1i Ifi 1 lff( LM III; Iy hi

uud li v 1 and 1 rbo r iw b 1 o in .

For ground level i-pec1 s, the power

t141l; itv III' RH( will range 1 riru 0.1 Lo 0,23 rnw/c'm 2 under the rcctenna

iuiI 1 rI i 0. 1 to 1 mW/tm 2 betweeii the boundary fence and thc rec Leuiia

( ('1WPI :ind NASA • q 78) .

There 14 00 .'urrent p v idenr p that these power

1 s W! I I advi'rs 1 y all e 1 the vcosysLem In Lli is region

11tI 11 v 1

'Lfldeo(l

1 rtt'-t tif Lhe region, Lhe rati of energy deposition will average less

L liiii Ow diurnal 1 uinp ra Lure cycle. Airbo
r tI)LV
1 11w.

t.lie r'toiiiia 1n(l rina 10 there for s ignt iLiant periods of

Al prscnt 1 hrt 1

1 ) 11!, 111' 1 ,

rne 1)10 La may en L.r the region

w()ul d :idvtrse]

evidence one way or tli p otlicr that such
af1e't s L1l1 sI)4'Ci1H.

9-3

10 REFERENCES

K.

11 t ,

In

11

1

U. U. \darw;"Microwaves lRduce Peripheral VasodilaLJ-ofl
!t1'i,k . ," SrOnvu, Vol. 207, No. 4437, pp. 1381-1383

)

V. R., "!"tlroducLion: Effects of Electromagnetic Radiation on
Ko Nor . '.ts System," Ann. N.Y Acad. Sci., Vol. 247, pp. 15-20
(1

/

)

\hv, 1 1. R,, IvicJlnc' for Cooperative Mechanisms in the Susceptibility
or Cer p bral Tissue to Environmental and Intrinsic Electric Fields,
1r F. (, SchmLtt. D. N. Schneider, and D. N Crothers (eds.),
in Biornolecular SysLems, Raven Press, New York,
325-112 (1979b)
, W. R. "11 . J s of Membranes of Cerebral Cells as Substrates for
iT1iorm1t icI S(:oiig," paper presented at Symposium on Memory
Cntr
Stt'nis, Acad. Sci. USSR and Acad. Med. Sci. USSR, Leningrad
(17 No
nibrr 1976).
\dy, W. R., "Pinpross Report--Problem Area P1. Study of the Biological
1t fec; oi EflvLronrnc?fltat Physical Factors. Topic 17 The Effects
or NauftI[ing Radiation on the Central Nervous System and Behavior.
Pr oj ect 1
TO Study of the Effects of Microwaves in Isolated
; Y Ila)t1c Function and Transmission of Neural Iinpulses,°
D. 1. MtReo, U.S. Coordinator for Problem IV, US-USSR Cooperative
Pr'gL;1ni, HI ON, North Carolina 27709 (1977)
AdTy, W. R., °Experino.nL and Theory in Long Range Interactions of
Electromagnetic Fields at Brain Coll Surfaces," in Proceedings of
LhoBimcLicEffecLs WorksbQpApri1 6-7, Lawrence Berkeley
LaboraIui, Ropori LBL-7452, pp. 53-75 (1978).
Oeiroplivsiologic Effects of Radiofrequency and Microwave
A.v. W. R.,
Radiation,
13u11. N.Y. Acad. Med., Vol. 55, No. 11, pp. 1079-1093
(IJ79)
Aliv, W. R. , 1rrqtto t iry and Power Windowing in Tissue Interactions with
Weak 11i.ctron p auiu. tic Fields," Proc. IEEE, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 119-125
(80).
Ah y , ti. R, and S. M. I3awLn (ds.), Brain Interaction with Weak Electric
and MaLflLic_FLlds, Neurosciences Research Program Bulletin,
1 , No. J, MIT Press (1977).
W.

l0-1

Adey, W. R. and S. M. Bawin (eds.), "Brain Cell Surfaces in Cooperative
Binding and Release of Calcium by Low Level Electromagnetic Fields,"
in Abstracts of Open Symposium on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Helsinki, Finland (1978).
Albert, E. N., "Reversibility of the Blood-Brain Barrier," Radio Sci.,
Vol. 14, No. 65, pp. 323-327 (1979).

Albert, E. N. and M. DeSanLis, "Do Microwaves Alter nervous System
Structure?" Ann. N.YI Acad. Sci., Vol. 247, pp. 87-108 (1975).
Albert, E. N. and M. DeSantis, "Histological Observations on Central
Nervous System," in C. C. Johnson and M. L. Shore (eds.),
Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, U.S Department of
iT ealth, Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication
(FDA) 77-8010, pp. 299-310 (1976).
Albert, E. N., L. Grau, and J. Kerns, "Morphologic Alterations in
Hamster Blood-Brain Barrier After Microwave Irradiation," J.
Microwave Power, Vol. 12, 1o. 1, pp. 43-44 (1977).
Alien, S. J. and W. D Hurt, "Calorimetric Measurements of Microwave
Energy Absorption by Mice after Simultaneous Exposure of 18 Animals,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 6S, pp. 1-4 (1979).
Allis, J. W., and M. L. Fromnie, "Activity of Membrane-Bound Enzymes
Exposed to Sinusoidally Modulated 2450-MH Microwave Radiation,"
Radio 3d., Vol. 14, No. 65, pp. 85-91 (1979).

Ames, B. N., "Identifying Environmental Chemicals Causing Ifutations and
Cancer," Science, vol. 204, pp. 587-592 (1979).
ANSI C95.1-1974, "Safety Level of Electromagnetic Radiation with Respect
to Personnel," issued by the American National Standards Institute,
published by the Institute of Flectrical and Electronics Engineers,
New York, New York (1974).
Appleton, B., Results of Clinical Surveys for Microwave Ocular Effects,
U.S. Dept. of Health, Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C.,
Public Health Service Report, Hew Publication (FDA) 73-8031,
BRH/DBE 73-3 (February 1973).
Aslan, E., "Broad-Band Isotropic Electromagnetic Radiation Monitor,"
IEEE Trans. Instr., Measurement, Vol. IM-21, pp. 421-424 (1972).
Babij, T. M. and H. Trzaska, "Omnidirectional Power Density Probes,"
Program and Abstracts of Annual Meetin g of URSI, Amherst, Massachusetts
(October 1976).

10-2

Baillie, H. D., "Thermal and Nonthermal Cataractogeiiesjs by Microwaves,"
presented at Symp. on Biol. Effects and Health Implications of
Microwave Irradiation, Richmond, Virginia (1969).
l3aillie, H. D., A. G. Heatons, and D. K. Pai, 'The Dissipation of Microwaves as Heat in the Eye" presented at Synip. on Biol. Effects and
Health Implications of Microwave Irradiation, 1ichmond, Virginia
(1969).
Baranski, S. and P. Czerski, Biological Effects of Microwaves, Dowden,
Hutchinson & Ross, Inc.. Stroudsburg, Pennsylvania, p. 133 (1976).
Bassen, H., M. Swicord, and J. Abita, 'A Miniature Broad-Band Electric
Field Probe," Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., Vol. 247, pp. 481-493 (1975).
Bassen, FI., et al., "Evaluation of an Implantable Electric-Field Probe
Within Finite Simulated Tissues," Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 6S,
pp. 15-25 (1977).
I3awin, S. M., in Summary of the ERMA.0 Work Session on Nervous System
and Behavioral Effects of Nonionizing Electromagnetic Radiations,
Office of Telecommunications Policy, Washington, D.C. 20504 (1974).
]3awin, S. M.,, and W. R. Adey, "Interactions Between Nervous Tissue and
Weak Environmental Electric Fields," in C. C. Johnson and M. Shore
(eds.), Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Vol. 1,
pp. 323-330, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare,
Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8010 (1976a).
Bawin, S. M. and W. R. Adey, "Sensitivity of Calcium Binding in Cerebral
Tissue to Weak Environmental Electric Fields Oscillating at Low
Frequency," Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., Vol. 73, No. 6, pp. 1999-2003
(1976b).
Bawiri, S. M. and W. R. Ade
"Calcium Binding in Cerebral Tissue," in
D. G. Hazzard (ed.), Symposium on Biological Effects and Measurenieut
of Radio Frequency/Microwaves, U.S. Department 02 Health, Education,
and Welfare, Washington, D.C., Hew Publication (FDA) 77-8026 (1977).
Bawin, S. 14., L. K. Kaczmarek, and W. R. Adey, "Effects of Modulated
VHF Fields on the Central Nervous System," Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci.,
Vol. 247, pp. 74-81 (1975).
Bawin, S. 14., A. R. Sheppard, and W. R. Adey, "Models of Long-Range
Order in Cerebral Macromolecules: Effects of ELF, VHF and tJHJ•
Fields in Calcium Binding," in Abstracts of 1917 international
Symposium on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves,
Airlie, Virginia (1977a).

10-3

Bain, S. M. et al.,, "Electromagnetic Radiation and Biological. Systems,"
Final Report, U.S. Public Health Services Grant 1 ROl FD-678-03,
Brain Research Institute, University of California, Los Angeles,
California (1977b).
Bawin, S. M., A. R. Sheppard, and W. R. Adey, "Possible Mechanisms
of Weak Electromagnetic Field Coupling in Brain Tissue," Bioelectrochem.
Bioeneretics, Vol. 5, pp. 67-76 (1978a).
Bawin, S. M. et al., "Ionic Factors in Release of 45ca2+ from Chicken
Cerebral Tissue by Electromagnetic Fields," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,
Vol. 75, pp. 6314-6318 (1978b).
gelsher, D. R., Development of Near-Field Electric Energy Density Meter
Model 1DM-2, HEW Publication (NIOSH) 75-140 (1975).
Berman, E. and H. B. Carter, "Mutagenic and Reproductive Tests in Male
Rats Exposed to 425 or 2450 MHz (CW) Microwaves," in Abstracts of
•Open Symposium on the Biological . Effects of Electromagnetic Waves,
Helsinki, Finland (1978).
Berman, 13., J. B. Kinn, and 11. B. Carter, "Observations of Mouse Fetuses
After Irradiation with 2.45 GUz Microwave," Health Phys., Vol. 35,
pp. 791-801 (1978).
Birenbaum, L., G. M. Grosof, S. W. Rosenthal, and M. M. Zaret, "Effect
of Microwaves on the Eye," IEEE Trans. BME, Vol. 16, pp. 7-14 (1969).
Blackman, C. F. et al., "The Effect of Mirrowave Exposure on Bacteria
Mutation Induction," in C. C. Johnsot and M. Shore (eds.), Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, U.S. Department of Health, Education,
and Wolf-are, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8010 (1976).
Blackman, C. F. et al., "Two Parameters Affecting Radiation-Induced
Calcium Efflux from Brain Tissue," in Abstracts of 1977 International
Symposium on the Biological Effects of Electromagtietic Waves, Airlie,
Virginia (1977).
Blackman, C. F, J. A. Elder, C M. Weil, S. G. Benane, D. C. Eichiriger,
and D. E. House, "Induction of Calcium-Ion Efflux from Brain
Brain Tissue
by Radiofrequency Radiation: Effects of Modulation Frequency and
Field Strength," Radio Sci., Vol. 14. No. 65, pp. 93-98 (1979).
Blasberg, R. G., "Problems of Quantifying Effects of Microwave Irradiation
on the Blood-Brain Barrier," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65, pp. 335-344
(1979).
Bowman, R. R., "Some Recent Development in the Characterization and
Measurement of Hazardous Electromagnetic Fields," in P. Czerski
et al. (eds.), Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of Microwave
Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 67-74 (1974).

10-4

Bruce-Wolfe, V. and D. R. Justesen, "Microwave-Induced iiyperthermia and
the Visually Evoked Electrocortical Response of the Guinea Pig,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65, pp. 187-191 (1979).
Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med., Second Series, Vol. 55, No. 11 (1979).
Burdeshaw, J.A. and S. Schaffer, Factors Associated with the Incidence
of Congenital Anomalies: A Localized Investigation, Final Report,
Report No. XXIII, May 24, 1973-March 31, 1976, EPA 600/1-77-016
(March 1977).
Cain, C. A. and W. J. Rissman, "Microwave Hearing in Mammals at 3.0 Gilz,"
in C. C. Johnson and M. Shore (eds.), Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Vol. 1, pp. 79-88, U. S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA)
77-8010 (1976).
Cain, C. A. and W. J. Ri3sivan, "Mammalian Auditory Responses to 3.0 GHz
Microwave Pulses," IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng, Vol. BME-25, No. 3,
pp. 288-293 (1978).
Cairnie, A. B. and R. K. Harding, "Further Studies of Testis Cytology
in Mice Irradiated with 2450-MHz 'Microwaves," BioelectromagrleLics
Syinposiuxn, Abstract A-32, p. 440, Seattle, Washington (June 1979).
Carpenter, R. L., "Microwave Radiation," in D. H. K. Len (ed.), Handbook
of Physiology (Section 9: "Reactions to Environmental Agents"),
American Physiological Society, Bethesda, Maryland, pp. 111-125
(1977).
Carpenter, R. L., "Ocular Effects of Microwave Radiation," Bull. N.Y.
Acad. Med., Vol. 55, No. 11, pp. 1048-1057 (1979).
Chang, B. K. et al., "The Effect of Microwave Radiation (1.0 GHz) on
the Blood-Brain Barrier in Dogs," Abstracts of Open Symposium on
Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Helsinki, Finland (1978).
Chen, K. M. A. Samuel, and R. Hoopingarner, "Chromosomal Aberrations
of Living Cells Induced by Microwave Radiation," Envir. Lett.,
Vol.. 6, pp. 37-46 (1974).
Chou, C. X. and R. Galambos, "Middle-Ear Impairment and Microwave
Hearing," in Abstracts of 1977 International Symposium on the
Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Airlie, Virginia
(1977).
Chou, C. K. and A. W. Guy, "Carbon-Loaded Teflon Electrodes for Chronic
EEG Recordings in Microwave Research," J. Microwave Power, Vol • 14
No. 4, pp. 399-404 (1979a).

10-5

Chou, C. K. and A. W. Guy, "Microwave-Induced Auditory Responses in
Guinea Pigs: Relationship of Threshold and Microwave-Pulse
Duration," Radio 3d., Vol. 14, No. 6S, pp. 193-197 (1979b).
Chou, C. K., A. W. Guy, and R. Galambos,"Characteristics of MicrowaveInduced Cochlear Mic.rophonics," Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 63,
pp. 221-227 (1977).
Chou, C. K. et: al.., "Effects of Continuous and Pulsed Chronic Microwave
Radiation on Rabbits," in Abstracts of Open Symposium on Lhe Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Helsinki, Finland (1978).
Cleary, S. F. and B. S. Pasterirnek, "LenLi.ctilar Changes in Microwave
Workers. A Statistical Study." Arch. Environ. Health, Vol.
pp. 23-29 (1966).
Cleary, S. 1?., "Uncertainties in the Evaluation of the Biological Effec
of Microwave and Radiofrequency Radiation," Health Physics, Vol, 25,
pp. 387-404 (1973).
Cleary, S. F., "Biological Effects of Microwave and Radiofrequency
Radiation," CRC Critical Reviews in Environmental Control, Vol. 8,
pp. 121-166 (1977).
Cleary, S. F., "Recapitulation: Biomedical Effects," Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med.,
Vol. 55, No. 11, pp. 1119-1125 (1979).
Cleary, S. F., B. S. Pasternack, and C. W. Beebe, "Cataract Incidence
in Radar Workers," Arch. Envirori. Health, Vol. 11, pp. 179-182 (1965).
Cohen, B. 11., A. M. Lilienfeld, S. Kramer, and L. C. Hyman, "Parental
Factors in Down's Syndrome--Results of the Second Baltimore CaseControl Study," in E. G. Hook and I. H. Porter (eds.), Pqpulation
Genetics-Studies in Humans, Academic Press, New York, pp. 301-352
(1977).
Cook, IL F.,, "Dielectric Behavior of Some Types of Human Tissues at
Microwave Frequencies," Brit. J. Appl. Phys., Vol. 2, pp. 295-300
(1951).
Cook, H. F., "A Comparison of Dielectric Behavior of Pure Water and
Human Blood at Microwave Frequencies," Brit. J. Appl. Phys.,
Vol. 3, pp. 249-255 (1952).
Czerski, P., "Microwave Effects on the Blood-Forming System with
Particular Reference to the Lymphocyte," Ann. N.Y. Acad. SO.,
Vol. 247, pp. 232-242 (1975).

10-6

CZLr.ki, P. ct al., 'Influence of Microwave Radiation on the Hemopc
System," in P. Czerski et al. (eds.)Pto1ogic Effects and Healrii
Hazards of Microwave Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw,
pp. 67-74 (1974).
Daily, L. et al., "The Effects of Microwave Diathermy on the Eye of the
Rabbit," Am. J. Ophthalmol., Vol. 35, pp. 1001-1017 (1952).

D t Ar,dra , J. A., 0. P. Gandhi, and J. L. Lords, "Behavioral and Thermal
Effects of Microwave Radiation at Resonant and Nonresonant Wave
Lengths,' Radio Sci., Vol. 1 , No. 6S, pp. 251-256 (1977).
I)ardallion, M., A. J. Berteaud, and C. Auerbeck, "Microwave Effects in
Drosophila inelanogasrer," in Abstracts of 1977 International
SyinposiLlrn on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves,
Airlie, Virginia (1977).
Dcficis, A., J. C. Dumas, S. Laurens, and G. Plurien, "Microwave Irradiation
and Lipid MeLabolism LLI Mice," Radio 3d., Vol. 14, No. 6S, pp. 99-101
(1979).
deLorge, J., "Operant Behavior and Rectal Temperature of SquOrrel
Monkeys During 2.45 GFIz Microwave Irradiation," aadio Sci., Vol. 14,
No. 6S, pp. 217-220 (1979).
deLorge, J. 0. and C. S. Szell, "Vigilance Behavior in Rats Exposed to
1.28 GHz Microwave Irradiation," Bioe:tectrornagnetics Symposium,
Abstract A-41, p. 449, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Dodge, C. H. and Z. R. Glaser, "Trends in Nonionizing Electromagnetic
Radiation BioeIfccts Research and Related Occupational Health
AspecLs," J. Microwave Power, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 319-334 (1977).
Dwaaasldj, J. D. and M. G. Shandala, "The Biologic Action and Hygienic
Significance of Electromagnetic Fields of Superhigh and Ultrahigh
Frequencies in Densely Populated Areas," in P. Czerski et al. (eds.),
Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of Microwave Radiation, Polish
Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 289-293 (1974)
Durn.±y, C. 11. et al., Radiofreguency Radiation Dosimetry Handbook (ed. 2),
USAF School of Aerospace Medicine, Brooks AFB, Texas; Report SAMTR-78-22 (1978).
Durney, C. H. et al., "Descriptive Summary: Radiofrequcncy Radiation
Dosimetry I!andbook--Second Edition," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65,
pp. 5-7 (1979).
DULLa, S. K., W. H. Nelson, C. F. Blacktnann, and D. J.
Brusick, "Lack
of Microbial Geneiic Response to 2.45-GHz CW and 8.5- to 9.6-G}tz
Pulsed Microwaves," 3. - Microwave Power, Vol. 14, No. 3, pp. 275-280

10-7

Eastwood, E., Radar Ornithology, Methuen & Co., distributed by Barnes
and Noble (1967).
Ferri, E. S. and M. E. G. Foti, "Cataractogenic Response of Rabbits to
Pulsed Microwaves of High-Peak Low-Average Power," in Abstracts
of 1977 International Symposium on the Biological Effects of
Electromagnetic Waves, Airlie, Virginia (1977).
Fisher, P. D., J. K. Lauber, and A. G. Voss, "The Effect of Low-Level
2450 MHz CW Microwave Irradiation and Body Temperature on Early
Embryonal Development in Chickens," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65,
pp. 159-163 (1979).
Foster, K. R. and E. D. Finch, "Microwave Hearing: Evidence for Thermoacoustic Auditory Stimulation of Pulsed Microwaves," Science,
Vol. 185, pp. 256-258 (1974).
Frey, A. H., "Auditory System Response to Radio-Frequency Energy,"
Aerospace Med., Vol. 32, pp. 1140-1142 (1961).
Frey, A. H. and S. R. Feld, "Avoidance by Rats of Illumination with Low
Power Nonionizing Electromagnetic Energy," J. Comp. Physiol. Psychol.,
Vol. 89, No. 2, pp. 183-488 (1975).
Frey, A. H. and E. Goren, "Holographic Assessment of a Hypothesized
Microwave Hearing Mechanism," Science, Vol. 206, pp. 232-234
(12 Oct 1979).
Frey, A. 11., S. R. Feld, and B. Frey, "Neural Function and Behavior
Defining the Relationship," Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., Vol. 247,
pp. 433-439 (1975).
Frey, A. H. et al.., "A Coaxial Pathway for Recording from the Cat Brain
During Illumination with UHF Energy," Physiol. and Behav.., Vol. 3,
pp. 363-364 (1968).

Frh1ich, 11., "Evidence for Bose Condensation-Like Excitation of Coherent
Modes in Biological Systems," Phys. Lett. ,, Vol. 51A, pp. 21-22
(1975a).

Frdhlich, H., "The Extraordinary Dielectric Properties of Biological
Materials and the Action of Enzymes," Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci.,
Vol. 72, pp. 4211-4215 (1975b).
Gage, M. 1., E. Berman, and J. B. Kirrn, "Videotape Observation of Rats
and Mice During an Exposure to 2450-MHz Microwave Radiation,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14No. 65, pp. 227-238 (1979a).

10-8

Gage, N. 1., J D. Edwards, and R. J. Pettthe].li, Chronic Exposure of
Rats to 100 MHz: Assessment of Operant Behavior, Bioelectroitiagnetics Symposium, Abstract A-37, p. 445, Seattle, Washington
(1979b).
Gandhi, 0. P., M. J. Hagmann, and J. A. DAndrea, "Part-Body and
Multibody Effects on Absorption of Rad:o-Frequency Electromagnetic
Energy by Animals and by Models of Man," Radio Sci., Vol. 14,
No. 6S, pp. 15-21 (1979).
Gandhi, 0. P., "Conditions of Strongest Electromagnetic Power Deposition
in Man and Animals," IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech.,
Vol. MTT-23, pp. 1021-1029 (1975).
Gandhi, 0. P., E. L. Hunt, and J. A. D'Artdrea, "Deposition of Electromagnetic Energy in Animals and in Models of Man With and Without
Grounding and Reflector Effects," Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 6S,
pp. 39-47 (1977).
Gary, N. E. and B J. Westerdahl, Study of Biological and Ecological
Effects of Energy Transmission by Microwaves on Behavior of Insects
and Other Terrestrial Invertebrates," Final Report for Ames Research
Center, NASA Contract NkS2-9539, as abstracted in Newson, B. D.,
"Research Plan for Study of Biological and Ecological Effects of the
Solar Power Satellite Transmission System," NASA Contractor Report
3044 (August 1978).
Goldstein, L. and Z. Cisco, trA Quantitative Electroencephalographic
Study of the Acute Effects of X-Band Microwaves in Rabbits,"
in P. Czerski et al. (eds.), Biologic Effects and Health Hazards
of Microwave Radiation, Polish dicaL Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 128-133
(1974).
Green, D. R., F. J. Rosenbaum, and W. F. Pickard, "Intensity of Microwave
Irradiation and the Teratogenic Response of Tenebrio Molitor,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, 14o. 6S, pp. 165-171 (1979).
Greene, F. M., "Development of Magnetic Near-Field Probes," U.S. Department
of Health, Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication
(NIOSH) 75-140 (1975).
Grodsky, I. T., "Y uronal Membrane: A Physical Synthesis," Math. Bio.
lei., Vol. 28, pp. 191-219 (1976).
Grove, A. M., D. M. Levinson, and D. R. Justesen, "Attempts to Cue
Successful Escape from a Highly Intense Microwave Field by Photic
Stimulation," Bioelectromagnetics Symposium, Abstract A-46, p. 454,
Seattle, Washington (1979).

10-9

Guy, A. W. et al., Quantitatiori of Microwave Radiation Effects on the
Eyes of Rabbits at 2450 MHz and 918 MHz, University of Washington
Scientific Report No. 2, Seattle, Washington (1974).
Guy, A. W., M. D. Webb, and C.C. Sorensen, Determination of Power
Absorption in Man Exposed to High frequency Electromagnetic Fields
by Thermographic Measurements an Scale Models," IEEE Trans. l3iomed.
En g ., Vol. 23, pp. 361-371 (1976a).
Guy, A. W., D. 1. NcRee, and F. McConnell, The Study of the Effects of
Microwaves on Behavior of Animals, Their Conditioned Reflex Activity,
and on Chemical, Cytochemical, and Immunological Properties of Blood,
Progr. Rpt. on Proj. 3, Topic 4.1 of the US/USSR Cooperative Program,
D. McRee (coordinator), NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina (1976b).
Hagmann, M. J. and 0. P. Gandhi, "Numerical Calculation of Electromagnetic
Energy Deposition in Models of Man with Grounding and Reflector
Effects," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 68, pp. 23-29 (1979).
Hagmatrn, N. J., 0. P. Gandhi, and C. H. Durney,"Numerical Calculation
of Electromagnetic Energy Deposition for a Realistic Model of Nan,
presented at the 1977 USC/1JRSI meeting, Airlie, Virginia (1977)
and to be published in IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory and Tech.
Hamnerius, Y., H. Olofsson, A. Rasmuson, and B. Rasmuson, 'A Negative
Test for Mutagenin Action of Microwave Radiation in Drosopbila
melanogaster," Mutation Res. Vol. 68, No. 3, pp. 217-223 (1979).
Hamrick, P. E. et al., "Humoral Immunity of Japanese Quail Subjected to
Microwave Radiation During Embryogeny," Health PLys., Vol. 33,
pp. 23-33 (1977).
Helier, J. R. and A. A. Teixeira-Pinto, "A New Physic'1 Method of
Creating Chromosomal Aberrations," Nature, Vol. 183, pp. 905-906
(1959).
Hirsh, F. G. and J. T. Parker, "Bilateral Lenticular Opacities Occurring
in a Technician Operating a Microwave Generator," ANA Arch. Ind.
Hyg. Occup. Med.,, Vol. 6, pp. 512-517 (1952).
Ho, H. S. and W. P. Edwards," Oxygen-Consumption Rate of Mine under
Differing Dose Rates of Microwave Radiation," Radio Sci., Vol. 12,
No. 68, pp. 131-138 (1977).
Huang, A. T. and N. Mold, "Immunologic and Hematopoietic Alterations by
2450 MHz Radiation," Bioelectroinagnetic Symposium, Abstract 3-19,
p. 476, Seattle, Washington (1979).

10-10

Hunt, E. L. and R. D. Phillips, ''Absolute Physical DosirneLry for Whole
Animal Experiments,Digest of Papers of the Microwave Density
Workshop, Atlanta, Georgia, June 1-2, 1972, sponsored by Department
of Microwave Research, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research (1972).
Janes, D. E, "Radiation Surveys-Measurement of Leakage Emissions and
Potential Exposure Fields," Bull. N.Y. Acid. Med., Vol. 55, No. 11,
pp. 1021-1041 (1979).
Janes, D. E. et al.., "Radio-Frequency Radiation Levels in Urban Areas,'
Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 6S, pp. 49-56 (1977).
Johnson, C. ,C. and A. W. Guy, ttNonionizing Electromagnetic Wave Effects
in Biological Materials and Systems," Proc. IEEE, Vol. 60,
pp. t92-718 (1972).
Johnson, C. C. at al., "Fiberoptic Liquid Crystal Probe for Absorbed
Radio-Frequency Power Temperature Measurement in Tissue During
Irradiation," Ann.N.Y. Acad. Sci., Vol. 247, pp. 527-531 (1975).
Joines, W. T. and R. J. Spiegel, "Resonance Absorption of Microwaves
by Human Skull," IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., Vol. BME-21, pp. 46-48
(1974).
Justesen. D. R., "Behavioral and Psychological Effects of Microwave
Radiation," Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med., Vol. 55, No. 11, pp. 1058-1078
(1979).
Justesen, D. R., "Microwave Irradiation and the Blood-Brain Barrier,"
Proc. IEEE, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 60-67 (1980).
Kalyada, T. V., P. P. Fukolova, and N. N. Goncarova, "Biologic Effects
of Radiation in the 30-300 MHz Range," in P. Cerski et al. (eds.)
Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of Microwave Radiation, Polish
Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 67-74 (1974).
Kaplan, J. et al.,"Biological and Behavioral Effects of Pre- and
Postnatal Exposure to 2450-MHz Electromagnetic Radiation in the
Squirrel Monkey," Abstracts of Open Syrnudum on the Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Helsinki, Finland (1978).
King, N. W., D. R. Justesen, and R. L. Clarke, "Behavioral Sensi[vity to
Microwave Irradiation," Science, Vol. 172, No. 3982, pp. 398-401
(1971)
Minn, J. B., "Whole Body Dosimetry of Microwave Radiation in Small
Animals: The Effect of Body Mass and Exposure Geometry," Radio
Sci., Vol. 12, No. GS, pp . 61-64 (1977).

lo-li

Klimkova-Deutschova, E., "Neurological Findings in Persons Exposed to
Microwaves," in P. Czerski et al. (eds.), Biologic Effects and
Health Hazards of Microwave Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers,
Warsaw, pp. 268-272 (1974).
Kramar, P. 0. et al., The Ocular Effects of Microwaves on Hypothermic
Rabbits: A Study of Microwave Catactogenic Mechanisms," Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci., Vol. 247, pp. 155-163 (1975).
Kritikos, H. N. and H. P. Schwan, "The Distribution of Healing Potential
Inside Lossy Spheres," IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., Vol.. BME-22,
pp. 457-463 (1975).
Kritikos, H. N. and H. P. Schwan, "Formation of Hot Spots in Multilaycr
Spheres," IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., Vol. 22, pp. 168-172 (1976).
Krupp, J. H., "Rader and Migrating Birds,' U.S. Air Force Aeromedical
Review, Vol. 3, p. 76 (1976).
Krupp, J. 11., "The Relationship of Thermal Stress to Immune-System
Response in Mice Exposed to 2.6 GHz Radio-Frequency Radiation,"
in Abstracts of 1977 International Symposium on the Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Airlie, Virginia (1977).
Lancranjan, 1. et al., "Gonadic Function in Workmen with Long-Term
Exposure to Microwaves," Health Ph y s., Vol. 29, pp. 381-385 (1975).
Larsen, L. E. and J. H. Jacobi, "Microwave Scattering Parameter Imagery
of an IsolatedCanine Kidney," Medical Physics, Vol. 6, No. 5,
pp. 394-403 (1979).
Lebovttz, R. N. and R. L. Seaman, "Microwave Hearing: The Response of
Single Auditory Neurons in the Cat to Pulsed Microwave Radiation,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 6S, pp. 229-236 (1977).
Lebovitz, R. M. and R. L. Seaman, "Effects on Behavior of Long Term
Exposure to Low Level MWR," Bioelectromagnetic Symposium, Abstract
A-39, p. 447, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Liburdy, R. P., "Eadiofrequency Radiation Alters the Immune System:
Modulation of T- and B-Lymphocyte Levels and Cell-Mediated Itumunocompetence by Hyperthermic Radiation," Radiat. Res., Vol. 77,
pp. 34-46 (1979a).
Liburdy, R. P., "Serum and Lymphocytes from Microwave Exposed Mice
Enhance Cell-Mediated Effector Function: Increased LymphocyteMediated Cytotoxicity During Allograft Rejection of EL-4 Lymphoma
Cells," Bioelectroma gnetics Symposium, Abstract 3-23, p. 480,
Seattle, Washington (1979b).

10-12

Liburdy, R. P., "Altered in vivo Lymphocyte Migration Following WholeBody RFR Exposure: Differential Effects on T- and B-.Lymphocytes,''
Bioelectromagnetics Sympo , Kum, Abstract B .-22, p. 479, Seattle,
WashingLon (1979c).
Liddle, C. G., J. P. Putnam, J. Y. Lewis, B. Dell, M. W. West, and 0. L
Effects
iluey, "The
of 9-GI{z Pulsed Microwaves on Circulating
Antibody Titers of Nice," Bioelectromagnelics Syniposium, Abstract
13-17, p. 474, SCaLL1C!, Washington (1979).
Lilienfeld, A. N. et al., "Foreign Servicc. Ili'alt:h Status Study: Evaluation
of Health Status of Foreign Service and Other Employees from Selected
Eastern European Posts," Final Report, July 31, 1978, Contract No.
6025619073, Dept. of Epidemiology, School of Hygiene and Public
Health, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland (1978)
Lin, J. C., "Microwave Propriios of Fresh Mammalian Brain Tissues at
Body Temperature, " IEEE Trans. J3ionied, Eng., Vol. 22, pp. 74-76
(1975).
Lin, J. C. "Further SL"dies on the Microwave Auditory Effect," IEEE
Trans, Microwave Theory Tech., V"1. 25, No. 11, pp. 938-943 (1977a).
Lin, J. C., 'theoretical Calculations of I'rcqiwnci•s and Thresholds of
Nicrowave-Induced Auditory SignaR,' Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 6S,
pp. 237-242 (1977b).
Lin, J. C., ''Microwave Biophysics," in M. A. Stuclily (c . d.), Microwave
Bioeffccts and Radiation Satety, Trans. LMPI, Vol. 8, The International Microwave Power .[n 1 11 t t e, Edinon L uii , Albe rla, Canada,
pp. 15-54 (1978).
Arthur D. Little, Inc., Response of Airborne Biota Lo Microwave Transmission from SPS, Quarterly Report No. 1 For October 1, 1979 to
January 1, 1980, EPA Contract No. 68-02-3278 (1980).
Liu, L. 14., F. G. Nickless, and S. F. Cleary, "Etlecls of Microwave
Radiation on Erythrocyte M' bran s ," Rad 1.0 Sc 1 . , Vol. 14, No. 6S,
pp. 109-115 (1979).
Livins Lan, G. K., C. C. Johnson, and L. A. 1)eLhlefsuu, "Comparative
Effects of Water and Microwave-'induced Ilypertlierniia on Cell Survival
and Sister Chromatid Exchange in Chinese Hamster Ovary Cells," j
Abstracts of 1977 International S ym p osium an the Biological Effects
of Electromagnetic Waves., Airlie, Virginia (1977).
Lobanova, E. A., "The Use 01 Conditioned Rof1exs 10 Study Microwave
Effects on the Central Nervous System," in P. Czerski. et al. (eds.),
Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of Microwave Radiation, Polish
Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 67-74 (1974'.

10-13

Lotz, W. G., Stimulation of the Adrenal Axis in the Microwave Exposed
Rat, Ph.D. discrtation, University of Rochester (1976). Available
from Xerox Univ. Microfilms, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48106, Order No.
77-25, 571.
Lotz, W. G. and S. N. Michaelson, "Effects of Ilypophysectomy and Dexamethasone on the Rats Adrenal Response to Microwave Irradiation,"
in Abstracts of 1977 International Symposium on the Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Airlic, Virginia (1977).
Lotz, W. G., S. N. Michaelson, and N. J. Lebda, Growth Hormone Levels
of Rats Exposed to 2450-MHz (CW) Microwaves,' in Abstracts of
1977 International Symposium on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Airlie, Virginia (1977).
Lovely, R. 11., S. J. Y. Mizumori, R. B. Johnson, and A. W. Guy, "Chronic
2
Exposure of Rats to 2450 MHz Microwaves at 5 mW/cm
Defining
Frequency Dependent Dose-Determinant Effects," Bioelectromagnetics
Symposium, Abstract A-38, p. 446, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Lu, S-T.., N. Lebda, S. M. Michaelson, S. Pettit, and D. Rivera, "Thermal
and Endocrinological Effects of Protracted Irradiation of Rats
by 2450-.MlIz Microwaves," Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 65, pp. 147-156

(1977).
Lu, S-T., S. Pettit, and S. M. Michaelson, "Dual Actions of Microwaves
on Serum Cortisone in Rats," Moelectromagnetics Symposium,
Abstract 4-5, p. 345, SeaLt.1, Washington (June 1979).
Magin, R. L., S-T. Lu, and S. M. Ni '-hae1so, "Stimulation of Dog Thyroid
by Local Application of High Intensity Microwaves," Am. J. Physiol.,
Vol. 233, pp. E363-E368 (1977a).
Magin, R. L., S-T. Lu, and S. M. Michaelson, "Microwave Heating Effect
on the Dog Thyroid,' IEEE Trans Biomed. Eng , Vol. 24, pp. 522-529
(1977b).
Maitland, G., "Modulation of Pentobarbital Effects on Timing Behavior in
Rats by Low-Level Microwaves," Bioelectromagnetics Symposium,
Abstract A-45, p. 453, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Najde, J. A. and J. C. Lin, "The Effect of Radiofrequency (148 MHz)
Electromagnetic Field Exposures on Hypersensitivity Responses in
Mice,"Bioelectromagnetics Sympojum, Abstract B-18, p. 475, Seattle,
Washington (1979).
Massoudi, H.., C. H. Durney, Fnd C. C. Johnson, 'A Geometric-Optics and
an Exact Solution for Internal Fields in and Energy Absorption by
a Cylindrical Model of Man Irradiated by an Electromagnetic Plane
Wave," Radio Sci.,, Vol. 14, No. 6, pp. 35-42 (1979).

10-14

McAfee, R. D., R. Bishop, and S. T. Elder, "The Effect of 9.31 GHz Pulsed
Microwave Irradiation on the Lever Press Behavior of Operantly
Responding Rhesus Monkeys," Eioelectrotnagnetics Symposium, Abstract
A-40, p. 448, Seattle, Washington (1979).
McArthur, G. R., J. L. Lords, and C. R. Durney, "Microwave Radiation
Alters Peristaltic Activity of Isolated Segments of Rat Gut," Radio
Sci., Vol. 12, No. 65, pp. 157-160 (1977).
McConnell, D. R., "Editorial Introduction," J. Microwave Power, Vol. 13,
No. 1, p. 1 (1978).
McRee, D.,, (Chairman), "A Technical Review 02 the Biological Effects
of Non-Ionizing Radiation," Report to the Office of Science and
Technology Policy by ad hoc Working Group (draft) (15 May 1978).
McRee, D. 1., "Review of Soviet/Eastern European Research an Health
Aspects 02 Microwave Radiation," Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med., Vol. 55,
No. 11, pp. 1133-1151 (1979).
Mckee, D. T1., "Soviet and Eastern European Research on Biological Effects
of Microwave Radiation," Proc. IEEE, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 84-91 (1980).
NcRee, D. 1. and P. E. Hamrick, "Exposure of Japanese Quail Embryos to
2.45 G}Iz Microwave Radation During Development," Radiat. Res.,
Vol. 71, pp. 355-366 (1977).
Merritt, J. 11., "Studies of Blood-Brai-' Barrier Permeability After Microwave Radiation," in Abstracts of 1977 International Symposium on
Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, AirlLe, Virginia (1977).
Michaelson, S. N., 'Biologic and Pathophysiologic Effects of Exposure to
Microwaves," in M. A. Stuchly (ed.) Microwave Bioeffects and Radiation
Safety, Trans. IMPI, Vol. 8, The International Microwave Power Institute, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada, pp. 55-94 (1978).
Michaelson, S. M., "Microwave Biological Effects: An Overview," Proc.
IEEE, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 40-49 (1980).
Michaelson, S. M.., et al., "Biochemical and Neuroendocrine Aspects of
Exposure to Microwaves," Ann. N.Y. Acad. Si., Vol. 247, pp. 21-45
(1975).
Mickey, G. H., J. H. Helier, and E. Snyder, "Pon-Thermal Hazards of
Exposure to Radio-Frequency Fields," Microwave Studies, Office of
Naval Research Contract No. N0014-69-C-0176, Final Report (July 1975).
Mikolajczyk, H. 3., "Microwave Irradiation and Endocrine Functions," in
P. Czerski et al. (eds.), Biological Effects and Health Hazards of
Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 46-51 (1974).

10-15

Mikolajczyk, H. J., "Microwave-Induced Shifts of Gonadotropic Activity
in Anterior Pituitary Gland of Rats," in C. C. Johnson and M. Shore
(eds.) Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, U.S. Department
of Health, Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C. HEW Publication
(FDA) 77-8010 (1976).
Mitchell, D. S., W. G. Switzer, and E. L. Bronaugh, "Hyperactivity and
Disruption of Operant Behavior in Rats After Multiple Exposures to
Microwave Radiation," Radio Si., Vol. 12, No. 6S, pp. 263-271 (1977).
Monahan, J. C. and W. W. Benton, "Microwave Absorption and Taste Aversion
55 a Function of 915 MHz Radiation," in D. G. Hazzard (ed.), Symposium
on Biological Effects and Measurement of Radio Freguency/Mtcrowaves,
U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C.,
HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8026 (1977).
Monahan, J. C. and W. W. Flentcrn, "The Effect of Psychoactive Drugs on
Operant Behavior Induced by Microwave Radiation,' Radio Sci., Vol.
14,No. 65, pp. 233-238 (1979).
Monahan, J. C. and H. S. 1{o, 'The Effect of Ambient Temperature on the
Reduction of Microwave Energy Absorption by Mice," Radio Sci.,
Vol. 12,No. 65, pp. 257-262 (1977).
National Instir'te for Occupational Safety and Health: Technical Report
'A Report on Electromagnetic Radiation Surveys of Video Display
Terminals," Washington, D.C., Government Print Office (1977).
Neuder, S. M. et al., "Microwave Power Density Absorption in a Spherical
Multilayered Model of the dead," in C. C. Johnson and M. Shore (eds.),
Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Department of Health,
Education and Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8011,
pp. 199-210 (1976).
O'Connor, M. E.., '!4amrna1iari Teratogencsis and Radiofrequency Fields,"
Proc. IEEE, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 56-60 (1980).
Olsen, R. G. and E. A. Molina, "The Nonmetliic Thermocouple: A DifferentialTemperature Probe for Use in Microwave Fields," Radio Sci.., Vol. 14,
No. 6S, pp. 81-84 (1979).
Oscar, K. J. and T. D. "Hawkins, 'Microwave A1terLion of the Blood-Brain
Barrier System of Rats," Brain Res., Vol. 126, pp. 281-293 (1977).
Oscar, K. .3., S. P. Gruenau, H. Folkcr, and S. I. Rapoport, "Effects of
Low Power Microwaves on the Local Cerebral Blood Flow of Conscious
Rats," in Abstracts of the 1979 Bioelectromagnetics Symposium,
Seattle, Washington (1979).

10-1.6

Patitrizel, it., et al.,"Stimulation of the Defenses of Nice with
TrypanosomiasiS by Exposure to Radiation Associated with a Magnetic
Electromagnetic Waves," Compt. Rend. D., Vol. 280, pp.
Field
1915-1918 (1975).
Pay, T. L., E. C. Beyer, and C. F. Reichelderfer, "Microwave Effects on
Reproductive Capacity and Genetic Transmission in Drosçhi1a
me1anogast," J. Microwave Power, Vol. 7, No. 2, pp. 75-82 (1972).

Pazderova, J., 'Workers' State of Health under Long-Term Exposure to
Electromagnetic Radiation in the VHF Band (30-300 MHz)," Pracovni
Lekarsti (Czech), Vol. 23, No. 8, pp. 265-271 (October 1971).
English Translation: JPRS No. UDC 616-001.228.1-057-07 (1971).
Pazderova J., J. Pickova, and V. Bryndova, " Blood Proteins in Personnel
of Television and Radio Transmitting Stations," in P. Czerski et al.
(eds.), Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of Microwave Radiation,
Polish Medical. Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 281-288 (1974).
Pazderova-Vejlupkova, J., "Influence of Pulsed Microwave Radiation on
the Lymphocytes of Rats," Bioelectromagnetics Symposium, Abstract
B-20, p. 477, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Peacock, P. 13., J. W. Simpson, and C. A. Alford, "Congenital Anomalies
in Alabama," J. Med. Assoc. Ala., Vol. 41, pp. 42-50 (1971).
Phillips, R. 0., E. L. Hunt, R. D. Castro, and N. W. King, ItThermoregu_
latory, Metabolic, and Cardiovascular Response of Rats to Microwaves,"
J._App1.o1., Vol. 38, No. 4, pp. 630-535 (1975).
Pickard, W. F. and R. G. Olsen, "Developmental Effects of Microwaves on
Tenebrio; Influences of Culturing Protocol and of Carrier Frequency,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65, pp. 181-185 (1979).
Pollack, 11., "Epidemiologic Data on American Personnel in the Moscow
Embassy," Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med., Vol. 55, No. 11, pp. 1182-1186
(1979).
Prausnitz, S. and C. Susskind, "Effects of Chronic Microwave Irradiation
an Mice," IRE Trans, Bio-Med. Electron., pp. 104-108 (1962).
P reston, E., E. J. Vavsour, and H. M. Assenheim, "Effects of 2,450-I4Hz
Microwave Irradiation on Permeability of the Blood-Brain Barrier
to Mannitol in the Rat," in Abstracts of 1978 Symposium on Electromagnetic Fields in Biological Systems, Ottawa, Canada (1978).
Proc. IEEE, Special Issue on Biological Effects and Medical Applications
of E1ectrornag' ic Energy, Vol. 68, No. 1 (1980).

10-17

Rapoport, S. 1., K. Ohno, W. R. Fredricks, and K. D. Pettigrew, "A
Quantitative Method for Measuring Altered Cerebrovascular Permeability,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 63, pp. 345-348 (1979).
Reed, J. R., 111, J. L. Lords, and C. H. Durney, Microwave Irradiation
of the Isolated Rat Heart after Treatment with ANS Blocking Agents,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 63, pp. 161-165 (1977).
Reidcr, D. R., D. L. Epstein, and J. 11. Kirk, "Aeromedical Review: Possible
Cataractogenic T 'ffects of Radiofrequency Radiation," U.S. Air Force
School of Aeospace Medicine Reviews 3-71, Brooks Air Force Base,
San Antonic, Texas (August 1971).
Reiter, L., Effects on Reflex Development and Age at Eye Opening, Prog.
Rept. on Proj. 3, Topic 4.1 of the U.S./USSR Cooperative Program,
D. McRe (Coordinator), NIEUS, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
(1976).
Richardson, A. W., T. D. Duane, and H. M. Hines, "Experimental Lenticular
Opacities Produced by Microwave Irradiation," Arch. Phys. Med.,
Vol. 29, p. 765 (1948).
RicIiaruoii, A. W. T. D. Duanc, and fl. M. Hin, "Experimental Cataracts
Prodtiid 1v 3-centimeter Pulsed Hicrowave Irradiation," AIJA Arch.
flLhu1ciic., Vol.. 45, pp. 382-386 (1951).
Robinette ! C. D. and C. Silverman, "Causes of Death Following Occupational
Exposure to Microwave Radiation (RADAR) 1950-1974," in D. G. Hazzard
(ed.), Symposium on Biological Effects and Measurement of Rndiofreguency/
Microwaves, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare, Washington,
D.C. HEW Publication No. (FDA) 778026 (1977).
Radzilsky, E. and J. Olszewski, "Permeability of Cerebral Blood Vessels
Studied by Radioactive Iodinated Bovine Albumin," Neurology, Vol. 7,
pp.. 279-289 (1957).
Rosenstein, L, EEC Investigations in Animals Exposed to Microwave Radiation,
Progr. Rept. on Proj. 2, Topic 4.1, of the U.S.-USSR Cooperative
Program, D. McRee (Coordinator), NIEIIS, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina (1976).
Rotkovska, D. and A. Vacek, "The Effect of Electromagnetic Radiation on
the Hematopoietic Stem Cells of Mice," Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci., Vol.
247, pp. 243-250 (1975).
Ruch, T. C. and H. D. Patton, Physiology and Biophysics, Vol. 111, W. B.
Saunders Co., Philadelphia, Pennsylvania (1973).
Rugh, R. et al., "Responses of the Mouse to Microwave Radiation During
Estrous Cycle and Pregnancy," Radiat. Res., Vol. 62, pp. 225-241
(1975)
10-18

Rukspoiimuang, S. and K-M. Chen, "Heating of Spherical versus Realistic
Models of Human and Infrahumn Heads by Electromagnetic Waves,'
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 6S, pp. 51-62 (1979).
Sadcikova, M. N.,"Clinical Manifestations of Reactions to Microave
Irradiation in Various Occupational Groups, in P. Czerski et al.
(eds.), Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of Microwave Radiation,
Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 261-267 (1974).
nza, J. N. and J. deLorge, "Fixed Interval Behavior of Rats
Exposed to Microwaves at Low Power Densities, Radio Sci.,
Vol. 12, No. 65, pp. 273-277 (1977).
Schlagel, C., K. Sulek, A. Ahmed, H. 1-to, and W. Leach, 'Kinetics and
Mechanisms of the Induction of an Increase in Complement Receptor
Positive (CR±) Mouse Spleen Cells Following a Single Exposure to
2450 MHz Microwaves,' Bioelectromagnetics Symposiuin, Abstract B-21,
p. 478, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Schmitt, F. 0. and F. E. Samson "Brain Cell Microenvironment," Neurosciences
Res. Prog. Bali., Vol. 7, pp. 277-417 (1969).
Scholl, D. M. and S. J. Alien, "Skilled Visual-Motor Performance by
Monkeys in a 1.2-CHz Microwave Field," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65,
pp. 247-252 (1979).
Schrot, 3., J. R. Thomas, and R. A. Banvard, "Alteration of Repeated
Acquisition in Rats by Microwave Radiation," Bioelectromagnetics
Symposium, Abstract A-43, p. 451, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Schwan, H. P., "Electrical Properties of Tissue and Cell Suspension,"
in Advances in Biological and Medical Physics, Vol. 5, pp. 147-209,
Academic Press, New York (1957).
Schwan, H. P., "Electrical Characteristics of Tissues: A
Biophysik, Vol. 1, pp. 198-208 (1963).

Survey,"

Schwan, H. P., "Field Interaction with Biological Natter," nn. N.Y.
Sci., Vol. 303, pp. 198-203 (1977).

Acad.

Schwan, H. P. and K. R. Foster, "RF-Field Interactions with Biological
Systems: Electrical Properties and Biophysica]. Mechanisms," Proc.
IEEE, Vol. 68, No. 1, pp. 104-113 (1980).
Schwan, H. P. and K. Li, "Capacity and Conductivity of Body Tissues at
Ultrahigh Frequencies," Proc. IRE , Vol. 41, pp. 1735-1740 (1953).
Schwan, H. P. and G. M. Piersol, "The Absorption of Electromagnetic Energy
in Body Tissue, Part I1,' Ain. J. Phys. Med., Vol. 34, pp. 425-448
(1955).

10-19

Sessions, G. R., 'Microwave-Induced Taste Aversions in Rats at 987 MHz,
Bioe1ectromagneics Symposium, Abstract A-42, p. 450, Seattle,
Washington (1979).
Shandala, M. G., Discussion following presentation of his paper at the
Operi. Symposium on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves,
Helsinki, Finland (1978).
Shandala, H. 0., et al., Study of the Effects of Non-Ionizing Microwave
Radiation on the Central Nervous System and Behavioral Responses,
First Report on Topic 4.1 of the U.S./USSR Cooperative Program,
D. McRee (Coordinator), NIEHS, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina
(1976).
Shandala, M. 0., et al., "Immunological and Hematological Effects of
Microwaves at Low Power Densities," in Abstracts of 1977 International
Symposium on the Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Airlie,
Virginia (1977).
Sheppard, A. R., S. M. Bawin, and W. R. Adey, "Models of Long-Range Order
in Cerebral Macromolecules: Effects of Sub-ELF and of Modulated VHF
and UHF Fields," RadioSci., Vol. 14, No. 6S, pp. 141-145 (1979).
Shimkovich, 1. S. and V. G. Shilyaev, "Cataract of Both Eyes which Developed
as a Result of Repeated Short Exposures to an Electromagnetic Field
of High Density," Vestn. Oftal., Vol. 72, pp. 12-16 (1959).
Siekierzynski, M., "A Study of the Health Status of Microwave Workers,"
in P. Czerski et al. (eds.), Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of
Microwave Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 273-280
(1974).
Sigler, A. T., A. M. Lilienfeld, B. H. Cohen, and J. E. Westlake,
"Radiation Exposure in Parents of Children with Mongolism (Down's
Syndrome)," Bull, Johns Hopkins ilosp., Vol. 117, pp. 374-399 (1965).
Silverman, C., "Epidemiologic Approach to the Study of Microwave Effects,"
Bull. N.Y. Acad. Med., Vol. 55, No. 11, pp. 1166-1181 (1979).
Smialowicz, R. J., "The Effects of Microwaves on Lymphocyte Blast Transformation in Vitro," in C. C. Johnson and M. Shore (eds.), Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, U.S. Department of Health, Education,
and Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8010 (1976).
Smialowicz, R. J., J. B. Kinn, and J. A. Elder, 'Terinatal Exposure of
Rats to 2450 MHz CW Microwave Radiation: Effects on Lymphocytes,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 65, pp. 147-153 (197).

10-20

Smialowicz, R. J., M. M. Riddle, P. L. Brugnolotti, K. L. Compton, and
J. B. Kinn, "Primary Immune Response of Mice Exposed to Continuous
or Pulsed Wave 425 MHz Radiofrequency Radiation," Bioelectromagnetics
Syiposium, Abstract B-14, p. 471, Seattle, Washington (1979b).
Spackman, D. 11., V. Riley, A. W. Guy, and C. K. Chou, "Studies of RF
Radiation Effects on Blood-Brain Barrier Permeability Using Fluorescein
and Amino Acids," in Abstracts of Open Symposium on the Biological
Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, Helsinki, Finland (1978).
Spackman, D. H,, V. Riley, A. W. Guy, and C. K. Chou, "Is the Blood-Brain
Barrier Altered by RP Irradiation?" in Abstracts of the 1979
Bjoelectromagnetics Symposium, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Stern, S., L. Margolin, B. Weiss, S-T. Lo, and S. M. Michaelson, "Microwaves: Effect i Thermoregulatory Behavior in Rats," Science,
Vol. 206, pp. 1 J8-1201 (1979).
Stewart-DeHaan, P. J., M. P. Creighton, W. M. Ross, and J. R. Trevithick,
'Heat-Induced Cataracts in the Rat Lens in Vitro," in Abstracts of
1979 Bioelectromagnetics Symposium, Seattle, Washington (1979).
Stodolnik-Baranska, W.., "Lymphoblastoid Transformation of Lymphocytes
in vitro After Microwave Irradiation," Nature, Vol. 214, pp. 102103 (1967).
Stodolnik-Baranska, W., "Experimental Microwave Ocular Effects," in
P. Czerski et at. (eds.), Biologic Effects and Health Hazards of
Microwave Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw, pp. 186-188
(1974a).
Stodolnik-Baranska, W., "The Effects of Microwaves on Human Lymphocyte
Cultures," in P. Czerski et al. (eds.), Biologic Effects and Health
Hazards of Microwave Radiation, Polish Medical Publishers, Warsaw,
pp. 189-195 (1974b).
Stuchly, M. A., "Potentially Hazardous Microwave Radiation Sources--A
Review," J. Microwave Power, Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 369-381 (1977).
Stuchly, M. A. and M. H. Repacholi, "Microwave and Radiofrequency Protection Standards
in Microwave Bioeffects and Radiation Safety,
Transactions of the International Microwave Power Institute, Vol. 8,
pp. 95-101 (1978).
Sudakov, K. V. and G. D. Antimoniy, "Central Mechanisms of Action of
Electromagnetic Fields," Uspekhi Fiziologicheskikh Nauk, No. 2
JPRS 60711, pp. 101-135 (1973).
Sutton, C. H. and F. B. Carroll, "Effects of Microwave-Induced Hyperthermia
on the Blood-Brain Barrier of the Rat," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 6S31
pp. 329-334 (1979).
10-23

Sutton, C. H., R. L. Nunnaily, and F. B. Carroll, "Protection of the
Microwave-Irradiated Brain with Body-Core Hypothermia," Cryobiology,
Vol. 10, p. 513 (1973).
Szmigielski, S., J. J1jazewicz, and M. Wiranowska, tIA CU J C SLnphy1occcci1
Infections in Rabbits Irradiated with 3-GHz Microwaves, Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci., Vol. 247, pp. 305-311 (1975).
Szmigielski, S., A. Pietraszek, and M. l3Lelec, "Effect of Long Term Low
Level Microwave Exposure on Development and Growth of Chemicallv
(3,4-Benzopyrene and Di .-Ethyl-Nitroso-Amine) Induced Ncoplasmas,"
Bioe1ectromanetiCS Symposium, Abstract A-28, p. 436, Seattle,
Washington (1979).
Tanner, J. A., "Effect of Microwave Radiation on Birds," Nature, Vol. 210,
pp. 636-637 (1966).
Tanner, J. A. and C. Romero-Sierra, "Beneficial and Harmful Accelerated
Growth Induced by the Action of Nonionizing Radiation," Ann. N.Y.
Acad. Sci., Vol. 238, pp. 171-175 (1974).
Tanner, J. A., C. Romero-Sierra, and S. J. Davie, "Nonthermal ECtecLs of
Microwave Radiation on Birds," Nature, Vol. 216, p. 1139 (1967).
Taylor, L. S. and A. Y. Cheung (eds.), The Physical Basis of Electromagnetic
Interactions with Biological Systems, U.S. Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA)
78-8055, pp. 35-112 (1978).
Tell, R. A. and E. D. Mantiply, "Population Exposure to VLJF and UHF
Broadcast Radiation in the United States, Proc. IEEE, Vol. 68,
No. 1, pp. 6-12 (1980).
Tell, R. A. and P. J. O'Brien, "An Investigation of Broadcast Rdiatinn
Intensities at Nt. Wilson, California," Tech. Note ORP/EAD 77-2,
Las Vegas, Nev., U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (1973),
Thomas, J. R., L. S. Burch, and S. S. Yeandle, "Microwave Radiation and
Chlordiazepoxide: Synergistic Effects on Fixed Interval Behavior,"
Science, Vol. 203, pp. 1357-1358 (1979),
Thomas, J. R. and G. Maitland, "Microwave Radiation and Dextroamphetamine:
Evidence of Combined Effects on Behavior of Rats,' Radio Sci.
Vol. 14, No. 68, pp. 253-258 (1979).
Tolgskaya, M. S. and Z. V. Gordon, Pathological Effects of Radio Waves,
Consultants Bureau, New York-London, 146 pp. (1973) (translated from
the original Russian text published by Meditsina Press, Moscow, 1971).

10-22

Travers, W. D. and R. J. Vetter, Low Intensity Microwave Effects on the
Synthesis of Thyroid Hormones and Serum Proteins," meeting abstract,
Health Phys., Vol. 33, p. 662 (1973).
Tyahe1ov, V. Vi,, R. E. Tigranian, and E. P. Khizhniak, "New ArtifactFree Electrodes for Recording of Biological Potentials in Strong
Electromagnetic Fields," Radio Sci. ,, Vol. 12, No. 65, pp. 121-123
(1977).
Tyazhelov, V. V., R. E. Tigranian, E. 0. Ktizhniak, and 1. G. Akov,
"Some Peculiarities of Auditory Sensations Evoked by Pulsed Microwave Fields," Radio Sci., Vol. 14, No. 6S, pp. 259-263 (1979).
U.S. Department of Energy, Preliminary Environmental Assessment for the
Satellite Power System (SPS), Revision 1,_Vol. I-Executive Summary,
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Research, Report No.
DOE/FR-0036/1 (1980).
U.S. Department of Energy and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Satellite Power System: Concept Development and Evaluation
Program--Reference System Report, U.S. Department of Energy, Office
of Energy Research, Report No. DOE/ER-0()23 (1978).
Vartna, M. M., E. L. Dage, and S. R. Joshi, Nut:agenicity Induced by
Non-lonizirig Radiation in Swiss Male Mice," in C. C. Johnson and
M. Shore (eds.), Biological Effects of Electromagnetic Waves, U.S.
Department of Health , Education, and Welfare, Washington, D.C.,
HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8010 (1976a).
Varma, M. 14., E. L. Dage, and S. R. Joshi, "Evaluation of Dominant Lethal
Test and DNA. Studies in Measuring Mutagenicity Caused by Non-Tcizing
Radiation," in C. C. Johnson and M. Shore (eds.), Biological Effects
of Electromagnetic Waves, U.S. Department of Health, Education, and
Welfare, Washington, D.C., HEW Publication (FDA) 77-8010 (1976b).
Wacker, P. F. and R. R. Bowman,"Quantifying Hazardous Electromagnetic
Fields: Scientific Basis and Practical Considerations, IEEE
Trans. Microwave Theory Techniques, pp. 178-187 (1971).
Weil, C. M., "Absorption Characteristics of MultiLayered Sphere Models
Exposed to VHF/Microwave Radiation," IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng.,
Vol. BME-22, pp. 468-476 (1975).
Whitcomb,, E. R., C. F. Blackman, and C. M. Weil, "Contraction of Smooth
Muscle in a Microwave Field," Radio Sci., Vol, 14, No. 63, pp. 155158 (1979).
White, R. 14., 'Generation of Elastic Waves by Transient Surface Heating,,"
3. Appl. Phys., Vol. 34, pp. 3559-3567 (1963).

10-23

Wiktor-Jeclrzejczak, W., A. Ahmed, P. Czerski, W. M. Leach, and K. W. Sell,
"Immune Response of Mice to 2450 MHz Microwave Radiation; Overview
of Immunology and Empirical Studies of Lymphoid Splenic Cells,"
Radio Sci., Vol. 12, No. 65, pp. 209-219 (1977).
Williams, D. B., et al., "Biological Effects of Studies on Microwave
Radiation: Time and Power Thresholds for the Production of Lens
Opacities by 12.3 cm Microwaves," AMA Arch. Opthalmol., Vol. 54,
pp. 863-874 (1955).
Wu, C. L. and J. C. Lin, "Absorption and Scattering of Electromagnetic
Waves by ProlaLe Spheroidal Models of Biological Structures," IEEE
Antenna and Propagation Society Int. Syinp. Digest, pp. 142-145 (1977).
Zaret, M., "Ophthalmic Hazards of Microwave and Laser Environments,"
39th Ann. Sci. Meeting Aerospace Med. Assoc., San Francisco (1969).
Zaret, M. W., "Electronic Smog as a Potentiating Factor in Cardiovascular
Disease," Med. Res. Engr., Vol. 12, 19o. 3, pp. 13-16 (1976).
Zarel, M., S. Cleary, B. Pasternack, and M. Eisenbud, "Occurrence of
Lenticular Imperfections in the Eyes of Microwave Workers and Their
Association with Environmental Factors," Rome Air Development Center
Report RADN-TN-61-226, New York University, N.Y. (1961).
Zielhuis, R. L., "Permissible Limits for Occupational Exposure to Toxic
AgenLs," Int. Arch. Arbeitsmed., Vol. 33, pp. 1-13 (1974).

10-24

11 GLOSSARY
AP

aLId tofrecuoncy

ANSI

American Natioria! Standards Institute

BBB

bind-brain harrier

BPI

brain iako index

CH

c 1 t Lzen ' band

(i

eochil?Llr mi.rophonics

CNS

ventral nervous system

(• pp1

('UUfl TS P(r

nLiiut

t(}i1 iflLTOUS Wave

T)MS(1

dimothvl su1fxide

flr )

U.S. JkpnrLrnnL of Energy

EM

e 1 i L 1() nepha

.1 ogram

e trard iogram
ELF

extremely mw frequency

Il1

Mutromagnet te f toids
e)trornanttic radiation

EPA

Environmental Protection Agency

ER

cwiked response

FCC

Federal Communications Commission

lItj

U.S,. Department of Health, Education and Welfare

111'AL

high frequency auditory limit

IMPP

horseradish Ieroxidase

IN

industrial, scientific, and medical

MPTS

microwave power transmission system

NI3S

National Bureau of Standards

N 1 EMR

non:Lonizing electromagnetic radiation

NIOSH

National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health

OSHA

Occupational Safety and Health Administration

pr f

pulse repetition frequencies

RF R

radiofrequency radiation

11-1

SAR

jt:ii 1i: LIImc)rpiLorl rate

SPS

Satellite power syslem

SRJC

sheep red blood c 11s

UHFultra h1gh frequency
VER

vfii;i11y evoked electrocoriical response

VVf

very high frequency
World Health Organization

11-2

