AD-776  967 


RESEARCH  IN  BIOLOGICAL  AND  MEDICAL 
SCIENCES  INCLUDING  BIOCHEMISTRY, 
COMMUNICABLE  DISEASE  AND  IMMUNOLOGY, 
INTERNAL  MEDICINE,  NUCLEAR  MEDICINE, 
PHYSIOLOGY,  PSYCHIATRY,  SURGERY  AND 
VETERINARY  MEDICINE.  VOLUME  II 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C. 

30  June  1973 


■\ 


DISTRIBUTED  BY: 


National  Technical  Information  Service 
U.  S.  DEPARTMENT  OF  COMMERCE 

5285  Port  Royal  Road,  Springfield  Va.  22151 


J 


[Pll  Redacted] 


UNCLASSIFIED  A  ^?/  , 

SECURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAQK  (Whm  Data  Bntarad)  A/i  / J  /  /  fa?  /  (£? 

REPORT  DOCUMENTATION  PAGE 

READ  INSTRUCTION! 

BEFORE  COMPLETING  FORM 

1.  REPORT  NUMBER  2,  OOVT  ACCESSION  NO. 

NA 

1.  RECIPIENT'S  CATALOG  NUMBER 

4.  TITLE  (md  Subtltlo) 

Research  in  Biological  and  Medical  Sciences,  including 
Biochemistry,  Communicable  Diseases  and  Immunology 

Internal  Medicine,  Nuclear  Medicine,  Physiology, 
Psychiatry,  Surgery,  and  Veterinary  Medicine. 

8.  TYPE  OF  REPORT  *  PERIOD  COVERED 

Annual  Progress  Report  - 
>1  July  1972  -  30  June  1973 

6.  PERFORMING  ORO.  REPORT  NUMBER 

NA 

7.  AUTHORS 

Listed  at  beginning  of  each  work  unit  report 

B.  CONTRACT  OR  GRANT  NUMBERS 

NA 

t.  PERFORMINO  ORGANIZATION  NAME  AND  AOORESS 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center 

_  Washington  P  C 

10.  PROGRAM  ELEMENT.  PROJECT,  TASK 
AREA  4  WORK  UNIT  NUMBERS 

NA 

II.  CONTROLLING  6ffice  name  A~ND  AOORESS 

U.  S.  Army  Medical  Research  and  Development 
Command 

Washington,  D.  C.  20314 

<2.  REPORT  OATI 

July  1973 

11.  NUMBER  OP  PAGES 

1288 

14  MONITORING  AGENCY  NAME  ft  AODRESy/f  dlUorml  from  Controlling  Offlca) 

IS.  SECURITY  CLASS,  (of  thla  n oport ) 

UNCLASSIFIED  1 

IS*.  DECLASSIFICATION/DOWNGRADING 
SCHEOULE 

I*.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  thla  Report) 

Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited 


17.  DISTRIBUTION  STATEMENT  (ol  tho  abstract  mntarad  In  Black  30,  tl  dlfformt  from  Maport) 


is.  supplementary  notes 

NA 


If.  KEY  WORDS  (Continue  on  ravraa  •!</•  II  nacaaoary  md  Identity  by  block  nuwbar) 

BIOLOGICAL  SCIENCES 
MEDICAL  SCIENCES 
BIOCHEMISTRY 
COMMUNICABLE  DISEASES 

20.  ABSTRACT  (Continue  m  ravoram  old*  It  nmcaaaary  md  Idmntlty  by  block  numbot) 

The  various  subjects  covered  in  this  report  are  listed  in  the  Table  of  Contents. 
Abstracts  of  the  individual  investigations  are  included  on  the  DD  Form  1498  introduc¬ 
ing  each  work  unit  report. 


B 

_ r _ 

DO  ,25“nM7!  ewnott  or  i  nov  •*  is  obsolete  UNCLASSIFIED 


rriiltiTY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PACE  (Whm  Dot*  Bnttod) 


UNCLASSIFIED _ 

ItCUgtTV  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAOtfWiw  PKi  IwfrfrfJ 

IMMUNOLOGY 
INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
NUCLEAR  MEDICINE 
PHYSIOLOGY 
PSYCHIATRY 
SURGERY 

VETERINARY  MEDICINE 


UNCLASSIFIED 


-MCURITY  CLASSIFICATION  OF  THIS  PAGCOWitn  Dmtm  Bntifd) 


L 


J 


AD 


I  «.  ,  MhDDH'288  (Rl) 

RESEARCH  IN  BIOLOG^AL  AND  MEDICAL  SCIENCES,  INCLUDING 
BIOCHEMISTRY,  COMMUNICABLE  DISEASES  AND  IMMUNOLOGY, 
INTERNAL  MEDICINE,  NUCLEAR  MEDICINE,  PHYSIOLOGY, 
PSYCHIATRY,  SURGERY,  AND  VETERINARY  MEDICINE 

(Projects,  tasks,  and  work  units 
are  listed  in  Table  of  Contents) 


Annual  Progress  Report 
1  July  1972  -  30  June  1973 


Volume  II 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


Approved  for  public  release;  distribution  unlimited. 

Destroy  this  report  when  no  longer  needed.  Do  not  return  it  to  the  originator. 

The  findings  in  this  report  are  not  to  be  construed  as  an  official  Department  of 
the  Army  position  unless  so  designated  by  other  authorized  documents. 

i  (}o 


FOREWORD 


In  conducting  the  research  described  in  this  report,  the  investigators  adhered 
to  the  "Guide  for  Laboratory  Animal  Facilities  and  Care, "  as  promulgated  by 
the  Committee  on  the  Guide  for  Laboratory  Animal  Facilities  and  Care  of  the 
Institute  of  Laboratory  Animal  Resources,  National  Academy  of  Sciences  - 
National  Research  Council. 


SUMMARY 


The  various  subjects  covered  in  this  report  are  listed  in  the  Table  of  Contents. 
Abstracts  of  the  individual  investigations  are  included  on  the  DD  Form  1498  in¬ 
troducing  each  work  unit  report,  and  names  of  investigators  are  given  at  the  be¬ 
ginning  of  each  report. 


iC/ 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 


VOLUME  II 


3A0621 10A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 


Page 


00  Tropical  Medicine 


002 

Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 

698 

044 

Virus  diseases  of  man  and  animals 

930 

045 

Bacterial  and  mycotic  diseases  of  man  and  animals 

931 

046 

Parasitic  infections  of  man  and  animals 

932 

047 

Metabolic  diseases  of  man  and  animals 

933 

048 

Rickettsial  diseases  of  man  and  animals 

934 

109 

Psychiatry  and  behavioral  studies 

935 

3A062110A821 

COMBAT  SURGERY 

00 

Combat  Surgery 

120 

Wound  healing 

936 

121 

Responses  to  trauma 

938 

122 

Anesthesia  and  pulmonary  complications  of  con  oat 
injury 

946 

3A0621 10A822 

MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 

00 

Military  Internal  Medicine 

120 

Metabolic  response  to  disease  and  injury 

947 

121 

Pathogenesis  of  enteric  diseases 

956 

122 

Microbial  genetics  and  taxonomy 

967 

123 

Histopathologic  manifestations  of  military  diseases 
and  injuries 

984 

125 

Hematology  of  nutritional  deficiencies  of  military 
importance 

1040 

126 

Infectious  hepatitis 

1041 

3A062110A823 

MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 

00  Military  Psychiatry 

030  Military  psychiatry 

idL 


1048 


Page 


031  Military  performance  and  stress:  Factors  leading  to 

decrements  of  performance  and  disease  1054 

032  Drug  abuse  in  military  personnel  1063 

3A062110A824  IONIZING  RADIATION  INJURY,  PREVENTION  AND 
TREATMENT 

00  Ionizing  Radiation  Injury,  Prevention  and  Treatment 

055  Chemical  protection  against  irradiation  1064 

057  Biological  effects  and  hazards  of  microwave  radiation  1072 

3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 

00  Malaria  Investigations 

106  Antigenic  fractionation,  serology  of  malaria  1079 

108  Biochemical  effects  and  mechanism  of  action  of  chemo¬ 
therapeutic  agents  1080 

112  Field  studies  on  drug  resistant  malaria  1085 

114  Malaria  program  supervision  1126 

122  Test  system  design  and  development  1127 

123  Biological  studies  on  anopheline  vectors  of  malaria  1128 

124  Biological  studies  of  mosquito  malaria  infection  and 

transmission  1129 

125  Taxonomy  and  ecology  of  disease  bearing  mosquitoes 

of  Southeast  Asia  1140 

126  In  vitro  cultivation  of  mosquito  tissues  and  malarial 

parasites  1141 

127  Test  systems  for  Plasmodium  falciparum  1142 

128  Natural  and  acquired  immunity  in  rodent  malaria  1143 

129  Host  responses  to  malaria  1144 

132  Clinical  and  metabolic  studies  of  malaria  1159 

134  Malaria  investigations  1163 

136  Metabolic  and  enzymatic  studies  of  normal  and  malaria 

infected  red  cells  1186 

171  General  pharmacology  of  anti-malarial  drugs  1187 


V 


ii 


3A062110A830  BIOSENSOR  SYSTEMS 


00  Biosensor  Systems 

055  Development  and  evaluation  of  improved  biological 

sensor  systems  Hgg 

056  Diseases  of  military  animals  H93 

3 A0621 10A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 

00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

101  Drug  abuse  methodology  1234 

102  Military  performance  and  drug  abuse  1243 

103  Drug  abuse  prevention  in  military  personnel  1260 

104  Drug  tests  systems  j  272 

105  Cellular  aspects  of  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse  1274 

DISTRIBUTION  LIST 

lzoo 

DD  Form  1473  (Document  Control  Data  -  R&D)  1287 


a 

! 

1 


PROJECT  3A062110A831 
TROPICAL  MEDICINE 

Task  00 

Tropi-.al  Medicine 


. li - ***a**»>^^ 


9 

J 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


umr  oo#  mot  smaot 
DD-DHki(An)iU 


fc.  CBNTMBUTIM 


I.  TITLK  fpwn*  VIM  CIamIMmMm  C**r 


( U)  Tropical  and  Subtropical  Military  Medical  Research 


It.  ICflNTIAtC  AND  TICNNOLOOIGAL  ANIA 


002600  Biology  003500  Clinical  Malaria  010100  Microbiology  013^00  Psychology 


M.  PCAFQfttMMO  OAQANtl  ATtOtt 


search  «**«•  US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
adoncm*  Bangkok,  Thailand 


PRINCIPAL  IN VfITtOA TOR  {?«««•*  UM  U  V  I.  AMPMiJr  )*tUtvt\mm) 

•*— *  Winter,  LTC  P.  E. 

TILl.MONf!  91+8  — U  523 

SOCIAL  IKCUAtTV  ACCOUNT  NUMBS*' 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


NAttt)  Top,  LTC  F.  H.  Jr. 

mmi,  Davidson,  LTC  D.  E.  DA 


>  (Uj  veterinary  Medicine;  (U)  Infectious  Diseases; 

(U)  Virus  Diseases;  (U)  Bacterial  Diseases  ;(U)  Rickettsial  Pisease;(U)Parasitic  Dlseasei 

II  TtCNNICAL  OSJICTtVS.*  14  APPROACH,  ||.  PROOHCftS  0*4 IWAmJ  pmf* pft*  I4mtllt,4  tf  nt mkm*  PftCf*  (air  ml  mmth  with  ft* '"V  ClmmmlHtmtlm  Cm*) 

23.  (U)  To  define  ecology  and  basic  biology  of  causal  agents  of  tropical  diseases,  to 
study  variables  of  host  environment  that  may  adversely  affect  the  performance  of  over- 
sease  USA  servicement  and  the  dev ,j.opi:ent  of  biochemical  tests  to  determine  the  present 
of  certain  drugs  in  urine. 

21.  (U)  Routine  diagnostic,  epidemiological,  serological,  and  psychological  procedures 
are  being  utilized. 

25.  (U)  72  08  -  73  06  Wrc*  research  included  epidemiological  studies  on  dengue  fever, 
Japanese  13  enceph°lxtis ,  viral  influenza  and  hepatitis  B  antigen.  Gonorrhea  was  re¬ 
ported  in  asymptomatic  Thai  females;  penicillinase  producing  staphylococci  was  found  in 
8l  percent  of  male  gonorrhea  and  an  outbreak  of  meningococcal  meningitis  was  reported. 
Parasitic  diseases  studied  included  malaria  and  gnathostomiasis .  Studies  continued  on 
veterinary  diseases,  and  mortality  in  laboratory  rodents  and  sub-human  primates  was 
analyzed.  A  series  of  questions  which  may  potentially  discriminate  US  soldiers  who 
are  high  risk  for  drug  abuse  has  been  identified.  A  method  for  screening  urine  for 
methaqualone  was  developed.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 


r+ttsbim  to  coAtrMota  i 


1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DD  FORMS  149SA  I  NOV  «S 
AND  I  ASS*  t  1  MAR  es  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

698 


Project  3A0621 1 0A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 


Investigators 

Principal:  SP4  Carl  W.  Ames;  CPT  Charles  L.  Bailey,  MSC; 

MAJ  Michael  W.  Benenson,  MC ;  Prakorb  Boonthal, 

M.D.i  Viktor  A.  Boklsch,  M.D.;  Chalam  Chantrasl; 

MAJ  Dumrong  Chiewsl 1 p,  RTA;  MAJ  Robert  B.  Cotton, 

MC;  LTC  David  E.  Davidson,  VC;  LTC  Robert  Edelman, 
MC;  Douglas  J.  Gould,  Ph.D.;  SFC  William  A.  Gresso; 
LTC  Richard  A.  Grossman,  MC;  Palratana  Gunakasem, 
M.D.;  MAJ  Dennis  0.  Johnsen,  VC;  Kwanyuen 
Lawhaswasdl,  DVM;  Joe  T.  Marshall,  Ph.D.;  Dhepanom 
Muangman,  M.D.;  Suchltra  Nlmanltya,  M.D.;  Ananda 
Nlsalak,  M.D.;  Palbulya  Panchayakarn,  M.D.; 

Boonchob  Pongpanlch,  M.D.;  MAJ  Harry  Rozmlarek, 

VC;  CPT  John  W.  Sagartz,  VC;  Nongnard  Sahakasmontrl ; 
MAJ  Robert  M.  Scott,  MC;  Stltaya  Slrlslngha,  DDS, 
Ph.D.;  LTC  Phlnyo  Slrlyaphan,  RTA;  Rapln  Snltbhan, 
M.D.;  Jiraporn  Suparadee;  Robert  Susklnd,  M.D.; 
Chlnlnthorn  Suwongse,  M.D.;  Panlta  Tanskul;  LTC 
Franklin  H.  Top,  Jr.,  MC;  SFC  Robert  E.  Weaver; 

MAJ  Robert  A.  Williams,  MC,  USAF 


Associate:  C.  Asvapaka;  Chinda  Charupatana,  B.S.;  Robert  W. 
Coleman,  M.D.;  SFC  Alson  R.  Hickerson;  CPT  M. 
Talmage  McMInn,  MSC;  Robert  E.  Olson,  M.D.;  Anong 
Parlyanond,  M.Sc.;  Jerm  Pomsdhlt;  MAJ  Douglas  R. 
Stutz,  MSC;  Richard  C.  Talamo,  M.D. 


A.  DENGUE  HEMORRHAGIC  FEVER 


1 .  Catabolic  Rates  of  C3  and  Clq  of  Patients  with  Dengue 
Hemorrhagic  Fever 

A  small  but  Important  proportion  of  children  experiencing 
secondary  dengue  virus  Infections  develop  dengue  hemorrhagic 
fever  (DHF)  and  Its  most  severe  form,  dengue  shock  syndrome  (DSS). 
Principal  manifestations  of  DSS  are  hypovolemic  shock.  Increased 
vascular  permeability,  mild  to  moderate  disseminated  Intravascular 
coagulation,  and  hemorrhage.  Previous  observations  of  marked 
depressions  of  C3  levels  during  acute  DSS  suggested  complement 
activation  as  an  Immunopathogenlc  mechanism.  In  1971  a  study  to 


699 


define  the  role  of  the  complement  system  In  the  Immunopathogenesls 
of  DHF  was  carried  out  In  Bangkok  (SMRL  Annual  Report,  1972  p.  75- 
87).  Studied  were  55  patients  with  DHF,  36  of  whom  had  DSS. 

Serum  concentrations  of  9  complement  proteins,  transferrin, 
fibrinogen  and  fibrin-spilt  products  were  measured  by  radial 
Immunodiffusion.  The  concentration  of  all  measured  complement 
components  with  the  exception  of  C9  were  depressed  during  shock. 
Concomitant  but  lesser  reductions  of  the  non-complement  protein 
transferrin,  however,  suggested  that  depressions  of  complement 
proteins  were  at  least  In  part  due  to  extravasation  from  the 
vascular  compartment.  There  was  an  Inverse  correlation  between 
serum  complement  levels  and  grade  of  disease.  C3  and  C5 
concentrations  were  most  affected  and  were  reduced  to  20-40%  of 
normal  In  severe  DSS  cases.  Activation  of  both  known  complement 
pathways  was  Indicated  by  simultaneous  depression  of  C4  and  C3 
proactivator  levels.  Decrease  of  plasma  fibrinogen,  appearance 
of  fibrin-spilt  products,  and  severe  thrombocytopenia  during 
shock  Indicated  occurrence  of  disseminated  Intravascular  coagula¬ 
tion. 


Low  levels  of  serum  complement  components  In  DSS  could  be 
due  to  1)  Increased  consumption,  2)  decreased  synthesis  and/or 
3)  sequestration  of  protein  extravascularly  due  to  Increased 
vascular  permeability.  In  order  to  confirm  the  strong  but 
circumstantial  evidence  of  complement  component  consumption  In 
DSS  foyrid  in  the  1971  study,  catabolic  studies  of  2  complement 
proteins,  C3  and  Clq,  were  undertaken  In  DHF  patients  in  1972. 

Metabolic  studies  using  125i_C3  or  125i_iabeled  Clq  were 
performed  on  23  DHF  patients.  Patients  with  non-acute,  non- 
Infectlous  diseases  served  as  controls.  The  degree  of  extra¬ 
vasation  of  serum  proteins  during  shock  was  assessed  by  injecting 
131 1-lgG  as  a  marker  simultaneously  with125I-C3  or  125i-ciq.  In 
both  studies,  thyroid  uptake  of  radioactive  I  was  blocked  by 
preliminary  and  continuing  administration  of  saturated  potassium 
Iodide. 

In  the  C3  metabolic  studies  15 >ic  of  ^I-C3  am|  15 0f 
1 31 i-igG  were  Inoculated  Intravenously.  Eight  blood  specimens 
were  obtained  during  the  day  of  Inoculation  and  two  blood  specimens 
were  obtained  on  days  2-8  post  Inoculation.  Determinations  of 
total  radioactivity  for  125j  and  131jf  immunochemical  quantitation 
of  all  complement  proteins,  transferrin,  fibrinogen,  and  hemopexln 
were  performed  on  all  samples. 

In  Clq  metabolic  studies,  15 /ic  of  ^25I-Clq  and  15 ^ic  of 
131 1-IgG  were  Inoculated  Intravenously.  Blood  was  drawn  at  1 
minute,  10  minutes,  30  minutes,  1  hour,  3  hours,  6  hours,  24  hours, 


700 


36  hours,  48  hours  and  60  hours  after  Injection  for  determination 
of  125i  and  131 1  radioactivity  and  Immunochemical  quantitation 
of  serum  components  as  In  the  C3  studies. 

Serum  samples  obtained  dally  during  the  study  from  patients 
were  tested  for  HI  antibody  to  dengue  1-4,  JEV,  and  Chlkungunya 
antigens.  Patients  with  4-fold  or  greater  titer  rises  to  at  least 
one  dengue  antigen  or  fixed  titers  >1:640  to  two  or  more  dengue 
antigens  were  considered  to  have  dengue  Infections. 

Sequential  levels  of  C3,  C5,  and  transferrin  and  the  platelet 
counts  of  one  OSS  patient  studied  are  shown  In  Figure  1.  In  this 
patient  (as  with  most  studied),  transferrin  was  lowered  concomi¬ 
tantly  with  Ipyels  of  C3  and  C5,  although  to  a  much  lesser  degree. 
This  example  demonstrates  the  difficulty  In  assessing  qualitatively 
or  quantitatively  complement  activation  by  determining  sequential 
serum  levels  of  complement  proteins. 

In  the  catabolic  studies,  extravasation  was  assessed  by 
Injecting  radio-labeled  IgG  simultaneously  with  C3.  The  left 
half  of  Figure  2  shows  the  elimination  of  IgG  and  C3  In  a  normal 
Individual;  the  right  half  of  Figure  2  shows  the  elimination  of 
these  proteins  in  patient  with  severe  (grade  IV)  OSS.  Within 
the  first  20  hours  of  study,  approximately  853!  of  the  Injected 
IgG  was  eliminated.  That  a  sizeable  proportion  of  IgG  eliminated 
was  pooled  extravascularly  Is  indicated  by  the  Increase  of 
percentage  of  injected  IgG  recovered  from  20-110  hours  after 
1nje:t1on  (mobilization  of  extravasated  IgG  back  Into  the  vascular 
compartment  after  the  shock  period).  By  comparing  the  measured 
values  of  IgG  of  each  patient  with  the  expected  normal  values, 
a  factor  was  obtained  which  served  to  correct  C 3  values  for  the 
amount  of  extravasation. 

Figure  3  compares  the  elimination  of  C3  in  the  same  OSS  and 
control  patient  after  correction  for  extravasation.  The 
difference  in  the  rate  of  elimination  occurred  within  the  first 
20-30  hours.  Thereafter  both  individuals  eliminated  C3  at  the 
same  rate.  The  initial  rapid  phase  of  C3  elimination  coincided 
with  shock  in  this  patient. 

Figure  4  compares  the  elimination  of  radio-labeled  Clq  In  a 
patient  with  grade  II  DHF  with  that  of  a  normal  control.  For 
the  Clq  values  depicted,  similar  corrections  as  for  C3  were 
made;  radio-labeled  IgG  was  Injected  simultaneously  with  Clq  and 
IgG  values  were  used  to  correct  for  extravasation.  A  vast 
difference  in  Clq  elimination  between  these  individuals  Is 
evident  with  a  more  rapid  catabolic  rate  In  the  DHF  patient. 


701 


Turnover  studies  of  C3  were  performed  on  17  patients  and  6 
controls.  Studies  of  Clq  catabolism  were  performed  on  7  patients 
and  3  controls.  Figure  5  summarizes  results  of  the  C3  study. 

The  fractional  catabolic  rate  of  C3  correlated  well  with  serum  C3 
levels  and  the  grade  of  illness.  Eleven  patients  with  OSS  (grade 
III-IV)  eliminated  2.6-3. 5%  of  the  C3  plasma  pool  per  hour  during 
a  seven  day  observation  period,  whereas  5  patients  with  DHF 
without  shock  eliminated  only  1 .9-2.6%.  The  average  of  5  controls 
was  1.9%.  The  greatest  increase  in  catabolic  rate  of  C3  was 
observed  during  the  initial  24-48  hour  period  of  study  which 
coincided  with  shock. 

The  catabolic  rate  of  Clq  in  the  7  dengue  patients  studied 
was  increased  over  that  of  control  individuals  (Figure  6).  During 
the  3  day  observation  period,  the  DHF  patients  eliminated  3.8- 
8.3£  of  their  Clq  plasma  pool  per  hour,  while  control  individuals 
eliminated  2. 8-3. 5%  per  hour.  There  was  no  apparent  correlation 
between  catabolic  rate  and  grade  of  disease  in  the  7  patients; 
this  was  expected  since  both  complement  pathways  (classical, 
involving  Clq  and  the  bypass  mechanism,  not  involving  Clq)  are 
activated  in  DHF. 

The  results  lend  support  to  the  concept  that  activation  of 
complement  constitutes  an  essential  part  of  the  pathogenic 
mechanism  of  DSS  and  DHF.  Complement-dependent  release  of 
vasoactive  amines  and  generation  of  platelet  procoagulant 
activity  are  envisaged  as  major  pathogenic  factors  of  the  dengue 
shock  syndrome. 


702 


Percent  of  Injec  id  12&I  C3 


100 


Hours 


Figure  3. 


Corrected  Elimination  Rates  of  ^5 
Control  and  DSS  Patient 


I  C3  in  a  Normal 


705 


Percent  of  Injected  1 


Control  #490 


10; 

6; 

4- 

2 

20  ^~40  60 

Hours 


Figure  4.  Corrected  Elimination  Rates  of  125I  Clq  in  a 
Normal  Control  and  DHF  Patient 


4 


1 


i  n  m  h 

Controls  Grade  of  Disease 


Figure  5.  Corrected  Elimination  Rates  of  ^1  C3  in  17  DHF 
Patients  and  6  Control  Patients 

•  =  Mean  values  of  group 

=  £  I .S.D  of  mean 


707 


Controls  Dengue 
Patients 


Figure  6. 


Corrected  Elimination  Rates  of 
Patients  and  3  Control  Patients 


125I  Clq  in  7  DHF 


O  =  Mean  values  of  group 
_  =  t  I . S. D.  of  mean 


708 


2.  Evaluation  of  the  Plasma  Klnln  System  In  Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever 


Dengue  virus  Infections  represent  an  Important  and  growing 
public  health  problem  In  the  tropics  and  subtropics.  The  patho¬ 
genesis  of  the  severe  and  life-threatening  manifestations  found  In 
Asia,  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever  (DHF)  with  and  without  shock,  Is 
Incompletely  understood.  Clinical  and  postmortem  observations 
suggest  that  pharmacologically  active  mediators  may  play  a  role  In 
causing  the  hypovolemia  and  shock  that  occur  In  severe  DHF.  The 
complement  system  Is  Involved  and  anaphylatoxlns  may  mediate  the 
rapid  changes  In  vascular  permeability  which  lead  to  vascular 
collapse. 

There  Is  circumstantial  evidence  that  the  plasma  klnln  system 
may  also  participate  In  DHF.  Increased  vascular  permeability  with 
hypoprotelnemla  and  circulatory  collapse  are  central  pathophysio¬ 
logical  events  In  DHF.  Plasma  klnlns  are  potent  endogenous 
mediators  of  Increased  vascular  permeability  and  the  infusion  of 
bradyklnin  Into  man  produces  systemic  arteriolar  dilatation, 
decreased  peripheral  vascular  resistance,  and  drop  In  arterial 
blood  pressure.  Bradyklnin  activity  Is  elevated  in  early  stages 
of  endotoxin  shock  In  monkeys.  Finally  the  complement  and 
fibrinolytic  systems  are  activated  In  DHF,  and  these  2  systems  are 
functionally  interrelated  with  the  plasma  klnln  system. 

The  development  of  a  sensitive  radioimmunoassay  for  bradyklnin 
and  enzymatic  assays  for  the  bradyklnin  activator  system,  which 
Includes  prekalllkreln  (Cl  esterase)  Inhibitor  has  recently  helped 
clarify  the  dynamics  of  the  plasma  klnln  system  by  permitting 
simultaneous  and  accurate  measurements  of  Its  major  components. 

We  report  here  sequential  measurements  of  complement  (C3)  and  4 
klnin  system  components-factor  XII  (Hageman),  bradyklnin, 
prekallikrein  and  kail Ikrein  inhlbltor-ln  18  patients  hospitalized 
with  DHF,  11  of  whom  developed  shock. 

Dengue  Hemorrhagic  Fever  Patients:  All  patients  were  admitted  to 
the  hemorrhagic  fever  ward  of  Bangkok  Children's  Hospital  during 
July  1972.  Seven  patients  were  diagnosed  as  having  DHF  without 
shock  and  11  patients  as  having  DHF  with  shock  (DSS)  by  criteria 
previously  reported.  Shock  occurred  on  the  day  of  admission  (7 
patients),  hospital  day  2  (2  patients),  day  3  (1  patient)  and  day 
5  (1  patient). 

Fever  Control  Patients;  Eight  hospital  In-patients  having  acute 
febrile  Illnesses  not  associated  with  dengue  Infection  comprised 
the  fever  control  (FC)  group.  Seven  had  been  admitted  with  a 
presumptive  diagnosis  of  DHF  which  was  not  tenable  on  the  basis 
of  their  subsequent  clinical  course  and  diagnostic  tests.  The 
eighth  patient  developed  a  fever  and  a  rash  during  treatment  of 

709 


4/ 


tuberculous  meningitis. 

Therapy:  Dengue  and  FC  patients  received  Intravenous  glucose- 
lactate-RInger's  Solution  for  dehydration  or  shock,  chloral 
hydrate  for  agitation,  acetaminophen  for  hyperpyrexia,  and  Vitamin 
C.  Plasma  was  given  to  4  DSS  patients  and  blood  transfusions  to 
one  FC  patient. 

Non-Fever  Control  Subjects:  Eighteen  afebrile  Thai  children  were 
bled  once  for  factor  XII,  bradyklnln,  prekalllkreln,  and  kalllkreln 
Inhibitor  assays;  2  children  were  healthy  and  16  were  convalescing 
from  surgery  or  acute  or  chronic  medical  conditions. 

Experimental  Design:  Venous  blood  specimens  from  all  26  febrile 
patients  studied  were  obtained  on  hospital  days  1  (admission)  2, 

4,  and  6  If  not  previously  discharged.  Convalescent  samples 
were  obtained  from  14  of  these  patients  on  follow-up  visits  13 
to  20  days  after  onset  of  their  Illness.  All  patients  were  bled 
2  to  6  times.  At  least  one  blood  specimen  was  drawn  from  most 
DSS  patients  during,  or  within  1-2  hours  of  vascular  collapse; 
one  patient  was  bled  one  day  before  and  after  the  day  of  shock 
(Fig.  2). 

The  following  laboratory  tests  were  performed  on  most  venous 
blood  specimens  obtained  from  febrile  patients.  Hematocrit 
(expressed  as  percent  of  discharge  Hct),  leukocyte  count  (per  mnw) 
and  platelet  count  (xlO^  per  mm3)  were  done  by  standard  methods. 
Serum  C3  concentrations  (mg/100  ml)  were  determined  by  radial 
Immunodiffusion  using  agar  plates  commercially  obtained  (Hyland 
Laboratory,  Los  Angeles,  Ca.);  serum  samples  from  Individual 
patients  were  tested  simultaneously  and  In  duplicate.  Plasma 
bradyklnln  concentrations  (nanograms/ml)  were  determined  by 
radioimmunoassay.  The  lower  range  of  sensitivity  of  the  radio¬ 
immunoassay  ranged  between  .31-. 67  ng/ml;  measurements  In  this 
range  are  expressed  as  .67  ng/ml  In  subsequent  analysis.  The 
activities  of  plasma  prekalllkreln  (micromoles/ml /hr  of  tosyl 
arginine  methyl  ester  hydrolysed)  and  kalllkreln  Inhibitor 
(Inhibitor  units)  were  determined  by  enzymatic  assay.  Plasma 
factor  XII  activity  (percent  of  Boston  standard)  was  determined  by 
a  modification  of  the  activated  partial  thromboplastin  time  using 
congenitally  deficient  plasma. 

The  blood  obtained  for  bradyklnln,  prekallikreln  (PK), 
kallikrein  Inhibitor  (KI)  and  factor  XII  assays  was  processed 
within  10  minutes  of  being  drawn  using  plastic  equipment.  Blood 
for  PK,  KI  and  factor  XII  assays  was  added  to  chilled  tubes 
containing  3.8%  sodium  citrate  and  the  plasma  separated  and  frozen 
at  -20°C.  Blood  for  bradyklnln  assay  was  added  to  tubes  containing 


710 


sodium  EDTA  and  hexadlmethrlne,  the  plasma  separated,  precipitated 
with  trichloracetic  acid,  and  frozen.  After  coding,  the  plasma 
was  shipped  In  dry  Ice  to  Boston  where  assays  were  performed  on 
freshly  thawed  plasma  between  2  and  5  months  after  the  blood  was 
collected. 

Serological  tests:  Admission  and  convalescent  sera  were  obtained 
from  tne  26  febrile  patients  and  tested  simultaneously  by  the 
hemagglut1nat1on*1nh1b1t1on  test  In  microtiter  plates  against  8 
units'  of  dengue  serotypes  1-4  and  chlkungunya  virus  antigens. 
Patients  were  considered  to  have  had  recent  dengue  Infections  If 
4-fold  or  greater  rises  In  antibody  titers  against  dengue  antigens 
were  found  In  paired  sera,  or  If  the  anti -dengue  titers  were 
elevated  and  fixed  (£1:640).  We  did  not  attempt  to  isolate  virus 
from  these  patients,  but  dengue  2  virus  was  recovered  from  children 
In  Bangkok  during  the  1972  OHF  epidemic  season. 

All  DHF  and  DSS  patients  had  serologic  evidence  of  recent 
secondary  dengue  Infections;  no  FC  patients  had  evidence  of  recent 
dengue  or  chlkungunya  virus  Infections. 

Laboratory  values  for  the  4  groups  of  patients  are  listed  In 
Table  1.  In  order  to  Illustrate  differences  found  between  clinical 
groups,  the  admission  and  lowest  or  highest  values,  selected  from 
multiple  bleedings,  are  shown  as  the  mean  ±S.D.  The  NFC  values 
are  compared  with  the  FC  admission  values,  and  FC  with  DHF  and 
DSS  values;  probability  levels  are  shown  (Two-tailed  Student's 
T-test).  A  comparison  of  the  FC  and  NFC  subjects  revealed 
significantly  lower  prekalllkreln  activity  In  FC  patients.  In 
contrast  to  fever  controls,  dengue  patients  (especially  the  DSS 
group)  had  greater  hemoconcentratlon,  significantly  lower  platelet 
counts,  and  lower  C3,  factor  XII,  and  prekalllkreln  levels  on 
admission  and/or  during  the  acute  Illness.  Bradyklnln  and 
kalllkrein  Inhibitor  values  were  similar  in  all  clinical  groups. 

The  temporal  profiles  of  platelet,  C3,  and  klnln  components  In 
DSS  patients  are  Illustrated  In  Figures  la-lf.  The  admission 
values  of  FC  patients  were  selected  for  analysis  because  they  are 
generally  the  lowest  of  repeated  measurements  In  this  group.  Fig. 
la  illustrates  the  normal  C3  concentration  before  shock,  the  low 
levels  on  the  day  of  shock,  and  the  progressively  higher  concentra¬ 
tions  during  convalescence;  a  similar  pattern  exists  for  platelet 
counts  (Fig.  lb).  Prekalllkreln  (Fig.  lc)  and  factor  XII  (Fig.  Id) 
activities  are  significantly  depressed  before  the  shock  day,  and 
higher  afterwards.  Kalllkrein  inhibitor  activity  (Fig.  le)  shows 
a  tendency  toward  low  values  before  shock,  normal  levels  during 
and  for  3  days  after  shock,  and  low  levels  again  during  late 


711 


convalescence;  the  values  are  widely  scattered  however,  and 
differences  are  not  statistically  significant.  Bradyklnln  concentra¬ 
tions  are  not  significantly  elevated  at  any  time  In  DSS  patients 
(Fig.  if). 

Changes  In  laboratory  values  are  Illustrated  In  more  detail  by 
a  patient  (Fig.  2)  who  developed  shock  3  days  after  admission,  and 
therefore  provided  more  than  1  pre-shock  blood  sample.  The  pre¬ 
shock  period  Is  characterized  by  a  rising  hematocrit  and  by  a 
falling  platelet  count  and  C3  concentration.  By  contrast,  factor 
XII  and  prekalllkreln  activity  was  low  but  rising  when  shock 
occurred,  and  normal  bradyklnln  concentration  did  not  change. 
Kalllkreln  Inhibitor  activity  fluctuated  widely.  Similar  changes 
were  observed  In  another  patient  who  developed  shock  5  days  after 
admission. 

This  study  was  designed  to  determine  whether  the  plasma  klnln 
system  Is  activated  In  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever.  In  order  to 
confirm  the  plausibility  of  bradyklnln  participation  In  OHF,  we 
attempted  to  show  a  temporal  relationship  between  clinical  shock 
and  elevated  levels  of  plasma  bradyklnln,  or  of  klnln  system 
component  activation.  The  plasma  klnln  system  Is  thought  to  be 
activated  sequentially  as  shown  In  Figure  3.  Evidence  of  full 
activation  of  the  klnln  system  should  Include  the  simultaneous 
demonstration  of  factor  XII,  prekalllkreln,  and  kalllkreln  Inhibitor 
depletion,  and  formation  of  bradyklnln. 

We  found  significant  depression  of  only  2  of  the  4  klnln  system 
components  -  prekalllkreln  and  factor  XII.  Depressed  enzymatic 
activity  of  these  2  serum  proteins  could  result  from  at  least  3 
different  mechanisms:  sequestration  of  the  protein  extravascularly, 
depressed  synthesis,  or  an  increased  rate  of  activation  and 
consumption.  1^25  labelled  albumin  (mol.  wt.  =  49,000)  crosses 
altered  blood  vessels  during  the  shock  phase  of  DHF,  and  Is 
sequestered  extravascularly. 

Depressed  serum  concentrations  of  transferrin  (mol.  wt.  = 

90,000)  are  also  found  during  the  shock  phase.  It  seems  likely 
that  at  least  part  of  the  consistently  depressed' activity  of 
prekalllkreln  (mol.  wt.  =  127,000)  and  Hageman  factor  (mol.  wt.  = 
110,000)  is  due  to  their  extravasation  preceding  shock.  A  point 
against  extravasation,  however,  Is  that  kallikrein  inhibitor 
(MW  =  50,000)  was  not  similarly  depressed  before  shock. 

Decreased  synthesis  of  prekalllkreln  and  factor  XII  by  a 
damaged  liver  may  be  another  cause  for  the  depressed  activity  of 
these  proteins.  Abnormal  liver  function  and  liver  necrosis 


712 


unrelated  to  shock  have  been  described  In  DHF.  Prekalllkreln 
levels,  In  particular,  are  a  very  sensitive  Index  of  liver 
dysfunction.  Kalllkreln  Inhibitor,  although  synthesized  by  the 
liver,  Is  not  very  sensitive  to  hepatic  dysfunction  and  remains 
normal  In  severe  liver  disease. 

The  third  possibility,  Increased  consumption  of  these  two 
proteins  as  a  consequence  of  their  activation,  Is  judged  unlikely 
In  view  of  the  normal  levels  of  kalllkreln  Inhibitor  (KI)  and 
bradyklnln  found.  The  depletion  of  Kl  as  it  forms  an  Inactive 
stoichiometric  complex  with  kalllkreln  Is  a  uniform  finding  In 
plasma  prekalllkreln  activation.  In  DHF  patients  studied,  there 
was  no  consistent  depletion  of  KI  at  any  stage  of  illness, 
suggesting  that  conversion  of  prekali ikrein  to  kail ikrein  did  not 
occur.  The  observed  variations  of  KI  activity  during  DHF  could  be 
ascribed  to  KI  interacting  with  plasma  enzymes  other  than  kalllkreln, 
such  as  Cl  esterase,  factors  XI  and  XII,  plasmin  and  thrombin,  A 
second  argument  against  consumption  of  prekall ikrein  and  factor 
XII  are  the  normal  bradykinin  concentrations  found  during  DHF.  This 
implies  that  prebradykinin  was  not  converted  to  bradykinin  by 
kali Ikrein,  and  thus  that  prekall ikrein  was  not  converted  to 
kail ikrein.  Admittedly,  if  bradykinin  was  generated,  it  may  have 
been  efficiently  and  rapidly  removed  by  controlling  kinase  systems 
after  its  formation;  the  half-life  of  bradykinin  in  vivo  is  less 
than  30  seconds.  Alternatively,  bradykinin  may  have  been  activated 
but  operative  peripherally  and  not  detected  in  venous  blood. 

Although  the  foregoing  evidence  against  prekall ikrein  and 
factor  XII  activation  in  DHF  is  indirect,  it  does  suggest  that  if 
consumption  does  occur,  pathways  other  than  those  presently 
considered  important  for  bradykinin  activation  are  operative.  For 
example,  the  complement  and  fibrinolytic  systems  are  activated  in 
DHF,  and  factor  XII  may  participate  in  this  process.  The  low 
values  of  prekall ikrein  in  fever  control  patients  implies  that 
mechanisms  associated  with  febrile  disease  jger  se  are  in  part 
responsible  for  the  low  levels  in  DHF;  prekaTTiloFein  metabolic 
turnover  studies  should  help  clarify  these  mechanisms. 

Clinical  shock  appeared  to  be  more  closely  related  temporally 
to  changing  levels  of  C3  and  platelet  counts  than  to  levels  of 
prekal  1  ikrein  and  factor  XII.  Two  patients  had  lower  prekallikrein 
and  factor  XII  values  on  admission  than  during  shock,  which  occurred 
3  and  5  days  later.  If  the  assumption  holds  that  the  observed  low 
levels  of  two  of  the  kinin  components  are  due  to  consumption,  and 
that  maximum  bradykinin  activation  is  required  for  the  development 
of  shock,  then  the  time  course  of  activation  seems  poorly  correlated 
temporally  to  the  onset  of  vascular  collapse  in  these  two  patients. 


713 


tUlMWHVM  VN$f V 


•0  00 

• 

•  00 

* 

I  *00 

• 

l 

1^  *oc 

I  soo 

. 

. 

. 

• 

o 

— 

* 

• 

£  100 

. 

m 

• 

— 

T 

t 

— 

_ 

* 

1 

• 

• 

a  •’ 

v5r 

w 

~~ 

w 

kS 

N1 _ 

»«■ 

m* 

M 

ms 

mi  TFT 

S  *•  -  •"] 

fs^oc-  oi*1 

1  *  '  ••  •  * ! 

[  •»  J 

1 

OA»S  Btrcwi  WC  *TTt»  SHOCK 

Figure  la  -  If.  Twiporal  profiles  of  C3,  platelet  and  kinin  components  In  patients  with  dengue  shock 
syndrome  (OSS).  Non-fever  controls  (NFC)  are  single  determinations,  fever  controls 
(FC)  are  admission  values,  and  each  point  for  OSS  patients  represents  a  single  measure, 
except  for  points  in  parenthesis  which  represent  the  average  of  two  or  more  determina¬ 
tions  on  the  same  individual  in  a  given  time  period.  Mean  values  are  Indicated  by 
bars.  Significance  limits  are  calculated  from  a  comparison  of  FC  and  NFC,  and  FC  and 
OSS  (Student's  T  test,  two-tailed);  NS  ■  not  significant  (P>  .05). 


715 


PERCENT  OF  MEAN  FEVER  CONTROL  VALUE  HOT  * 


igure  2.  Changing  Laboratory  Values  in  a  Patient  with  Dengue 

Shock  Syndrome.  PLT  platelet;  Hct,  percent  hematocrit 

nil'kanT  rev!;  ;  bradykinin-  KI*  kalUkretn  inhibitor; 
prekallikrein;  XII,  Factor  XII. 


716 


/ 


By  contrast  C3  concentrations  were  normal  on  admission  In 
these  two  patients,  but  began  to  decline  several  days  before  shock 
and  reached  lowest  levels  1-2  days  afterwards.  Platelet  counts 
tended  to  parallel  the  changing  C3  concentration.  Complement  (C3) 
activation  may  result  In  generation  of  the  vasoactive  complement 
peptides  C3a  and  C5a  followed  by  rapid  removal  of  activated  C3 
from  the  circulation.  The  sequence  of  Increased  vascular  per¬ 
meability  resulting  In  hypoprotelnemla,  hypovolemia  and  vascular 
collapsfc  In  DSS  may  be  mediated  totally  or  In  part  by  vasoactive 
complement  peptides  generated  prior  to  shock. 

In  order  to  explore  the  role  of  the  plasma  klnln  system  In 
the  pathogenesis  of  dengue  hemorrhagic  fever  (DHF),  bradvklnln, 
prekalllkreln,  kalllkreln  Inhibitor,  factor  XII  (Hageman),  and 
serum  complement  (C3)  were  measured  simultaneously  during  the  acute 
and  convalescent  stages  of  Illness  In  7  children  with  DHF  without 
shock,  In  11  with  dengue  shock  syndrome  (DSS),  and  In  8  patients 
with  acute  febrile  Illnesses  other  than  dengue  (FC).  Prekalllkreln, 
factor  XII  and  C3  levels  were  significantly  lower  in  both  dengue 
patient  groups  compared  to  FC  patients,  with  the  lowest  mean  levels 
found  In  DSS.  However,  bradyklnln  concentrations  were  not  elevated 
and  mean  kalllkreln  Inhibitor  activity  levels  were  not  depressed 
In  dengue  patients.  Two  DSS  patients  studied  at  least  2  days 
before  onset  of  shock  had  falling  C3  levels  which  were  more  closely 
related  temporally  to  the  onset  of  shock  than  were  their  rising 
levels  of  prekalllkreln.  The  results  fall  to  provide  convincing 
evidence  for  full  activation  of  the  plasma  klnln  system  leading 
to  free  bradyklnln  or  a  significant  role  for  bradykinin  in  the 
Immunopathogenesls  of  DHF;  results  do  re-focus  attention  on 
complement  as  a  potentially  Important  pharmacological  mediator  of 
dengue  shock  syndrome. 

3.  Plasma  and  Serum  as  a  Source  of  Dengue  Virus  in  Dengue 
Hemorrhagic  Fever  Patients  ' 


In  studies  reported  in  last  year's  Annual  Report  (pages  88-92), 
dengue  virus  was  isolated  from  DHF  patients  more  conmonly  from 
plasma  than  from  serum.  This  difference  wa  evident  especially  in 
children  presenting  with  high  dengue-2  HI  antibody  titers  (£l:160). 
The  significance  of  this  finding  was  lessened  by  the  small  numbers 
of  patients  with  isolates  and  by  technical  limitations  in  design. 
Isolations  from  serum  and  from  plasma  were  handled  by  different 
technicians. 

Studies  of  the  role  of  individual  dengue  antigens  recently 
described  by  WRAIR  and  other  laboratories  In  the  pathogenesis  of 
DHF  are  planned.  Interpretation  of  these  projected  studies  will 


718 


depend  upon  Identification  of  the  serotype  of  dengue  virus 
currently  Infecting  a  DHF  patient.  By  conventional  Isolation 
techniques  using  serum,  Isolates  have  been  obtained  from  15-20% 
of  DHF  patients  and  only  from  those  patients  admitted  with  low 
«1:160)  dengue  HI  titers.  More  efficient  methods  of  virus 
Isolation,  especially  from  patients  presenting  with  high  antibody 
titers  are  desired.  Consequently,  during  the  1972  DHF  season, 
the  Isolation  efficiency  of  plasma  versus  serum  was  studied. 

Studied  were  68  patients  admitted  to  Children's  Hospital  with 
a  clinical  diagnosis  of  DHF.  Serum  obtained  on  admission  and 
discharge  was  tested  against  dengue  1?4,  JEV,  and  Chlkungunya 
antigens  In  HI  tests.  Patients  were  considered  to  have  dengue 
Infections  If  a  4-fold  or  greater  rise  In  titer  was  shown  to  at 
least  one  dengue  antigen  or  If  titers  were  fixed  but  >1:640  to 
at  least  2  dengue  antigens. 

For  Isolation  studies,  10  ml  of  blood  was  obtained  on 
admission.  A  2  ml  aliquot  was  allowed  to  clot  and  serum  was 
separated  for  Isolation.  The  remaining  8  ml  aliauot  was  placed 
into  15  ml  centrifuge  tubes  coated  with  heparin  (80  units); 
heparinized  blood  was  centrifuged  at  600  rpm  for  5  minutes  at  4°C. 
The  buffy  coat  layer  was  gently  aspirated.  Remaining  whole  blood 
was  centrifuged  at  1500  rpm  for  15  minutes.  Plasma  was  aspirated 
and  pooled  with  the  buffy  coat  layer  to  be  used  as  cell -rich  plasma 
for  isolation  studies. 

The  remaining  whole  blood  was  centrifuged  at  5000  rpm  for 
15  minutes  and  the  upper  two-thirds  of  the  supernatant  aspirated 
with  care  to  avoid  platelet  contamination.  This  supernatant  was 
recentrifuged  at  5000  rpm  for  15  minutes,  the  upper  two-thirds  of 
the  supernatant  was  aspirated  and  served  as  cell -free  plasma  for 
isolation  attempts. 

Each  specimen  was  inoculated  onto  3  flasks  of  LLC-MK2  cells; 
isolation  was  performed  by  the  standard  method  of  direct  and 
delayed  plaques.  All  isolation  attempts  were  performed  by  the 
same  technician.  White  blood  cell  and  platelet  counts  were  carried 
out  on  all  cell -rich  and  cell -free  plasma  specimens  used  for 
Isolation. 

Of  the  68  patients  studied,  13  lacked  serologic  evidence  of 
dengue  infection;  no  Isolates  were  obtained  from  these  patients. 

Of  the  55  patients  with  serologically  confirmed  dengue  infections, 
12  dengue  isolations  were  obtained;  all  were  dengue  2.  Table  1 
shows  results  of  isolations  from  serum,  cell -rich  plasma,  and  cel  1  - 
free  plasma  from  the  dengue  patients.  Dengue  2  virus  was  Isolated 
from  6  of  the  7  patients  with  admission  HI  titers  <1:80  and  from 


Dengue  2  Number  of  Isolates _ 

HI  Titer  I  Plasma 

(Reciprocal)  Number  of  Patients  Total  Serum  Cell -rich  Cell -free 

<  20  3  3  2  3  3 


7  of  the  13  patients  studied  with  HI  titers S 1 : 1 60 . .  In  these 
patients,  Isolation  was  equally  efficient  from  serum  or  plasma 
specimens. 


Dengue  2  virus  was  Isolated  also  from  5  of  33  patients  admitted 
with  dengue  2  HI  titers  of  1:320-1:1280.  No  isolates  were  obtained 
from  serum  of  these  patients,  but  5  Isolates  were  from  cell -free 
and  4  from  cell-rich  plasma. 

No  Isolates  were  obtained  from  the  9  patients  with  initial 
dengue  2  HI  titers  21:2560. 

Little  difference  in  isolation  efficiency  between  cell-rich 
and  cell-free  plasma  was  found,  even  in  those  patients  without 
virus  in  serum.  Generally,  these  cell-free  plasma  preparations 
were  Indeed  cell-free.  White  blood  cells  were  not  detected  In 
any  cell-free  plasma  preparation  yielding  virus,  while  platelet 
contamination  (l-3xl03/mm3)  was  detected  in  only  5  of  12  cell-free 
preparations  yielding  virus.  In  the  5-patients  with  serum  negative 
for  dengue  virus,  WBC  and  platelets  were  not  detected  in  cell-free 
plasma  yielding  virus  in  3  patients. 

These  results  confirm  the  limited  data  from  the  1972  study 
in  defining  a  small  but  important  difference  in  the  efficiency  of 
isolation  of  dengue  virus  from  plasma  and  serum  of  DHF  patients. 

No  difference  in  isolation  efficiency  was  found  in  patients  with 
low  (£1:160)  admission  dengue  2  HI  titers,  but  all  5  isolates  from 
patients  with  initial  titersi  1  :320  were  obtained  from  plasma  only. 

Our  initial  hypothesis  that  an  increased  isolation  rate  from 
plasma  might  be  due  to  the  presence  of  cell  or  platelet  associated 
virus  in  plasma  is  not  supported  since  no  differences  between  cel  1  - 
rich  and  cell-free  plasma  was  found  in  patients  lacking  virus  in 
serum.  That  the  decrease  in  isolation  efficiency  might  be  due  to 
adherence  of  virus  to  fibrin  in  the  clot  does  not  seem  likely  in 
view  of  the  differences  between  isolation  from  serum  in  patients 
with  low  and  high  admission  HI  titers.  Possibly,  heparin  itself 
influences  neutralization  of  virus  in  high-titered  plasma,  per¬ 
mitting  incompletely  neutralized  virus  to  infect  LLC-MK2  cells. 
Further  studies  will  be  required  to  test  this  hypothesis.  Since 
virus  was  isolated  from  only  22%  of  the  patients  with  DHF  by  the 
most  efficient  specimen  (plasma),  other  approaches  to  increase 
the  efficiency  of  dengue  isolation  in  DHF  patients  are  indicated. 

4.  Efficiency  of  Peripheral  Blood  Collected  on  Filter  Paper  Discs 
and  One  Dengue  Antigen  in  Serologic  Diagnosis  of  Dengue  Hemorrhagic 
Fever. 


721 


For  routine  serologic  diagnosis  of  dengue  Infections  In  this 
laboratory,  serum  has  been  tested  against  antigens  of  all  four 
dengue  serotypes.  This  traditional  approach  has  two  significant 
disadvantages  In  a  large  scale  surveillance  program  for  DHF.  First, 
obtaining  blood  by  venipuncture,  aseptic  separation  of  serum  and 
transportation  of  serum  to  a  central  laboratory  requires  manpower, 
equipment,  and  logistical  support  not  often  available  to  smaller 
provincial  hospitals.  Second,  testing  sera  against  four  viral 
antigens  Is  expensive  (cost,  $2.00  US  per  test)  and  time-consuming, 
limiting  the  number  of  patients  which  can  be  tested  serologically. 

For  serologic  tests  against  viruses  other  than  dengue  (rubella, 
coronavlruses),  peripheral  blood  collected  on  a  filter  paper  disc 
has  proven  a  practical  and  economical  collection  system  In  extensive 
f1e*<d  research  projects.  The  purpose  of  the  study  reported  was  to 
compare  filter  paper  disc  specimens  with  serum  specimens  for 
serologic  diagnosis  of  dengue  In  patients  with  suspected  DHF.  A 
second  goal  was  to  compare  the  efficiency  of  the  HI  test  In 
serologic  diagnosis  of  dengue  using  only  one  dengue  antigen  versus 
all  four  dengue  antigens.  This  research  has  Important  Implications 
In  serologic  diagnosis  of  dengue  Infections  under  adverse  military 
field  conditions. 

Sixty-four  patients  admitted  to  Children's  Hospital  with  a 
diagnosis  of  DHF  were  studied.  Dengue  viruses  were  Isolated  from 
11  of  these  patients;  all  Isolates  were  dengue  2.  Acute  serum 
drawn  on  admission  and  convalescent  serum  drawn  on  discharge  on 
each  patient  were  tested  for  antibody  to  the  four  dengue  serotypes 
by  the  standard  method  of  Clarke  and  Casals  modified  to  microtiter; 
8-16  units  of  antigens  were  used.  In  addition,  peripheral  blood 
obtained  by  finger  prick  was  collected  on  two  filter  paper  discs 
(Schlelder  and  Schuell,  No.  740-E,  diameter  12.7  mm).  One  set  of 
acute  and  convalescent  discs  from  each  patient  was  stored  at  4°C 
and  the  other  at  C/°C  for  one  week  (to  mimic  the  effect  of  ambient 
temperature).  Both  sets  of  discs  were  soaked  with  0.4  ml  borate 
saline  (pH  9.0)  and  Incubated  at  4°C  overnight.  One  half  ml  of  a 
25%  acid-washed  kaolin  solution  In  borate  saline  was  added  and 
Incubated  at  room  temperature  for  20  minutes  with  occasional 
agitation.  The  eluate  was  separated  by  centrifugation  at  2500  rpm 
for  30  minutes,  treated  with  0.02  ml  of  packed  goose  RBC  at  4°C 
for  30  minutes  with  occasional  agitation  and  then  centrifuged. 

Since  the  IgG  concentrations  of  several  eluates  tested  approximated 
5%  of  that  of  companion  sera,  the  final  dilution  of  the  eluate 
obtained  was  considered  to  be  a  1:20  dilution  of  whole  serum.  The 
eluate  was  tested  for  HI  antibodies  to  dengue  2  and  dengue  4 
antigens  by  the  same  technique  used  for  serum  specimens. 

Shown  in  Table  1  are  the  differences  In  HI  titer  (log  2) 
between  the  filter  paper  technique  and  serum  for  128  individual 

722 


specimens  tested.  There  Is  close  concordance  In  the  two  techniques 
for  dengue  2  HI  antibody  titers;  36X  of  the  filter  paper  titers 
were  within  one  dilution  of  the  serum  titer.  A  different  pattern 
was  seen  with  dengue  4  antigen.  Only  612  of  filter  paper  titers 
were  within  one  dilution  of  the  serum  titer;  the  distribution  of 
filter  paper  titers  was  skewed  considerably  toward  lower  titers 
than  were  obtained  In  sera.  Technical  reasons  for  the  discrepancy 
with  the  two  antigens  are  not  apparent;  Indeed,  Identical  aliquots 
of  the  eluate  of  each  specimen  were  tested  with  both  antigens 
simultaneously. 

A  comparison  of  titers  obtained  from  filter  paper  discs  stored 
at  4°C  and  37°C  for  one  week  against  the  two  dengue  antigens  Is 
shown  In  Table  2.  Tested  were  52  sera  from  26  DHF  patients. 

Storage  at  37°C  did  not  change  HI  titers  significantly  In  compari¬ 
son  with  storage  at  4°C. 

Table  3  compares  diagnosis  of  dengue  Infections  using  dengue 
2  antigen  alone  by  serum  and  by  filter  paper  disc  specimens  In  the 
64  patients  studied.  Rises  In  titer  were  found  In  32  patients 
using  serum  compared  with  29  using  discs  Concordance  of  the  two 
methods  was  found  In  20  patients  with  titer  rises,  In  10  with  high 
fixed  titers,  and  In  13  patients  with  low  fixed  titers.  Discrepan¬ 
cies  were  limited  to  variations  between  titer  rises  and  high  fixed 
titers  by  both  techniques.  The  results  with  dengue  4  antigen  were 
similar  (Table  4). 

The  efficiency  of  serologic  diagnosis  of  dengue  Infections 
using  the  filter  disc  collection  method  and  one  dengue  antigen  In 
comparison  with  serum  and  four  dengue  antigens  Is  shown  In  Table 
5  (dengue  2  antigen)  and  Table  6  (dengue  4  antigen).  In  this 
analysis  a  4-fold  or  greater  titer  rise  to  any  one  of  the  four 
dengue  antigens  In  serum  specimens  was  considered  Indicative  of 
dengue  Infection.  Results  were  similar  with  both  antigens; 
conventional  serologic  techniques  Identified  46  dengue  Infections 
by  rise  In  HI  titer  in  the  64  patients  studied  while  filter  paper 
discs  detected  Infections  In  29  (D2)  and  30  (D4)  patients.  All 
Infected  patients  not  detected  by  the  filter  paper  technique  had 
high  fixed  titers  (£1:640)  to  the  dengue  antigen  used.  Both 
methods  were  concordant  In  patients  with  low  fixed  titers  (without 
evidence  of  dengue  Infection).  If  a  rise  to  either  D2  or  D4  was 
used  to  Indicate  dengue  Infection,  Infections  were  Identified  In 
31  of  the  46  patients  who  had  a  serum  titer  rise  to  one  of  the 
four  dengue  antigens. 

Little  difference  In  the  efficiency  of  serologic  diagnosis 
of  dengue  Infections  with  64  DHF  patients  studied  was  found 
between  the  peripheral  blood  filter  paper  disc  specimens  and  serum 

723 


specimens  when  tested  with  one  dengue  antigen.  Storage  of  discs 
at  37°C  for  one  week  did  not  change  dengue  HI  titers.  The  data 
suggested  that  the  more  convenient  filter  paper  disc  can  be  used 
for  dengue  diagnosis  with  little  decrease  In  diagnostic  efficiency. 

Considerable  decrease  In  efficiency  of  dengue  serologic 
diagnosis  accrued  when  one  dengue  antigen  was  used  Instead  of  all 
four  dengue  serotypes.  Using  sarun'  specimens,  only  33  patients 
(D2  antigen)  and  30  patients  (04  antigen)  had  diagnostic  titer 
rises  while  46  patients  showed  rises  when  all  four  dengue  antigens 
were  used.  By  filter  paper  using  one  dengue  antigen,  29  (02 
antigen)  and  30  (04  antigen)  showed  rises.  All  patients  with  rises 
detected  by  four  antigens  but  no  rise  with  slrgle  antigens  (02  or 
D4)  had  fixed  titers  of £1:640  against  the  single  antigens.  If 
high  fixed  titers  (£  1:640)  (In  addition  to  rour-fold  titer  rises) 
are  accepted  as  serologic  criteria  of  recent  dengue  Infections, 
the  use  of  one  dengue  antigen  results  In  little  decrease  In 
diagnostic  efficiency.  Patients  without  serologic  evidence  of 
dengue  by  conventional  techniques  were  correctly  Identified  by 
the  filter  paper  disc-single  antigen  test.  Although  the  lack  of 
concordance  In  titers  to  dengue  4  antigen  between  the  two  tests 
suggests  caution  In  the  application  of  the  filter  disc  technique 
for  antibody  prevalence  data,  the. results  suggest  that  It  is  an 
acceptable  technique  for  confirmation  of  dengue  Infections  In  a 
DHF  surveillance  program. 


724 


Comparison  of  HI  titers  from  eluates  of  filter  paper  discs  stored  at 


Table  3 


Efficiency  of  Serologic  Diagnosis  of  Dengue  Infection  by  Filter  Paper 
Discs  Compared  with  Serum  (Dengue  2  HA) 


Serum 

Titer 

No  Tit< 

jr  rise 

Totals 

Filter  Paper  Disc 

rise 

>  1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

<1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

Titer  rise 

20 

8 

I 

29 

No  Titer  rise 

>  1:640 

11 

10 

0 

21 

<1:640 

1 

0 

13 

14 

Totals 

32 

18 

14 

64 

Table  4 

Efficiency  of  Serologic  Diagnosis  of  Dengue  Infection  by  Filter  Paper 
Discs  Compared  with  Serum  (Dengue  4  HA) 


Serum  | 

Filter  Paper  Disc 

Titer 

rise 

No  Titer  rise 

Totals 

>1:640  Titer 

(no.  patients) 

<1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

Titer  rise 

21 

8 

0 

29 

No  Titer  rise 

>1:640 

7 

15 

0 

22 

<1:640 

0 

0 

13 

13 

Totals 

28 

23 

13 

64 

727 


Table  5 


Efficiency  of  Serologic  Diagnosis  by  Filter  Paper  Discs;  Discs  and 
D2  HA  Compared  to  Serum  and  D^  -  D4  HA 


Serum ,  4  Dengue  Antigens 

Titer 

rise 

No  Titer  rise 

Totals 

Filter  Paper  Disc 

Antigen 

>1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

<1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

Titer  rise 

28 

1 

0 

29 

No  Titer  rise 

>1:640 

17 

4 

0 

21 

<1:640 

1 

0 

13 

14 

Totals 

46 

5 

13 

64 

Table  6 

Efficiency  of  S^ologic  Diagnosis  by  Filter  Paper  Disc;  Discs  and 
Dj  HA  Compared  to  Serum  and  Dj  -  D4  HA 


Serum,  4  Dengue  Antigens 

Titer 

rise 

No  Titer  rise 

Totals 

Filter  Paper  Disc 

D4  Antigen 

>1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

<1:640  Titer 
(no.  patients) 

Titer  rise 

29 

1 

0 

30 

No  Titer  rise 

>1:640 

17 

4 

0 

21 

<1:640 

0 

0 

13 

13 

Totals 

46 

5 

13 

64 

728 


B.  JAPANESE  ENCEPHALITIS 


1 .  Human  Immunoglobulin  M  Antibody  In  the  Serodlagnosls  of 
Japanese  Encephalitis  Virus  Infections. 

The  serological  Identification  of  a  primary  group  B  arbovirus 
Infection  can  usually  be  made  on  the  basis  of  a  monospecific 
antibody  response  to  a  type  specific  virus  antigen,  measured  by 
the  standard  serological  tests  of  HI,  CF,  or  Nt.  However,  the 
high-titered  heterospecific  antibody  found  In  serum  after  sequen¬ 
tial  Infections  with  group  B  arboviruses  hinders  specific 
Identification  of  the  most  recent  Infection.  In  addition,  the 
rapid  anamnestic  antibody  titer  rise  In  secondary  group  B  Infec¬ 
tions,  together  with  delays  In  obtaining  the  acute  phase  serum 
specimens  from  some  patients,  often  makes  It  Impossible  to  detect 
a  titer  rise  In  whole  serum. 

Serum  Inmunoglobulln  M  (IgM)  has  been  found  to  be  more 
capable  than  serum  Inmunoglobulln  G  (IgG)  of  distinguishing 
antigenic  differences  between  certain  virus  types  within  non¬ 
arbovirus  groups  (2,  3,  4,  5).  Similarly  IgM  antibody  produced 
In  response  to  group  B  arbovirus  Infections  of  rabbits  and  guinea 
pigs  was  more  specific  than  IgG  for  the  Infecting  virus,  and  IgM 
antibody  reacting  monospeclflcally  with  JEV  antigen  provided  a 
specific  serological  diagnosis  for  first  JEV  Infection  In  gibbons 
previously  sensitized  with  dengue.  The  usefulness  of  the  IgM 
antibody  assay  In  human  dengue  infections  has  recently  been 
reported. 

We  have  encountered  many  patients  In  Southeast  Asia  who  have 
either  primary  Infections  with  monospecific  fixed  or  falling 
titers  to  JEV  or  dengue,  or  secondary  infections  with  cross- 
reactive  titers  to  these  viruses.  In  an  attempt  to  improve  the 
efficiency  of  serodlagnosis  of  these  infections,  we  have  compared 
the  immunospeciflcity  of  isolated  IgM  HI  antibody  with  the 
specificity  of  HI,  CF  and  Nt  antibody  in  whole  serum  obtained  from 
groups  of  well -studied  patients.  This  paper  describes  our 
experience  using  IgM  antibody  analysis  in  the  serodiagnosls  of 
88  patients  hospitalized  In  Vietnam  and  Thailand  with  presumed 
Japanese  encephalitis.  We  also  present  the  results  of  IgM  antibody 
titrations  on  the  serum  of  Thai  persons  with  clinically  inapparent 
JEV  infections. 

Patients  with  Japanese  Encephalitis:  Acute  and  convalescent 
bloods  were  collected  from  2  groups  of  patients  hospitalized  with 
fever  and  acute  encephalitis.  The  first  group  consisted  of  23 
American  military  personnel,  between  18  and  27  yrs  of  age, 
hospitalized  at  the  93rd  Evacuation  Hospital,  Long  Blnh,  Vietnam, 


729 


from  May  to  October  1970.  The  presumptive  diagnosis  of  encephalitis 
was  made  on  the  basis  of  the  clinical  triad  of  headache,  fever, 
and  central  nervous  signs  and  symptoms  associated  with  an  abnormal 
cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF),  which  was  sterile  for  bacteria  on 
culture.  A  CSF  was  considered  to  be  abnormal  If  greater  than  10 
white  cells/cmm  were  found,  or  If  the  protein  was  elevated  above 
45  mgX.  Convalescent  phase  sera  for  arbovirus  serology  were 
drawn  from  each  patient  10  to  14  days  after  the  acute  phase  sera. 

The  time  between  the  onset  of  Illness  and  the  acute  phase  serum 
sample  ranged  from  2  to  17  days.  Although  3  patients  died,  no 
postmortem  brain  specimens  were  obtained  for  viral  Isolation 
attempts;  JEV  was  Isolated,  however,  from  the  brain  of  an  American 
soldier  dying  with  encephalitis  during  the  1969  epidemic  of  JE 
which  occurred  In  the  Saigon-Long  Blnh  area  of  Vietnam.  All 
patients  had  presumably  been  Immunized  with  17-D  yellow  fever 
virus  vaccine  prior  to  their  arrival  In  Vietnam;  no  patients  gave 
a  past  history  compatible  with  clinical  dengue  fever. 

Serum  pairs  from  the  second  group  of  encephalitis  patients, 

65  In  number,  were  selected  from  a  serum  bank  representing  more 
than  120  Thai  patients.  The  patients  were  hospitalized  during 
a  1970  JE  epidemic  which  occurred  In  the  Chlangmal  and  Lampang 
Valleys  of  Northern  Thailand.  The  presumptive  diagnosis  of  JE 
was  made  using  clinical  criteria  described  above.  The  age  of 
these  64  Thai  patients  ranged  from  3  to  47  yrs,  and  approximately 
2/3  were  males.  JEV  was  Isolated  In  this  laboratory  from  the 
brain  of  a  fatal  case,  and  13  more  Isolates  of  JEV  were  recovered 
from  vector  mosquito  pools  collected  In  Chlangmal  during  the 
epidemic.  Detailed  epidemiological  and  clinical  descriptions  of 
these  and  additional  patients  hospitalized  during  the  1970 
epidemic  will  be  published  elsewhere.  Acute  phase  serum  specimens 
were  drawn  1-24  days  after  onset  of  disease,  with  a  median  of  4 
days.  Convalescent  phase  sera  were  drawn  from  each  patient  3  to 
72  days  after  the  acute  specimen,  with  a  median  interval  of  14  days. 

Subjects  with  Inapparent  Infections:  Sera  obtained  from  two  groups 
of  nealthy  Thai  persons  residing  in  Chiangmai  Valley  were  tested 
for  evidence  of  recent  JEV  or  group  B  infection.  The  first  group 
consisted  of  more  than  70  family  members  of  hospitalized  JE 
patients.  These  family  members  volunteered  for  serial  bleedings 
performed  prospectively  over  2  to  8  week  intervals  during  the 
1970  epidemic.  Serum  from  eleven  family  members  with  evidence 
of  Inapparent  Infections  were  selected  for  IgM  analysis.  Another 
group  of  31  subjects  was  selected  from  over  400  Chlangmal  Valley 
villagers  and  Chlangmal  city  schoolchildren  who  participated  In 
a  study  designed  to  monitor  the  Incidence  of  Inapparent  JEV 
Infection  in  Chlangmal  Valley  In  1970.  They  were  bled  at  approxi¬ 
mately  3  month  intervals.  Persons  In  Chiangmai  Valley  reside  in 
an  area  where  JEV,  dengue  and  Tembusu  viruses  are  endemic. 

730 


Serological  tests:  HI  and  CF  tests  were  performed  In  microtiter 
plates  as  described  previously,  using  8  units  of  HA  arbovirus 
antigens  for  the  HI  test,  and  8  CF  units  of  antigen  and  2  units 
of  complement  for  the  CF  test.  The  Nt  test  previously  described 
was  employed  with  minor  modifications.  In  that  plaques  In  OEV 
and  dengue  Infected  cultures  were  counted  on  days  5  and  6, 
respectively. 

The  following  virus  strains  were  used  for  the  3  serological 
tests:  JEV  (Nakayama),  dengue  1  (Hawaii),  dengue  2  (New  Guinea 
"C"),  dengue  3  (H-87),  and  dengue  4  (H-241).  In  addition, 

Tembusu  virus  (LGLT-377)  and  Wesselsbron  virus  (BKM  367-66)  were 
used  in  HI  tests  of  sera  from  11  Individuals  with  Inapparent 
Infections. 

Treatment  of  Whole  Serum  with  2-mercaptoethanol :  One  part  of  a 
1:10  dilution  of  2-ME  In  borate  saline  (0.2  molar),  pH  9.0,  was 
added  to  9  parts  of  goose-erythrocyte  adsorbed,  acetone- treated 
serum.  The  mixture  was  incubated  at  37°C  for  30  minutes  and 
then  placed  at  4°C  for  30  minutes.  The  2-ME  treated  and  untreated 
aliquots  of  the  same  serum  were  then  diluted  simultaneously  for 
the.-  HI  test  run  against  8-16  HA  units  of  D  1-4  and  JEV  antigens. 

If  the  HI  antibody  titer  after  treatment  was  reduced  to  or  below 
one-fourth  of  the  titer  before  treatment,  the  serum  was  judqed 
to  contain  2-ME  sensitive  (IgM)  antibody. 

Serum  Fractionation  by  Sucrose  Density  Gradient  Centrifugation: 
The  fractionation  of  serum  followed  standard  SDGC  methodology. 
Briefly, 0.125  ml  of  heat-inactivated  serum  was  diluted  with 
normal  saline  to  0.25  ml,  adsorbed  with  goose  erythrocytes,  and 
then  layered  on  a  10%  to  40%  sucrose  gradient  (5.5  ml  total 
volume).  Following  centrifugation  at  35,000  rpm  for  18  hours, 

12  fractions  of  the  gradient  were  collected  dropwlse  through  a 
pin-hole  drilled  in  the  bottom  of  the  centrifuge  tube.  Fractions 
1  thru  7  were  collected  in  0.3  ml  aliquots,  while  fractions  8 
thru  12  were  collected  in  0.5  ml  volumes.  Each  fraction  was 
divided  Into  2  aliquots.  One  aliquot  was  treated  with  2-ME 
(0.135  ml  sucrose  fraction  plus  0.15  ml  of  0.2  molar  2-ME)  for 
30  min  at  37°C  and  then  for  30  min  at  4°C;  the  second  aliquot  was 
treated  with  0.15  ml  buffer  similarly.  The  untreated  (control) 
and  2-ME-treated  aliquots  were  then  diluted  for  HI  titration 
against  8-16  units  of  HA  arbovirus  antigens.  Serum  from  patients 
with  encephalitis  were  routinely  tested  against  JEV  &  01 -4 
antigens;  healthy  persons  were  tested  against  JFV,  one  or  more 
dengue  serotypes,  Wesselsbron,  and  Tembusu  antigens.  The  concen¬ 
tration  of  IgM  and  IgG  In  the  12  serum-sucrose  fractions  of  each 
of  12  sera  was  determined  by  radial  inmunodlffuslon  In  agar 


4 


731 


("Immunoplates"  Hyland  Laboratories,  Los  Angeles,  Calif).  All 
of  the  IgM  detectable  by  radial  Immunodiffusion  was  concentrated 
Into  serum-sucrose  fractions  3,  4  &  5,  and  occasionally  Into 
fractions  2  thru  6.  Between  80-100%  of  the  detectable  IgG  was 
found  In  fractions  7-12,  while  the  remainder,  If  any,  was  detected 
In  fractions  3-6,  and  accounted  for  0%-40%  of  the  Immunoglobulins 
contained  In  these  early  fractions.  Because  IgM  was  reproduclbly 
concentrated  Into  3  fractions  (3,  4,  5),  these  were  always  selected 
without  pooling  for  2-ME  treatment  and  HI  titrations;  the  remaining 
9  fractions  were  discarded.  As  previously  reported  the  non¬ 
specific  HA  Inhibitors  were  Isolated  In  the  top  of  the  sucrose 
gradient  (r**act1on-12);  therefore  sera  were  not  extracted  with 
acetone  before  HI  testing. 

Serological  Criteria;  Whole  Serum:  Encephalitis  patients  were 
divided  Into  2  serological  groups  on  the  basis  of  their  whole 
serum  HI  &  CF  antibody  responses  to  JEV  and  Dl-4  antigens.  The 
first  group  had  titer  rises  &  4-fold)  to  JEV  alone,  or  to  JEV  & 

D4  with  higher  JEV  convalescent  titers.  These  patients  were 
presumed  to  have  had  a  recent  primary  immune  response  to  their 
first  exposure  to  a  group  B  arbovirus  (JEV).  The  second  group 
were  considered  to  have  had  a  probable  recent  JEV  Infection 
secondary  to  prior  group  B  arbovirus  experience.  This  secondary- 
type  serological  pattern  was  characterized  by  an  anamnestic 
antibody  response,  with  high  convalescent  titers  (generally 
*1:640  by  HI  and  £1:64  by  CF)  to  JEV  and  to  2  or  more  dengue 
serotypes;  the  JEV  convalescent  titer  was  usually  ^4-fold  higher 
than  any  one  of  the  4  dengue  serotypes.  Serological  pattern 
varied  according  to  the  test  employed.  The  one  test  providing 
the  most  definitive  serological  result,  l.e.,  monospecific 
Instead  of  heterospecific,  and  rising  rather  than  fixed  or  falling 
titers,  was  recorded.  Patients  with  monospecific  fixed  or  falling 
titers  against  JEV  In  paired  serum  spaced  greater  than  7  days 
apart  were  considered  to  have  been  infected  once  with  JEV  at  some 
unspecified  time  in  the  past.  Patients  with  heterospecific  fixed 
or  falling  titers  to  JEV  and  to  two  or  more  dengue  serotypes  were 
considered  to  have  been  Infected  more  than  once  by  group  B  arbo¬ 
viruses  In  the  past.  Representative  primary  and  secondary 
serological  patterns  (Table  1)  Illustrate  that  any  one  of  the 
three  serological  tests  provided  a  specific  diagnosis  of  a  recent 
or  remote  JEV  primary  Infection,  whereas  none  of  the  3  serological 
tests  Identified  the  type-specific  group  B  arbovirus  In  secondary 
Infections. 

Treatment  of  Whole  Serum  with  2-mercaptoethanol :  In  an  attempt  to 
confirm  JEV  as  the  Specific  group  B  arbovirus  responsible  for  acute 
encephalitis  In  patients  with  secondary  Infections,  we  tested  for 
the  presence  and  reactivity  of  IgM  antibody  by  treating  whole 

732 


serum  with  2-ME.  2-ME  labile  antibody,  reactive  against  JEV  but 
not  01-4,  was  detected  In  the  sera  of  6  of  7  Thai  and  American 
patients  with  primary  JEV  Infections,  but  In  none  of  13  patients 
with  secondary  Infections.  These  results  Indicate  that  IgM  antibody 
does  appear  In  the  majority  of  patients  with  a  primary  Immune 
response  to  a  recent  JEV  Infection,  and  that  the  antibody  Is 
specific  for  JEV.  The  Inability  to  detect  IgM  antibody  after 
secondary  Infections  may  have  been  the  consequence  of  high-titered 
IgG  antibody  masKlng  lower- titered  IgM  antibody  In  whole  serum. 

We  therefore  Isolated  IgM  and  IgG  from  whole  serum  by  sucrose 
density  gradient  centrifugation  (SDGC). 

Serological  Criteria:  SDGC  Fractions  of  Whole  Serum:  Virus 
specific  IgM  antibody  was  considered  present  In  serum-sucrose 
fractions  of  whole  serum  when  the  HI  titer  agilnst  one  of  the  HA 
antigens  fell  after  2-ME  treatment.  The  fall  was  considered 
significant  when  2-ME  reduced  the  HI  titer  to <  1  /8  of  the  control 
titer  in  any  one  of  the  3  IgM-rlch  fractions,  or  to  <1/4  of  the 
control  In  2  or  more  fractions.  These  criteria  are  weighted  In 
favor  of  eliminating  false  positive  IgM  results.  In  a  small  number 
of  sera,  we  noted  a  4-fold  HI  titer  drop  In  one  IgM-rich  fraction 
and  a  2-fold  titer  reduction  In  2  additional  IgM  fractions  after 
2-ME  treatment.  Such  sera  were  considered  to  contain  "trace"  IgM 
antibody  activity  against  the  antlgen(s)  in  question.  The  IgM 
antibody  titer  was  considered  to  rise  or  fall  significantly  when 
the  titer  between  acute  and  convalescent  sera  differed  > 2-fold  in 
at  least  2  fractions,  or  £  4-fold  In  at  least  one  fraction.  Low- 
titered  IgM  antibody  was  lost  after  the  unavoidable  10-fold 
dilution  of  serum  In  the  sucrose  gradient.  This  dil utlonal  loss 
of  IgM  antibody  activity,  resulting  In  false  negative  results,  was 
noted  particularly  in  serum  having  JEV  HI  titers  of  <1:40. 

Repeated  testing  of  IgM  antibody  negative  and  positive  serum 
(15  sera  refractionated  and  titered  2  to  6  times)  resulted  In 
reproducible  titrations  In  greater  than  95X  of  runs.  The  SDGC 
procedure  was  precise  In  that  doubling  the  serum  volume  placed 
on  the  gradient  resulted  In  a  2-fold  Increase  of  IgM  and  IgG 
antibody  titers.  Storage  at  -20°C  for  12  months,  and  as  many  as 
4  freeze-thaw  cycles,  produced  no  significant  loss  of  JEV  IgM 
antibody  activity. 

Serum  IgM  Antibody  After  Japanese  Encephalitis:  The  paired  sera 
from  the  4  patients  shown  In  Table  1  were  fractionated  and  the 
results  are  listed  In  Table  2.  The  2-ME  labile  HI  antibody  limited 
to  fractions  3-5,  which  contained  all  Immunopreci  pi  table  IgM, 
reacted  with  JEV  but  not  with  D  1-4.  In  contrast,  HI  antibody  In 
fractions  7-12  (not  shown)  reacted  In  high  titers  (1:16  to  >1:128) 
with  both  JEV  and  dengue  antigens,  was  2-ME  resistant,  and  was 

733 


IgG  by  radial  liwnodlf  fusion.  We  conclude  that  the  SOGC  procedure 
partially  or  completely  Isolates  IgM  from  IgG  and  thereby  permits 
measurement  of  the  IgM  antibody  titer.  Furthermore,  the  results 
In  Table  2  Indicate  that  JEV-specIflc  IgM  antibody  Is  produced 
not  only  In  primary  JEV  Infections,  but  after  JEV  Infections  In 
patients  with  previous  group  B  arbovirus  experience  as  well.  The 
IaM  antibody  titers  In  paired  sera  may  be  rising  (Patients  A  and 
C),  fixed  (not  Illustrated),  or  falling  (Patients  B  and  D).  The 
contamination  of  IgM  by  IgG  probably  accounts  for  the  2-ME 
resistant  antibody  found  In  some  IgM-rlch  fractions.  This  con¬ 
tamination  was  observed  more  often  In  high-titered  sera  (Patients 
C  and  D)  than  In  low-titered  sera  (Patients  A  and  B).  The  presence 
of  serum  IgM  Immunoreactlve  against  JEV  In  these  patients  with 
acute  encephalitis  provides  additional  serological  confirmation 
of  a  recent  JEV  Infection. 

A  further  comparison  of  whole  serum  and  IgM  antibody  patterns 
In  23  American  and  65  Thai  encephalitis  patients  Is  presented  In 
Table  3.  Twenty-one  American  troops  had  IgM  antibody  reactive 
only  against  JEV,  and  19  of  these  21  had  rising  IgM  titers.  One 
patient  (E,  Table  4)  had  rising  IgM  convalescent  antibody  titers 
cross-reacting  with  JEV  (>1:128)  and  D4(l:8).  IgM  antibody  was 
not  detected  In  a  final  patient,  a  female  nurse  stationed  In 
Saigon,  who  had  low-fixed  whole  serum  HI  titers  of  1:20-1:40 
against  JEV  and  D4.  Thus  rising  titers  in  conventional  serological 
tests  specifically  confirmed  a  recent  JEV  infection  In  only  7 
American  patients  (30%) .  HI  titration  of  isolated  IgM  confirmed 
the  diagnosis  in  19  patients  (83%),  and  led  to  a  presumptive 
diagnosis  of  JEV  In  3  more  persons  with  fixed,  falling  or  weakly 
heterospecific  IgM  titers. 

JEV  IgM  antibody  was  found  in  41  of  65  hospitalized  Thai 
children  and  adults  (Table  3).  Thirty-nine  of  these  41  persons 
had  JEV  monospecific  activity,  and  31  of  these  39  showed  rising 
IgM  titers;  the  remaining  8  patients  had  fixed  or  falling  IgM 
titers.  Most  IgM  negative  patients  fell  Into  the  secondary 
infection  group;  possible  reasons  for  this  disparate  distribution 
of  negative  patients  will  be  discussed  later.  Two  of  the  41  Thai 
patients  displayed  cross-reactive  IgM  antibody  titers  (Table  4). 

The  high  JEV  and  low  04  IgM  titers  In  patient  F  suggest  a  recent 
JEV  Infection.  In  patient  G,  the  unusual  combination  of  high- 
titered,  cross-reactive  IgM  against  JEV  and  D1,  2  and  3  precludes 
the  presumptive  serodiagnosls  of  JE. 

As  seen  in  Table  3,  rising  titers  In  conventional  serological 
tests  In  Thai  patients  specifically  confirmed  a  recent  JEV  infection 
in  19  persons  (29%),  while  the  diagnosis  was  confirmed  by  JEV- 
speclfic,  rising  IgM  antibody  titers  In  31  persons  (48%).  In 


734 


addition,  the  JEV  IgM  titers  were  fixed  In  1  patient,  falling  In 
7,  and  weakly  heterospecific  In  1  (patient  F;  Table  4),  providing 
a  presumptive  or  confirmed  diagnosis  of  JEV  In  40  cases  (61%) . 

IgM  antibody  reacted  monospeclflcally  with  JEV  In  60  of  63 
Thai  &  American  patients  whose  sera  contained  IgM  antibody  activity. 

The  diagnostic  efficacy  of  each  of  the  4  serological  tests 
used  In  this  study  Is  compared  In  Table  5.  Only  patients  with 
monospecific. rising  titers  to  JEV  are  considered  positive.  Twice 
as  many  presumed  cases  of  JE  were  confirmed  as  recent  JEV  Infections 
by  IgM  analysis  than  by  any  other  single  serological  test.  The 
apparent  superiority  of  IgM  analysis  could  be  Increased  further 
if  the  12  patients  with  fixed,  falling  or  low  titered  hetero¬ 
specific  IgM  patterns  are  Included. 

Serum  IgM  Antibody  After  Inapparent  JEV  Infections:  It  was  of 
Interest  to  determine  whether  serum  obtained  from  persons  with 
inapparent  JEV  and  secondary  group  B  arbovirus  Infections  contained 
JEV-specIflc  IgM  antibody.  Thirty-six  sera  from  31  apparently 
healthy  Chiangmal  villagers  and  urban  school  children,  with 
evidence  of  subcl Inlcal  Infections  detected  serologically  at  12- 
16  week  interval  bleedings,  were  fractionated  by  SDGC  (Table  6). 

Only  one  serum  from  a  Chiangmal  city  school  child  contained  trace 
amounts  of  antibody  to  D2.  The  35  remaining  sera  contained  no 
detectable  IgM  antibody.  These  results  raised  the  possibility 
that  IgM  antibody  may  not  be  produced  after  Inapparent  JEV 
infections. 

In  order  to  further  investigate  this  possibility,  we 
fractionated  sera  obtained  from  11  additional  Chiangmal  villagers 
with  inapparent  JEV  or  group  B  Infections.  These  Infections  were 
diagnosed  by  antibody  titer  rises  in  serial  sera  drawn  prospectively 
at  2  to  8  week  intervals.  Five  of  the  11  subjects  had  primary 
rising  titers;  4  of  these  produced  IgM  antibody  reactive  with  JEV 
but  not  Dl-4,  Tembusu,  or  Wesselsbron  viruses  (Table  6).  Virus- 
specific  IgM  antibody  Is  therefore  produced  In  inapparent  JEV 
infections.  In  contrast  to  the  findings  In  encephalitis  patients, 
no  IgM  antibody  activity  was  detected  in  6  serum  pairs  showing 
primary  falling  or  secondary  Infection  patterns. 

The  above  studies  may  be  summarized  as  follows:  Paired  sera, 
obtained  from  88  American  and  Thai  patients  hospitalized  with 
presumed  Japanese  encephalitis,  were  tested  by  the  standard 
serological  techniques  of  hemagglutination  Inhibition  (HI), 
complement  fixation,  and  plaque  reduction  neutralization.  On  the 
basis  of  these  tests,  35  patients  had  recent  or  remote  primary  JEV 
Infections,  while  53  patients  had  secondary  group  B  arbovirus 

735 


H2f.  n  4 


Table  2 


IqM  antibody  titration  of  paired  sera  from  encephalitis  patients 
with  primary  JCV  &  secondary  group  B  arbovirus  infections. 


Pi 

Whole50* 

Serum 

Serological 

Pattern 

Day 

of 

Disease 

Serum  ^ 
Sucrose 
Fraction 

Reciprocal  HI  antlbodv  titer 

VZ3HB 

HI 

QA _ 

_ D3 _ 

D2  _ 

_ m _ 

m 

H 

2-ME 

c 

2-ME 

c 

2-ME 

A 

6 

3 

2 

0 

El 

0 

0 

m 

n 

91 

0 

0 

1°R 

4 

2 

0 

H 

0 

■a 

H 

H 

Q 

0 

1 

5 

2 

2 

0 

0 

Rl 

H 

n 

.  o 

12 

3 

8 

El 

0 

0 

0 

0 

m m 

0 

0 

4 

16 

0 

n 

0 

0 

0 

0 

n 

0 

0 

5 

64 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

MM 

o 

0 

B_ 

4 

3 

8 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

IFx 

4 

16 

2 

0 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

2 

5 

16 

2 

2 

0 

4 

4 

2 

2 

4 

4 

mm 

3 

II 

2 

mm 

2 

0 

2 

0 

1 

4 

Q 

2 

H 

2 

2 

0 

I  i 

5 

H 

0 

H 

8 

2 

0 

2 

2 

I 

3 

2 

l 

m 

2 

4 

2 

4 

1 

1  1 

4 

H 

2 

n 

Ba 

4 

4 

4 

4 

H 

1  1 

5 

n 

2 

mm 

SI 

4 

4 

4 

4 

13 

■  n  h 

32 

8 

a 

mm 

n 

mm 

mm 

8 

8 

1 

m 

64 

8 

H 

n 

n 

B 

B 

8 

8 

i 

Kfl 

32 

6 

U 

u 

H 

n 

II 

8 

8 

■ 

24 

32 

8 

1 

i 

1 

8 

8 

2°rx 

32 

8 

n 

■tfl 

1 

B 

Mm 

8 

8 

■  n 

32 

8 

ts 

16 

8 

H 

n 

16 

8 

3S 

3 

16 

8 

8 

8 

16 

■a 

8 

16 

8 

8 

4 

32 

6 

8 

8 

16 

m 

B>a 

16 

16 

6 

5 

16 

8 

8 

8 

16 

8 

H 

16 

16 

8 

xx  Antibody  titers  listed  in  Table  1. 

^  Fractions  containing  IgM  as  detected  by  radial  immunodiffusion. 

*C  *  aliquot  of  serum-sucrose  fraction  first  treated  with  buffer 

••  2-ME  ■  aliquot  of  serum-sucrose  fraction  first  treated  with  2-mercaptoetbanol. 


Table  3.  Comparison  of  whole  serum  and  serum  IgM  antibody  patterns  In 
Americans  and  Thais  hospitalized  with  presumed  Japanese 
encephalitis. 


IgM  antibody  not  detected 


+  See  footnotes  Table  2 


Table  5.  Comparison  of  four  serological  tests  used  in  the  diagnosis  of 


740 


l 


4 


irs  tested 


741 


Bled  at  12-16  week  intervals 
Bled  at  2-8  week  Intervals. 


Infections  characterised  by  high  cross-reactive  antibody  titers 
to  JEV  and  to  dengue  virus  serotypes  1-4,  Immunoglobulin  M  ( IgM) 

HI  antibody,  Isolated  from  whole  serum  by  sucrose  density  gradient 
centrifugation,  reacted  with  JEV  but  not  dengue  viruses  In  31 
secondary  cases  and  In  29  primary  Infection  patients.  IgM  antibody 
reacted  monospeclflcally  with  JEV  In  60  of  63  patients  whose  serum 
contained  detectable  IgM  activity.  Moreover,  rising  JEV  IgM 
antibody  titers  were  found  In  6  of  25  patients  having  fixed  or 
falling  whole  serum  antibody  titers.  Altogether,  57*  of  patients 
were  confirmed  as  recent  JEV  Infections  by  rising  IgM  antibody 
titers,  while  only  26%  were  confirmed  by  conventional  serological 
tests.  On  the  basis  of  these  findings  more  precise  serological 
criteria  have  been  formulated  which  utilize  whole  serum  and  IgM 
antibody  titrations  together  for  the  diagnosis  of  JEV  Infections. 

2.  Japanese  B  Encephalitis  Among  United  States  Marines  at  Nham 
Phong  Marine  Air  Base,  Thailand,  July  1972. 

In  July  1972  the  occurrence  of  cases  of  Japanese  B 
encephalitis  at  a  United  States  Marine  Air  Base  provided  an 
opportunity  to  study  the  epidemiology  of  Japanese  encephalitis 
virus  In  a  population  of  United  States  servicemen  at  risk. 

Nham  Phong  Marine  Air  Base  is  located  approximately  60  miles 
south  of  Udorn,  and  30  miles  north  of  Khon  Kaen  on  the  Korat 
Plateau  in  central  Thailand.  The  area  surrounding  the  base  Is  an 
elevated  scrub  forest  Interrupted  by  rice  paddles  approximately 
700-900  feet  above  sea  level.  The  base  Itself  was  under  construc¬ 
tion,  the  men  living  in  canvas  tents.  Roads  were  unpaved,  water 
services  consisted  of  water  trailers  of  potable  water  brought 
from  a  water  treatment  point.  Urine  "tubes"  and1  "burn  out" 
latrines  were  used  for  human  waste  disposal.  Shower  areas  wer6 
not  screened  and  were  operational  daily  for  only  limited  periods. 
The  men  were  provided  with  insect  repellent,  bed  nets,  and  insect 
spray. 

The  base  was  divided  into  several  discrete  living  areas  (see 
map  Fig  1).  The  construction  battalion  (MCB-5)  and  the  logistic 
support  group  (LS6)  had  their  own  galleys  and  dispensaries  and 
were  located  at  the  north-west  end  of  the  runway.  Security,  MABS- 
15,  and  HAMS-15  were  located  south  of  the  runway  and  had  their 
meals  served  on  the  flight  line. 

Clinical  Cases;  Patients  seen  at  the  sick  bay  at  Nham  Phong  with 
clinical  signs  and  symptoms  (fever,  headache,  stiff  neck)  suggest¬ 
ing  Japanese  B  infection  were  examined  and  blood  was  drawn  for 
serological  testing.  Patients  were  hospitalized  at  the  432nd  Air 
Force  Hospital,  Udorn  RTAFB.  The  patients  were  visited  in  the 


742 


hospital  and  their  clinical  charts  reviewed. 

Seventeen  patients  from  Nham  Phong  Marine  Air  Base  were 
hospitalized  with  a  presumptive  diagnosis  of  Japanese  B  encephalitis. 
Sixteen  patients  were  hospitalized  at  the  432nd  Air  Force  Hospital 
at  Udorn  RTAF  Base.  One  patient  became  111  in-transit  to  Japan 
and  was  hospitalized  there.  Three  other  patients  were  seen  and 
followed  closely  at  the  Sick  Bay  at  Nham  Phong.  Fourteen  of  the 
total  of  20  patients  (17  hospitalized,  3  followed  as  outpatients) 
demonstrated  serological  evidence  of  recent  Infection  with  Japanese 
B  encephalitis  virus,  and  of  these,  eleven  had  clinical  and 
laboratory  evidence  of  encephalitis. 

Serum  Survey;  A  serum  survey  of  randomly  selected  Individuals  was 
begun  on  15  July  1972.  (From  each  unit  men  were  selected  by 
randomly  choosing  final  digits  of  the  social  security  number). 

Men  selected  were  subsequently  Identified  in  either  pay  lines  or 
unit  formations.  One  month  following  the  original  serum  collection 
an  attempt  was  made  to  re-bleed  as  many  individuals  as  could  be 
found.  The  sera  were  transported  to  the  SMRL  for  HAI  testing 
against  dengue  I-IV  and  chikungunya  antigens  as  well  as  against  JEV. 

At  the  time  of  the  first  serum  collection  In  July,  436  men 
contributed  specimens  for  testing.  One  month  later  351  of  these 
were  available  for  rebleeding  and  332  were  ultimately  re-bled 
(see  Table  1).  This  represents  approximately  a  20%  sample  from 
the  five  units  that  were  bled. 

Thirty-one  persons  re-bled  had  a  rise  in  titer  from  the  first 
bleed  to  the  second.  Fifty-seven  persons  had  a  fixed  titer  in 
the  two  specimens  of  1:80  or  greater.  Thus  a  total  of  88  persons 
of  the  sample  of  332  had  evidence  of  infection  with  JEV.  Thus 
(assuming  the  sample  is  representative)  27%  of  the  men  In  these 
five  units  were  infected  with  JEV  during  the  period  of  the  epidemic. 
There  were  approximately  1800  persons  in  these  five  units, 
indicating  approximately  480  men  were  infected.  There  were  P  cases 
of  clinically  recognized  encephalitis  among  the  men  in  these  units 
yielding  an  apparent  to  inapparent  clinical  encephalitis  ratio  of 
1:60.  (Weighting  the  percentage  by  units  would  give  a  ratio  of 
1:63).  (See  Table  2). 

As  can  be  seen  in  Table  3  the  Security  and  LSG  units  had  a 
greater  percenta'  '  of  persons  positive  for  JEV  antibody  possibly 
indicating  grea;  >i  exposure.  This  Increased  exposure  may  be 
explained  by  nigi/  time  activity  (see  Table  3).  Security  is 
responsible  for  patrols  around  the  base  at  night;  almost  all  of 
the  men  in  this  group  may  thus  have  been  exposed  to  the  mosquito 
vectors.  LSG,  the  logistic  support  group,  had  men  working  in 
bulk  fuel  and  in  the  ammunition  dump  at  night;  thus  their  exposure 

743 


may  also  have  been  high. 


Rates  of  non-specific  URI  Illness  during  the  period  of  the 
outbreak  were  similar  between  those  developing  JEV  antibody  and 
those  not  developlno  antibody.  Those  with  no  JEV  antibody  titers 
had  more  illness  a-  <ach  category.  (See  Table  4). 

Village  Survey:  Inree  Thai  villages  In  the  vicinity  of  the  base 
were  visited  to  assess  their  possible  contribution  to  the  out¬ 
break  among  the  U.S.  servicemen.  The  distances  from  these  village 
areas  to  the  Air  Base  are  within  the  flight  range  of  the  known 
vector  mosquitoes  in  Thailand.  Each  village  consists  of 
approximately  70  elevated  wooden  houses.  Each  house  has  animal 
pens  underneath  to  keep  hogs  and  cattle.  The  agricultural  industry 
in  the  area  consists  of  rice,  cattle,  kenaf  fiber,  hogs,  silk 
and  corn. 

There  were  no  known  human  cases  of  encephalitis  among  the 
villagers  at  any  time  before,  during,  or  after  the  period  when 
cases  were  appearing  on  the  Air  Base.  Approximately  60%  of  the 
swine  in  the  villages  were  bled  and  serologic  evidence  indicated 
that  transmission  in  swine  had  occurred  in  the  area  within  the 
previous  five  months. 

Table  1.  Units  Submitting  Serum  Specimens 


Unit  Name 

Approximate 
No.  in  Unit 

No.  Bled 

1st  Bleed 

No.  Re-bled 

%  of  Unit 
Re-bled 

Security 

350 

67 

54 

15% 

MABS-15 

357 

111 

76 

21% 

HAMS-15 

588 

79 

60 

10% 

LSG 

300 

54 

39 

13% 

MCB-5 

506 

125 

103 

20% 

Total 

1801 

436 

332 

18% 

Entomological  Survey:  New  Jersey  light  traps  were  operated  inside 
the  theater  tent  of  LSG  and  in  the  area  of  the  outdoor  theater  of 
the  MCB-5  group.  Battery-powered  COC  traps  were  run  in  the 


744 


Table  2 


JEV  Infections  by  Unit 


Unit 

No.  In  Unit 

Percent  of  Men 
Tested  with 

JEV  Infection 

Number 

Estimated 

JEV  Infection 

No.  Cases 

I/A 

Security 

350 

48Z 

168 

i 

168/1 

MABS-15 

357 

28Z 

100 

2 

50/1 

HAMS-15 

588 

15Z 

87 

1 

87/1 

LSG 

300 

43Z 

130 

2 

65/1 

MCB-5 

506 

17Z 

86 

3  ! 

28/1 

Total 

1801 

26.71 

571 

9 

63/1 

Table  3 

Night  Exposure  by  Units 


Unit 

Z  with 
JEV 

Average 
Nltes 
Exposed 
per  Man 

Security 

48 

6.65 

MABS-15 

28 

0.68 

HAMS-15 

15 

0.16 

LSG 

43 

1.26 

MCB-5 

17 

0.98 

745 


Table 


&  Fever  3  3.4  10  4.1 


vicinity  of  the  LSG  showers  and  the  southern  end  of  the  runway. 

CDC  traps  were  also  placed  In  various  locations  In  the  villages. 
These  traps  were  operated  for  two  consecutive  nights. 

Mosquito  collections  on  the  base  made  on  the  nights  of  19 
and  20  July  yielded  adults  of  three  proven  JEV  vectors,  Culex 
fuscocephala,  C.  gelldus  and  C .  tritaenlorhynchus.  These  and 
other  Culex~spec1es  were  the  most  abundant  mosquitoes  In  these 
collections.  The  drainage  system  of  the  base  seemed  excellent, 
with  little  permanent  standing  water,  except  for  a  marshy  area 
receiving  waste  water  which  was  located  about  50  meters  west  of 
the  LSG  showers.  Larvae  of  C.  fuscocephala  were  present  In  this 
drainage  area. 

Mosquito  collections  In  the  villages  also  yielded  all  three 
vector  species.  Larvae  of  C.  fuscocephala  and  C.  tritaenlorhynchus 
were  also  collected  in  the  vicinity  of  each  of  the  villages. 

To  summarize  the  above  studies,  an  outbreak  of  Japanese  B 
encephalitis  occurred  at  Nham  Phong  Air  Base  where  approximately 
3000  presumably  non-lmmine  US  servicemen  were  stationed.  From  the 
middle  to  the  end  of  July,  14  clinically  apparent  encephalitis  cases 
occurred  and  were  sent  to  Udorn  RTAFB  Hospital  for  treatment.  It 
Is  estimated  that  approximately  850  inapparent  infections  also 
occurred.  At  this  time,  in  the  early  rainy  season,  large  numbers 
of  all  three  vector  mosquitoes  were  present;  night  duty,  night¬ 
time  outdoor  movies,  and  night-time  outdoor  showers  all  contributed 
to  exposing  the  men  to  the  vector  mosquitoes. 

None  of  the  villagers  in  the  surrounding  Thai  villages  reported 
clinical  encephalitis.  The  villages  did  contain  pig  herds  with 
60-80%  of  the  pigs  having  JEV  antibody.  In  one  village,  80%  of 
the  pigs  under  5  months  of  age  had  antibody,  indicating  transmission 
in  the  recent  past  months.  Almost  certainly  the  large  number  of 
susceptible  pigs,  within  easy  flight  range  of  the  vector  mosquitoes, 
performed  their  now  familiar  role  as  an  amplifying  host. 

3.  Antibody  Levels  to  Japanese  Encephalitis  Virus  .in  Swine  in  an 
Area  of  a  Human  Epidemic 

The  objective  of  these  studies  was  to  determine  and  evaluate 
antibody  titers  to  Japanese  Encephalitis  Virus  (JI-.V)  in  swine  in 
the  area  of  a  human  epidemic. 

In  July  1972  an  outbreak  of  Japanese  encephalitis  occurred  in 
American  military  personnel  at  the  Nham  Phong  Marine  Air  Base, 
Thailand.  From  previous  studies  performed  by  our  laboratory  In 


748 


the  Chlangmai  area  and  from  studies  performed  In  Japan  by  other 
laboratories,  swine  can  be  considered  an  amplifying  host  for  JEV 
and  a  potential  source  of  infection  for  humans  through  mosquito 
transmission.  Swine  can  also  be  used  as  a  sentinel  species  In 
following  the  course  of  a  hunvn  epidemic.  The  villages  In  the 
Immediate  area  of  the  Marine  base  raise  a  substantial  number  of 
hogs. 


Three  nearby  villages  and  one  pig  farm  were  visited.  No 
clinical  cases  of  encephalitis  had  been  reported  In  either  humans 
or  swine  in  these  locations.  One  hundred  twenty  four  swine  were 
bled  and  the  fresh  whole  blood  Inoculated  within  5  minutes  Into 
weanling  mice  in  an  attempt  to  isolate  the  virus  of  Japanese 
encephalitis.  Sera  from  the  same  hogs  were  tested  for  hemagglutina¬ 
tion  inhibition  (HI)  activity  against  JEV. 

No  isolates  of  JEV  were  obtained  from  the  specimens  taken; 
however,  swine  in  all  four  areas  showed  serologic  evidence  of 
previous  infection  with  JEV,  with  serum  antibody  titers  as  high 
as  1:1280  by  tne  HI  method.  Table  1  shows  the  number  of  animals 
with  positive  titers  (greater  than  1:20)  to  JEV.  In  areas  3  and 
4,  pigs  of  all  ages  had  a  high  incidence  of  positive  titers  to 
JEV,  but  in  areas  1  and  2  most  animals  over  5  months  of  age  showed 
positive  titers  while  most  animals  under  5  months  of  age  were 
negative.  Because  a  few  of  the  young  pigs  in  area  1  exhibited 
positive  antibody  titers  but  most  remained  susceptible,  it  was 
possible  that  active  infection  with  JEV  was  present  in  this  area 
at  the  time  of  bleeding.  On  30  August  1972,  one  month  after  the 
original  sera  were  collected,  areas  1  and  2  were  visited  again. 

No  clinical  cases  of  JEV  had  been  reported  in  humans  or  animals. 

Sera  were  drawn  from  49  hogs  and  titers  for  JEV  antibody  were 
determined  by  the  HI  method.  These  results  are  compared  with 
titers  of  the  earlier  sampling  in  Table  2.  Because  identification 
of  individual  animals  was  not  possible  in  all  cases,  sera  were 
not  paired  but  were  processed  as  a  group.  The  incidence  of  positive 
JEV  titers  has  not  shown  any  significant  change,  remaining  high 
(100%)  in  older  animals  and  low  (13%)  in  the  young  animals.  The 
epidemic  of  encephalitis  in  humans  was  over;  there  had  been  no  new 
cases  in  the  2  weeks  immediately  preceeding  this  second  visit. 

The  epidemic  of  JEV  infection  in  humans  was  at  its  peak  before 
the  first  serum  sampling  in  hogs  was  done.  The  high  incidence  of 
positive  antibody  titers  exhibited  by  very  young  animals  in  areas 
3  and  4  on  30  July  1972  indicates  that  these  animals  were  actively 
infected  with  JEV  only  1  to  2  months  earlier  and  could  have  served 
as  a  reservoir  of  infection.  Passive  immunity  from  the  mother 
might  account  for  some  antibody  in  very  young  pigs,  but  does  not 


749 


JEV  Titers  in  Swine  from  Nham  Phon< 


1 


1 0 
o 


w 

JC 


c 

0 

s 


0) 

2  < 
I  «H 
I/)  O 


w 

SC  3 


u  w 


“i  ? 


o 

HEX 
a  =  ^ 
<  2;  o 


§ 

Q  «b 


* 

<0 

c 

2 


<0 

I 


GO 


O) 

00 


a* 

o 

o 


o 

o 


w 

00 

eg 

rT 

CM 

3 

CM 

5  Mon 
of  Age 

as 

in 

eg 

a? 

o 

a* 

00 

a* 

CM 

as 

tO  to 

«r  £ 


a? 


(v  CM 
«  2 


a? 

tO 

CM  £2 


O 

r^ 


LO 

CM 


o 


o 

O) 


w 

O 


w 

0) 


E  -c 

S 

-4  2 


in 


e  *, 
«  S 


w 

0)  - 
»C 


E  3 
c  o 

CM  CO 


w 

<D 

a  ^ 

E  w 


<D 
LO  £ 


8 

<D 

D 

* 


TD 

0) 


ja 

(A 


10 

E 


c 

ro 


0 

u» 

JS 

E 

o 

c 


Cfi  m 

G  2, 

3  O* 

C  C 

S2  <0  (0 

O,”* 

§3  § 

u  i£  at 


c  c  c 

sss 


0 

H 


HH  < 
W  H  > 
H  H  M  h 


Pig  Farm,  Nai  Koon  Punthong 


Table  ; 


Ban  Nong  Krung  Kli  Kuang 
Ban  Kok  Sanga 


account  for  the  high  Incidence  of  positive  titers  among  the 
younger  group  In  areas  2  and  4  as  compared  to  the  low  Incidence 
of  positive  titers  among  the  younger  group  In  areas  1  and  2.  At 
the  nearby  air  base  were  a  group  of  Individuals  new  to  Southeast 
Asia  and  not  previously  exposed  to  JEV.  The  people  at  the  air  base 
began  showing  clinical  signs  of  Japanese  encephalitis  In  early 
July  1972.  Villagers  who  had  been  In  the  area  a  long  time  had 
undoubtedly  been  previously  exposed  to  JEV,  probably  had  a 
substantial  Immunity  to  the  Infection,  and  did  not  develop  clinical 
signs.  By  the  time  of  our  visit  on  30  July  1972,  the  vlremlc 
stage  In  the  hogs  had  already  passed,  and  virus  could  no  longer 
be  Isolated  from  the  specimens  collected.  With  this  reservoir  of 
virus  no  longer  available,  we  would  expect  to  see  a  decrease  In 
clinical  cases  of  JEV  In  the  humans  and  termination  of  the  epidemic. 
This  Is  exactly  what  did  happen.  From  these  observations  and  data, 
It  appears  that  active  Infection  with  JEV  occurred  first  In  the 
hogs  In  areas  3  and  4,  and  followed  shortly  thereafter  In  the 
susceptible  human  population  at  Nham  Phong  Air  Base.  No  evidence 
for  active  Infection  with  JEV  was  found  In  the  animals  In  areas  1 
and  2  during  the  study  period.  Table  2  Indicates  that  young 
susceptible  hogs  In  these  villages  remained  susceptible  on  30 
August  1972,  and  did  not  become  Infected  as  had  the  animals  In 
the  other  villages  and  the  people  at  the  air  base.  The  high 
incidence  of  positive  JEV  titers  In  animals  over  5  months  of  age 
confirms  the  prevalence  of  JEV  In  this  area.  Virtually  all 
individuals  had  become  infected  by  the  fifth  month  of  life.  Because 
hogs  are  clinically  silent  when  Infected,  they  can  exist  as  an 
undetected  reservoir  of  JEV. 

4.  Japanese  Encephalitis  Virus  In  Pregnant  Swine 

The  purpose  of  these  studies  was  to  establish  whether  a 
relationship  exists  between  Japanese  encephalitis  virus  (JEV) 
infection  and  economic  problems  in  swine  production  in  Thailand. 

Although  JEV  usually  causes  a  clinically  inapparent  infection 
in  swine,  evidence  from  Japan  indicates  that  it  is  related  to 
problems  of  infertility,  abortion,  and  the  birth  of  dead  or  weak 
piglets.  It  has  become  economically  advantageous  to  suspend  the 
breeding  of  sows  in  Japan  during  the  encephalitis  season  so  that 
the  losses  resulting  from  this  problem  are  reduced. 

The  occurrence  of  JEV  among  swine  and  other  domestic  animals 
in  Asian  areas  other  than  Japan  is  well  documented.  In  two 
piggeries  located  near  Udorn  and  Saraburl,  Thailand,  significant 
numbers  of  weak  or  dead  piglets  were  born  from  first  litter  gilts 
during  the  encephalitis  season  of  1971  in  herds  where  serologic 
examination  later  showed  JEV  infection  to  be  endemic.  The 


752 


productivity  of  these  sows  showed  great  Improvement  after  this 
first  litter.  Evidence  that  JEV  Is  the  cause  of  this  problem 
In  Thailand  Is  scanty  and  only  circumstantial;  JEV  has  not  been 
Isolated  from  piglets  nor  has  fetal  damage  been  shown  to  follow 
the  development  of  a  JEV  antibody  titer  or  vlremla  In  the  sow. 

It  remains  a  possibility  that  the  observed  problems  In  swine 
production  are  only  Incidentally  related  to  JEV. 

The  Kasetsart  University  pig  farm  located  In  Saraburl 
Province  was  used  as  the  study  site.  Previous  testing  has  shown 
antibody  titers  to  JEV  In  nearly  100%  of  the  adult  animals  on  this 
farm.  Forty  three  young  gilts  were  selected  for  this  study,  which 
began  In  April  1972  and  was  completed  In  September  1972.  All  the 
animals  were  bred  for  the  first  time  during  April,  May,  or  June. 
Sera  were  drawn  from  each  animal  every  two  weeks  and  antibody 
titers  to  JEV  measured  by  the  hemagglutination  Inhibition  (HI) 
method;  titers  were  run  In  grodps  every  2  weeks  as  collected. 

Blood  was  drawn  at  weekly  Intervals  and  Inoculated  intra- 
cerebrally  Into  weaillng  ICR  mice  for  attempted  virus  Isolation. 

The  pigs  were  monitored  in  this  way  until  they  converted 
(conversion  being  an  eight-fold  or  greater  increase  in  serum 
antibody  titer)  or  until  after  they  farrowed.  Complete  breeding 
and  farrowing  records  were  kept,  and  the  number,  health,  and 
appearance  of  the  piglets  was  recorded. 

Only  5  of  the  43  animals  in  the  study  group  still  had  negative 
titers  at  the  end  of  the  study;  14  had  positive  titers  when  the 
study  began  and  did  not  convert,  12  converted  before  breeding, 
and  10  converted  during  gestation.  Of  the  12  animals  showing 
conversion  before  breeding,  6  did  not  conceive  after  multiple 
breedings  and  were  sold,  and  one  wa .  bred  twice.  This  can  be 
compared  to  conception  with  the  first  breeding  in  all  19  animals 
showing  a  negative  titer  and  in  12  of  14  animals  showing  positive 
titers  before  the  study  began.  The  average  litter  size  in  both 
positive  and  negative  animals  was  similar,  but  animals  showing 
JEV  titer  conversion  during  gestation  suffered  from  stillbirths 
and  reproductive  complications  more  often  than  did  animals  with 
negative  titers.  Animals  showing  negative  titers  to  JEV  through¬ 
out  the  study  produced  an  average  of  8.60  piglets  per  litter, 
those  with  positive  titers  produced  7.00,  and  those  converting 
during  the  study  produced  4.95  healthy  piglets  per  litter. 

Although  a  virus  was  isolated  from  many  of  the  laboratory  animals 
inoculated,  it  was  usually  identified  as  Ingwavuma  virus  and  is 
reported  elsewhere.  JEV  was  Isolated  on  one  occasion  on  7  July 
1972,  the  sow  aborted  at  32  days  gestation  on  11  July  1972,  and 
conversion  was  demonstrated  on  14  July  1972. 


Table  1 .  Production  record  of  gilts 


Time  of 

JEV 

Co.iversion(a) 

No. of 
Animals 

Concep¬ 
tion  Rate 

Ave. 

Litter 

Size 

Healthy 
Piglets 
Per  Sow 

Remarks 

2  mo.  before 
breeding 

10 

40% 

9.1 

3.90 

3  -  had  normal  litters 

1  -  dystocia -5  piglets  suffocated 

1  -  bred  2  times -3  stillborn 

5  -  did  not  conceive  in  3  successive 

breedings 

1  mo.  before 
breeding 

2 

50% 

9.0 

4.00 

1  -  stillborn 

1  -  did  not  conceive  in  3  successive 
breedings 

2nd  month  of 
gestation 

6 

100% 

8.8 

6.33 

4  -  had  normal  litters 

1  -  4  stillborn,  2  died  the  first  week 

1  -  aborted  32  days  gestation  (e) 

3rd  month  of 
gestation 

4 

100% 

8.5 

6.00 

3  -  had  normal  litters 

1  -  2  stillborn;  sow  developed  metritis 
and  all  piglets  died  in  1  week 

Negative 
titer  (b) 

7 

100% 

9.6 

8.60 

4  -  had  normal  litters 

1  -  5  stillborn 

2  -  conceived,  sarw  sold  for  unrelated 

reasons  (d) 

Pos  ltive 
titer  (c) 

14 

88% 

8.4 

7.00 

10  -  had  normal  litters 

2  -  one  non-fertlle  breeding  -  sold 

2  -  sow  died  of  unrelated  problems  (d) 

(a)  Conversion  Is  an  eight  fold  or  greater  Increase  In  titer. 

(b)  Negative  titer  is  1:20  or  less. 

(c)  Positive  titer  is  1:80  or  greater 

(d)  These  animals  were  not  used  in  calculating  the  healthy  piglets  per  sow 

(e)  JEV  was  isolated  from  this  sow. 


As  previosuly  stated,  JEV  was  Identified  on  only  one  of  the 
Isolation  attempts.  As  22  animals  showed  JEV  titer  conversions 
during  the  study,  It  Is  assumed  that  these  animals  were  vlremlc 
earlier,  but  that  they  were  no  longer  vlremlc  on  the  day  samples 
were  taken  for  attempted  virus  Isolation. 

Table  1  indicates  that  although  the  average  litter  size  of 
all  groups  In  the  study  was  similar,  sows  showing  JEV  titer 
conversion  during  the  study  had  a  significantly  lower  number  of 
healthy  piglets  than  sows  not  showing  conversion.  This  Is  true 
both  for  animals  infected  before  and  during  gestation.  In  the 
animals  which  converted  before  breeding,  this  is  the  result  of  a 
markedly  decreased  conception  rate.  The  animals  infected  during 
gestation  showed  a  high  conception  rate,  but  experienced  more 
complications  during  gestation  and  parturition  than  either 
animals  infected  before  conception  or  animals  not  converting.  In 
both  cases,  the  result  was  a  significant  decrease  in  the  number 
of  healthy  offspring  produced  by  animals  infected  with  JEV. 

Animals  already  showing  high  antibody  titers  at  the  start  of  the 
study  were  similar  to  those  with  negative  titers  throughout  the 
study  in  that  conception  rate  was  high,  few  reproductive  problems 
were  experienced,  and  a  relatively  high  number  of  healthy  piglets 
per  sow  were  produced. 

Natural  infection  with  the  virus  of  Japanese  encephalitis 
has  been  shown  to  reduce  the  reproductive  efficiency  of  susceptible 
sows.  Serologic  and  virus  isolation  studies  indicate  transmission 
of  JEV  in  the  herd  during  the  study  period.  Infection  immediately 
prior  to  breeding  appears  to  reduce  the  rate  of  conception,  while 
infection  during  pregnancy  appears  to  induce  a  high  frequency  of 
complications  during  gestation  and  at  parturition,  particularly 
a  high  incidence  of  stillbirths.  The  reproductive  efficiency  was 
comparatively  higher  both  in  sows  with  high  antibody  titers  not 
showing  evidence  of  infection  near  the  time  of  gestation  and  in 
sows  with  negative  JEV  antibody  titers. 

5.  Ecology  of  Japanese  Encephalitis  Virus  Infections  in 
Chiangmai  valley:  Vector  Studies 

The  purpose  of  these  studies  is  to  investigate  the  ecology 
of  vectors  of  Japanese  encephalitis  virus  (JEV)  in  the  Chiangmai 
Valley,  Northern  Thailand,  with  particular  emphasis  on  their 
dispersal,  host  preferences  and  population  dynamics. 

In  studies  described  in  previous  Annual  Report,  JEV  was 
isolated  from  3  Culex  species  -  C.  fuscocephala,  £.  gelidus  and 
C..  tritaeniorhynchus  -  in  the  Chiangmai  Valley,  and  all  3  species 


755 


are  believed  to  be  acting  as  JEV  vectors  In  that  area.  During 
1972  studies  were  undertaken  In  a  village  In  Saraphl  district 
to  determine  the  pattern  of  dispersal  of  vector  mosquitoes 
following  the  taking  of  a  blood  meal.  The  village  selected  for 
these  studies  was  surrounded  by  rice  fields  and  separated  from 
neighbouring  villages  by  distances  of  1-2  Km.  On  3  successive 
nights  In  July  and  again  In  August  freshly  engorged  mosquitoes 
were  collected,  counted,  marked  with  a  fluorescent  dust  and 
released  from  a  central  point.  Beginning  on  the  second  night 
after  release  CDC  light  traps  were  operated  for  7  consecutive 
nights  within  the  study  village  and  across  rice  fields  in 
neighbouring  villages.  All  mosquitoes  collected  In  these  traps 
were  examined  under  a  longwave  ultraviolet  lamp  for  marked 
specimens. 

To  determine  if  the  density  of  vector  mosquitoes  varies 
according  to  the  distance  from  blood  meal  sources,  CDC  light  traps 
were  operated  at  Intervals  across  an  open  rice  field  from  a 
village  in  Mae  Rim  district.  Five  collection  sites  were  selected; 
the  first  trap  was  located  within  the  village  near  livestock  and 
the  other  four  at  increasingly  greater  distances  from  the  village 
across  1700  meter  wide  rice  fields.  The  last  collection  site  was 
more  than  half  the  distance  across  the  rice  fields  to  another 
village.  Studies  were  also  made  to  determine  If  the  JEV  vector 
species  demonstrate  seasonal  differences  in  host  preferences. 

Three  Magoon  traps  were  baited  on  successive  nights  each  week 
with  a  buffalo,  cow  or  pig.  These  animals  were  rotated  from  trap 
to  trap  to  eliminate  differences  due  to  trap  location. 

In  July  1972  an  estimated  12,723  C.  fuscocephala,  444 
C.  gelidus  and  21,380  C.  tritaeniorhynchus  were  marked  and  released 
Tn  Sara  phi  district.  In  CDC  trap  collections  made  following  their 
release  27  C.  fuscocephala  (0.21%)  and  40  C.  tritaeniorhynchus 
(0.18%)  were  recaptured.  Both  species  apparently  dispersed  in  a 
random  fashion  and  marked  specimens  were  recaptur  'd  at  distances 
up  to  1400  meters  from  the  release  point  (Figure  t)*  For  unknown 
reasons  the  majority  of  marked  mosquitoes  were  recaptured  at  one 
site  1100  meters  west  of  the  release  point.  In  August  an  esti¬ 
mated  6,078  C.  fuscocephala,  481  C.  gelidus  and  10,718  C. 
tritaeniorhynchus  were  marked  and  released  from  the  same  village 
site.  Light  traps  were  operated  for  the  same  period  and  at  the 
same  sites  as  in  the  first  experiment.  A  total  of  15  £. 
fuscocephala  (0.24%),  1  C.  gelidus  (0.20%)  and  2  C.  tritaeniorhynchus 
(0.02%)  were  recaptured  Tn  this  experiment.  The  dispersal  pattern 
was  similar  to  that  observed  in  the  first  experiment  (Figure  2). 
However,  1  C.  tritaeniorhynchus  was  recaptured  at  a  point  1800 
meters  from  the  release  point,  which  was  the  maximum  distance  at 
which  light  traps  were  located  from  the  release  point.  No 


756 


Table  1  Summary  of  mosquito  collections  in  CDC  traps  set  in  a  rice  field  at  various 
distances  between  two  villages  -  Chiangmai,  Thailand,  1972-73. 


758 


Fig.  2.  Map  showing  location  of  sites  at  which  marked 
Q»  fuscocephala ,  C.  gelldus  and  C.  trltaenlorhynchus 
were  recaptured  -  August  197  2. 


correlation  between  the  pattern  of  dispersal  of  vector  mosquitoes 
with  either  wind  direction  or  velocity  was  observed  during  these 
experiments.  The  flight  ranges  of  these  mosquitoes  would  allow 
for  rapid  dissemination  of  JEV  from  village  to  village  In  the 
Chlangmal  Valley. 

The  results  of  CDC  trap  collections  made  at  varying  distances 
across  rice  fields  from  a  village  In  Mae  Rim  district  are 
summarized  In  the  Table  1.  Statistically  significant  differences 
were  observed  between  numbers  of  mosquitoes  collected  In  the 
village  and  In  the  rice  fields.  These  differences  appear  to  be 
directly  correlated  with  the  distance  of  trap  locations  from  the 
nearest  village. 

From  September  1972  to  February  1973  larger  numbers  of  Culex 
fuscocephala,  C.  gelidus  and  C.  trltaenlorhynchus  were  collected 
from  Magoon  traps  baited  witTTa  buffalo  than  from  the  traps  baited 
with  either  a  cow  or  pig.  Lowest  numbers  were  collected  In 
December  and  January  with  populations  beginning  to  Increase  in 
February.  The  numbers  of  mosquitoes  in  cow-baited  traps  fluctuated 
in  the  same  general  pattern  as  those  in  the  buffalo-baited  traps. 
Consistently  fewer  mosquitoes  were  collected  In  pig-baited  traps 
than  when  either  a  buffalo  or  cow  was  used,  however,  some  specimens 
of  each  of  the  3  species  were  collected  each  month  in  the  traps 
baited  with  the  pig. 

C.  ARBOVIRUSES 

1 .  Isolation  of  Ingwavuma  Virus  from  Domestic  Pigs 

Detailed  in  the  1971-1972  SMRL  Annual  Report  was  the  isolation 
of  Ingwavuma  from  a  Culex  vishnui  pool  obtained  in  the  Chiangmai 
Valley  in  1970  and  serologic  evidence  that  domestic  pigs  indigenous 
to  the  valley  were  commonly  infected  with  Ingwavuma  (or  a  closely 
related  virus).  Studies  undertaken  during  the  past  year  have 
established  Ingwavuma  antibody  prevalence  in  areas  of  Thailand 
other  than  the  Chiangmai  Valley,  have  demonstrated  natural  infection 
of  Thai  pigs  with  Ingwavuma  virus,  and  have  extended  the  range  of 
this  virus  eastward  to  Taiwan. 

Prevalence  of  Ingwavuma  Antibody  in  Thai  Pigs  from  Areas  Other 
Than  Chiangmai:  Sera  of  20  pigs  from  each  of  3  areas  of  Thailand- 
Kanchanaburl  in  the  West,  Udorn  in  the  Northeast,  and  Saraburi  in 
the  Central  plains-were  tested  for  neutralizing  (NT)  antibody  at 
a  1:20  serum  dilution  by  the  micro-plaque  reduction  neutralization 
test  (PRNT)  described  in  last  year's  annual  report.  Serum  was 
considered  to  have  antibody  if  it  reduced  the  number  of  plaques  to 


760 


less  than  80%  of  the  control  plaque  counts.  Ingwavuma  antibody 
was  found  In  pigs  from  all  3  areas,  suggesting  a  broad  distribution 
of  this  virus  In  Thailand;  the  prevalence  was  50%  in  pigs  at 
Kanchanaburl ,  45%  at  Saraburl,  and  10%  at  Udorn. 

Natural  Infection  of  Thai  Pigs;  In  March  1972,  the  Department  of 
Veterinary  Medicine  began  a  study  at  the  Tubkwang  Breeding  Farm 
of  Kasertsart  University  in  Saraburl  Province  to  determine  the 
effects  of  Japanese  encephalitis  infections  In  pregnant  sows. 
Beginning  in  April,  serum  for  viral  serology  was  obtained  bi¬ 
weekly  on  study  animals  and  weekly  blood  specimens  were  Inoculated 
directly  Into  weanling  mice  which  were  transported  to  SMRL  and 
observed.  Brain  suspensions  of  dead  or  sick  mice  were  further 
passaged  in  suckling  mice. 

Twenty-eight  pregnant  sows  were  thus  studied  from  April 
through  July  1972.  No  Ingwavuma  isolates  were  obtained  from  the 
6  animals  who  had  NT  antibody  at  the  start  of  the  study.  Of  the 
22  animals  initially  lacking  NT  antibody,  16  had  serologic 
evidence  of  infection  and  isolates  were  recovered  from  11  (Table  1). 
Only  one  isolate  was  obtained  per  animal,  suggesting  that  the 
duration  of  Ingwavuma  viremia  in  pigs  is  less  than  one  week.  All 
but  2  of  the  isolates  were  from  blood  collected  in  the  2  week 
period  from  21  April  through  7  May.  Significant  rainfall  occurred 
in  Saraburi  in  March  and  April.  Convalescent  antibody  titers  of 
infected  pigs  ranged  from  1:160  to  £1:640,  the  geometric  mean 
titer  was  1 :360. 

Ingwavuma  Isolates  from  Nam  Phong,  Thailand,  and  Taiwan:  In 
addition  to  the  Saraburi  isolates,  3  strains  of  Ingwavuma  virus 
were  isolated  from  blood  obtained  from  pigs  near  Nam  Phong  Air 
Force  Base  in  the  Korat  Plateau.  Three  virus  strains  Isolated 
from  pig  blood  in  Taiwan  by  Dr.  Ananda  Nisalak  of  NAMRU  2  have 
be^n  shown  to  be  identical  to  Ingwavuma  virus  by  PR(J  with 
hyper irtmune  BKM  705  antisera. 

Isolation  studies  undertaken  during  the  past  year  have 
confirmed  the  hypothesis  developed  from  past  antibody  prevalence 
studies  that  pigs  are  an  important  host  of  Ingwavuma  virus  in 
Southeast  Asia.  Our  studies  have  expanded  the  range  of  this  virus 
previously  isolated  only  in  Africa  and  India  through  Thailand  to 
Taiwan.  Further  studies  of  the  virus  which  rarely  if  ever  Infects 
humans  are  not  planned. 


761 


m 


Table  1.  Natural  Ingwavuma  Infections  In  Pigs,  Saraburi,  1972 


Ingwavuma  NT  Antibody  Status 

N 

umber  of  Pigs 

March  1972 

July  1972 

Studied 

With  Ingwavuma  Isolates 

*  TrjH 

16 

11 

6 

0 

Present 

6 

0 

2.  Survey  of  Tick-Borne  Viruses  in  Thailand 

Over  50  species  of  ticks  have  been  collected  by  SMRL  personnel 
In  the  past  few  years  from  37  provinces  of  Thailand;  10  of  these 
species  have  been  recorded  as  attacking  human  beings.  Several 
arbovirus  diseases  of  public  health  Importance  are  transmitted 
to  man  through  ticks.  Most  prominent  have  been  the  tick-borne 
encephalitis  complex  of  Group  B  arboviruses,  Congo  group 
arboviruses  and  the  Kemerovo  group  viruses.  Viruses  of  these 
groups  have  been  defined  as  etlologic  agents  in  outbreaks  of 
meningo-encephalitis  and  hemorrhagic  fever.  No  surveys  for  tick- 
borne  viruses  have  previously  been  made  in  Thailand,  and  only 
two  arboviruses  -  Nyamanini  and  Pathumthani  viruses  -  have  been 
isolated  from  ticks  collected  in  Thailand. 

During  this  period  a  total  of  10,888  ticks  were  collected 
from  six  provinces  ( i . e . ,  Chiangmai,  Mae  Hong  Son,  Nakhon  Nayok, 
Nakhon  Ratchasima,  Pathumthani  and  Prachinburi),  identified  and 
pooled  for  virus  isolation  attempts.  Included  in  the  709  pools 
tested  were  28  species  of  ticks  -  belonging  to  the  genera 
Amblyomma,  Aponoma ,  Argas,  Boophilus,  Dermacentor,  Ixodes, 
flpmaphysalis  and  Rhipicephalus  (Tab! e  1).  The  largest  numbers 
of  ticks  tested  belonged  to  the  genera  Boophilus  and 
Haemaphysalis,  respectively.  Various  collection  techniques  were 
employed  during  this  period,  but  the  largest  numbers  of  ticks 
collected  were  removed  from  trapped  wild  mammals  and  birds  and 
from  domestic  animals.  A  total  of  1205  small  mammals  and  262 
birds  were  trapped  ard  examined  for  ticks.  Approximately  400 
domestic  animals,  including  buffalo,  cattle,  goats  and  dogs,  were 
examined  for  ticks.  Finally,  2262  ticks  were  collected  resting 
on  vegetation  or  in  the  vicinity  of  avian  rookeries. 

Six’unidentified,  ether  sensitive  viral  agents  were  isolated 
from  pools  of  Argas  robertsi  collected  in  the  vicinity  of  nests 
of  Night  Herons  (Nycticorax  nycticorax)  in  Nakhon  Nayok  province. 
Thus  far,  no  viruses  have  been  recovered  from  ticks  removed  from 
mammcls  or  birds  trapped  during  this  period. 


762 


Table  1 .  Ticks  collected  in  Thailand  and  tested  for  viral 
agents,  1972-73. 


No.  of  Pools 

No.  of  Ticks 

Aipblyomma  so. 

7 

16 

A.  te^tudlnarium 

1 

1 

Aponpmma  sja. 

3 

11 

A.  lucasi 

2 

28 

Areas  sp. 

o 

0 

A.  pusillus 

3 

90 

A,  robertsl 

12 

130 

Boophilus  sd. 

2 

5 

B.  microplus 

197 

2,931 

Derma centor  sd. 

1 

4 

D.  auratus 

22 

49 

D.  atrosiqnatus 

4 

6 

Ixodes  sp. 

5 

10 

20 

33 

Haemaphysalis  sp. 

52 

2,661 

H.  anomqla 

20 

567 

H.  atherurus 

1 

2 

H.  bandicota 

104 

1,177 

H.  canestrinii 

1 

4 

H.  comigera 

18 

563 

H.  heinrichi 

75 

1,106 

H.  lagrangei 

12 

145 

H.  obesa 

6 

12 

H.  semensis 

6 

130 

H.  Wellington! 

7 

19 

Rhipicephalus  sp. 

38 

176 

R.  h.  haemaphysaloides 

71 

693 

R.  sanquineus 

19 

319 

Total 


709 


10  >  888 


D.  INFLUENZA 


1.  An  Outbreak  of  Influenza  A  among  USAF  Personnel  at  Udorn  Royal 
Thai  A*r  Force  Base. 

On  19  September  1972  this  laboratory  was  requested  by  the  1st 
Medical  Service  Wing  (PACAF)  to  assist  In  the  Investigation  of  an 
outbreak  of  febrile  upper  respiratory  tract  disease  at  Udorn  Royal 
Thai  Air  Force  Base,  Thailand.  An  Increase  In  URI  dispensary  visits 
was  first  noted  on  10  September  and  by  17  September  53  flight  crew 
members  were  grounded  with  a  flu-like  syndrome.  The  explosive  nature 
of  this  outbreak,  Its  Impairment  of  the  mission  of  the  base,  and  Its 
occurrence  In  a  military  population  previously  Immunized  with  polyva¬ 
lent  Influenza  vaccines  necessitated  Its  Immediate  Investigation. 
Accordingly,  SMRL  Investigators  visited  Udorn  RTAFB  on  20  September. 

It  was  decided  that  epidemiologic  Investigation  and  Institution  of 
control  measures  were  the  responsibility  of  the  1st  Medical  Service 
Wing  while  etlologlc  Investigation  of  the  outbreak  was  the  responsi¬ 
bility  of  SMRL. 

Etiology:  Preliminary  Investigation  established  that  approximately 
360  men  had  developed  the  syndrome  In  the  two  days  preceding  20 
September,  and  that  most  units  on  the  base  were  Involved.  Eighteen 
USAF  personnel  hospitalized  or  visiting  the  emergency  room  of  the 
432nd  USAF  Hospital  were  examined  by  SMRL  Investigators.  Clinically 
these  patients  presented  almost  universally  with  a  dry,  hacking  cough, 
sore  throat  of  variable  degree  with  marked  pharyngeal  Injection  but  no 
exudate,  marked  malaise,  headache,  and  myalgias.  Systemic  symptoms 
predominated.  Oral  temperatures  ranged  from  normal  to  105°F ;  all  but 
3  of  the  18  had  temperatures  greater  than  100°F.  White  counts  on 
these  patients  were  generally  between  8,000  and  12,000. 

Throat  swabs  obtained  on  the  18  patients  were  Immediately  plated 
and  streaked  on  sheep  blood  agar  plates.  Small  numbers  of  B  hemolytic 
streptococci  were  isolated  from  but  two  patients  and  one  of  these  Iso¬ 
lates  was  Bacitracin  resistant. 

Throat  washings  In  Hanks'  balanced  salt  solution  and  0.4  percent 
bovine  plasma  albumin  were  obtained  on  all  18  patients,  Immediately 
frozen  on  dry  Ice,  transported  to  SMRL  and  inoculated  into  embryonated 
eggs  and  rhesus  monkey  kidney  cell  cultures.  Strains  of  Influenza  A 
were  isolated  from  throat  washings  of  13  patients  -  from  all  6 
hospitalized  patients  and  from  7  of  the  12  patients  examined  in  the 
emergency  room. 

Acute  serum  was  obtained  on  all  18  patients  and  3  week  convales¬ 
cent  serum  was  obtained  by  the  432nd  USAF  Hospital  on  10  of  these 
patients.  Of  those  7  patients  with  influenza  A  isolated,  6  had 


four-fold  or  greater  rises  In  hemagglutination-inhibition  (HI)  anti¬ 
body  to  one  of  the  Udorn  Isolates,  A/Udorn  302/72.  None  of  the  three 
patients  without  Isolates  had  diagnostic  antibody  rises. 

Antigens  of  one  of  the  Udorn  Isolates,  Udorn  302,  were  compared 
with  previous  Influenza  A  strains  In  cross  HI  tests.  Rooster  antisera 
to  A/ JAP  305/57,  A/HK  1/68,  and  A/Udorn  302/72  were  used  in  these 
tests  against  A/JAP  305/57,  A/HK  1/68,  A/Korat/72  (a  strain  isolated 
In  Korat,  Thailand,  In  February  1972),  and  A/Udorn  302/72.  Results  are 
shown  In  Table  1.  The  data  Indicate  that  A/Udorn  302/72  Is  related  to 
strains  represented  by  A/HK  1/68,  but  Is  different  antlgenlcally  from 
the  1968  and  1972  strains.  Rooster  antisera  to  these  latter  strains 
were  but  weakly  reactive  to  the  Udorn  strain.  This  would  suggest  that 
human  antibodies  induced  by  previous  Infection  or  immunization  with 
1968  antigens  would  afford  considerably  less  protection  to  the  Udorn 
strain  than  to  the  1968  or  Korat  1972  strain. 

Throat  washings  and  strains  isolated  from  the  Udorn  patients  were 
forwarded  to  the  WRAIR  for  more  detailed  antigenic  analysis  and  for 
possible  vaccine  use.  Although  final  reports  have  not  been  received 
on  the  Udorn  isolates,  a  strain  isolated  in  Bangkok  In  September  1972, 
A/Bangkok  2/72  (which  appears  antigenically  identical  to  A/Udorn  302/ 
72),  has  been  characterized  as  identical  to  A/England  42/72  by  the 
WHO  Influenza  Reference  Laboratory  in  England. 

Epidemiology;  Between  10  September  and  30  September,  1387  USAF 
personnel  reported  to  base  medical  facilities  with  URI  or  influenza¬ 
like  symptoms.  All  patients  were  examined  by  physicians  or  corpsmen; 
those  seen  after  20  September  filled  out  a  questionnaire  at  the  time 
of  examination  while  those  examined  before  20  September  were  contacted 
and  questionnaires  filled  out  retrospectively.  The  questionnaires 
specifically  dealt  with  souadron,  clinical  symptomatology,  and  date  of 
last  influenza  immunizations.  Pertinent  findings  from  this  data 
obtained  by  1st  Medical  Service  Wing  are  summarized. 

Total  numbers  of  suspected  influenza  cases  seen  at  Udorn  RTAFB  in 
September  1972  are  shown  in  Table  2.  The  attack  rate  for  total  base 
personnel  was  21%,  but  considerable  variation  between  units  was  ob¬ 
served.  Of  interest  was  that  62%  of  the  base  flying  personnel 
developed  illness  as  opposed  to  16%  of  non-flying  personnel. 

Dates  of  onset  of  involved  personnel  are  shown  in  Figure  1.  The 
explosive  nature  of  the  1972  Udorn  outbreak  was  in  contrast  with  that 
observed  by  Smith,  et  al,  in  an  A/HK/ 68  outbreak  at  Korat  RTAFB  in 
1968  (SMRL  Annual  Report,  1969). 

The  frequency  of  individual  symptoms  in  the  1387  patients  studied 
are  shown  in  Table  3.  Sore  throat,  coryza,  fever,  headache,  and 

765 

(Next  page  is  767) 


malaise  were  found  In  over  2/3  of  the  patients,  while  cough  and 
myalgias  were  complaints  of  about  502. 


A  history  of  previous  Immunization  with  polyvalent  Influenza 
vaccines  was  obtained  In  912  of  the  1387  patients  studied;  882  of 
all  patients  had  received  Immunizations  on  or  after  October  1971. 
Although  the  data  obtained  do  not  permit  a  comparison  of  attack  rates 
In  Immunized  versus  unlmmunlzed  personnel,  the  available  data  suggests 
that  Influenza  vaccines  containin']  A/HK/68  antigens  were  at  best  of 
limited  effectiveness  against  the  1972  Udorn  strain. 


Table  1.  Comparative  HI  Tests  with  A/Udorn  302/72  Antigen 
and  Early  Influenza  Isolates 


Antigen 

A/ JAP  305/57 

A/HK  1/68 

A/Udorn  302/72 

A/JAP  305/57 

ill 

<20 

A/HK  1/68 

40 

80 

A/Kora t/ 72 

20 

ttH  i 

80 

A/Udorn  302/72 

20 

mtm 

M 

Table  2.  The  Totals  of  Influenza  Cases  at  Udorn  RTAFB  during  Septem¬ 
ber  1972  Listed  by  Unit  of  Assignment 


Unit 

Population* 

Cases 

Attack 

Rate 

58  TFS 

100 

68 

Of) 

68 

432  SPS 

250 

146 

58 

555  TFS 

75 

39 

52 

13  TFS 

75 

31 

41 

14  TFS 

125 

50 

40 

Det  1,  7AF  (7/13  AF) 

50 

16 

32 

432  FMS 

450 

141 

•31 

432  AMS 

350 

97 

29 

432  MMS 

300 

79 

26 

432  CES 

150 

35 

23 

432  OMS 

300 

70 

23 

432  USAF  Hospital 

125 

27 

22 

621  TCS 

125 

24 

19 

1974th  Cornu  Sq 

350 

62 

18 

432  CSG 

2000 

341 

17 

432  Supply  Sq 

250 

41 

16 

Det  5 

15 

2 

13 

307th  TFS 

450 

54 

12 

56  SW  Det  1 

300 

31 

10 

523rd  TFS 

400 

26 

7 

Misc  Small  Units 

400 

T 

i 

3 

TOTALS 

6640 

1387 

*  All  unit  strengths  are  rounded  to  nearest  twenty-five. 


768 


Table  3.  A  Comparison  of  Symptom  Proportions  in  Influenza  Cases 
Interviewed  at  Udorn  RTAFB  During  September  1972 


Sore  Throat 
Runny  Nose 
Fever 

Less  than  102° 

More  than  102° 
Headache 
Malaise 
Chills 
Cough 
Myalgia 
G.I.  Symptoms 
Arthralgias 
Red  Eyes 
Rash 


No 

Percentage  with  S. 

247 

88 

307 

87 

292 

79 

292 

79 

1068 

23 

333 

76 

444 

68 

513 

63 

666 

52 

787 

47 

944 

32 

1013 

27 

1013 

27 

1353 

5 

770 


-  -  — . 


SEPTEMBER 


E.  RABIES 


1.  Rabies  Diagnostic  Laboratory  Service  In  Thailand. 

This  laboratory  provides  accurate,  rapid  rabies  diagnostic  service 
for  U.S.  military  units  In  Southeast  Asia  and  In  the  Western  Pacific. 
The  laboratory  utilizes  the  fluorescent  antibody  test  and  mouse  Inocu¬ 
lation  on  all  cases  received.  All  reports  are  made  via  telephone  and 
are  followed  by  written  confirmation. 

During  the  period  1  April  72  to  30  March  73  brain  specimens  of 
1016  animals  were  received  for  rabies  examination  (Table  1).  The  dog 
continues  to  be  the  most  frequently  Infected  species  In  Thailand.  The 
percentage  of  positive  cases  of  canine  rabies  Is  essentially  the  same 
as  it  has  been  In  previous  years  of  this  laboratory  operation. 


Table  1.  Summary  of  Rabies  Diagnoses  1  April  1972  - 
31  March  1973 


Species 

Examined 

Number 

Examined 

Number 

Positive 

Percent 

Positive 

Canine 

787 

394 

50.1 

Feline 

132 

24 

18.2 

Rodent 

41 

0 

0.0 

Nonhuman  Primate 

18 

0 

0.0 

Bat 

11 

1 

9.9 

Rabbit 

9 

0 

0.0 

Human 

6 

3 

50.0 

Equine 

6 

0 

0.0 

Mongoose 

2 

0 

0.0 

Porcine 

1 

1 

Bovine 

1 

1 

Ovine 

1 

0 

Civet 

1 

0 

0.0 

Otter 

1 

0 

0.0 

Total 

1016 

424 

41.7 

2.  The  Use  of  the  Corneal  Test  as  an  Ante-mortem  Method  of  Rabies 
Diagnosis  in  Human  Patients. 

There  have  been  reports  of  the  successful  application  of  the 
fluorescent  antibody  technique  to  corneal  impression  smears  from 
experiment* Py  nfected  animals  (Schneider,  L.  G.,  1969,  Zentralbl. 
Vet.  Med  ,  24-31).  There  Is  at  least  one  report  of  the  successful 

77J 


use  of  this  procedure  In  the  ante-mortem  diagnosis  of  a  human  case  of 
rabies.  (Clfuentes,  E.,  et  al ,  1971,  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  74,  23-25). 

Recently,  we  have  performed  the  corneal  test  on  two  human  rabies 
patients.  The  first  patient  was  a  43  year- old  woman  who  had  been 
bitten  by  a  rabid  dog  3  weeks  prior  to  the  onset  of  symptoms.  Corneal 
Impressions  were  taken  before  and  after  death,  and  In  both  Instances 
positive  Immunofluorescence  was  detected.  Postmortem  examination  of 
in*-  sra1n  revealed  positive  Immunofluorescence  as  well  as  the  presence 
f  v  j-i  bodies  In  formal  In- preserved  samples.  The  second  case 
■•i  .•  'lvt>d  a  22  year-old  American  soldier  who  had  been  bitten  by  a  rabid 
v-oo  weeks  before  the  onset  of  symptoms.  Positive  Immunofluorescence 
'<r-  detected  in  corneal  Impressions  taken  11  days  before  death.  Post¬ 
mortem  corneal  samples  were  also  positive.  The  diagnosis  of  rabies 
was  confirmed  by  the  observation  of  positive  inmunofluorescence  and 
Negri  bodies  in  the  brain  after  death. 

Consid?ring  these  encouraging  initial  findings,  critical  evaluation 
of  the  corneal  test  in  human  rabies  patients  is  warranted.  A  research 
proposal  for  thic  r^r-.j.e  las  been  developed.  At  least  twenty  human 
rabies  patients  will  iv?  studied  to  determine  the  reliability,  specifi¬ 
city,  and  time  or  >-ve!opment  of  corneal  immunofluorescence. 

3.  Reservoirs  of  Rabies  in  Thailand. 

a.  Survey  of  Mild  Rodents;  A  survey  was  performed  to  determine 
the  prevalence  of  rabies  virus  infection  in  wild  rodents  in  the 
Cholburi-Rayong  area.  This  area  was  selected  because:  1)  there  was 
a  high  incidence  of  canine  rabies,  and  2)  a  high  frequency  of  rabies 
virus  infection  was  reported  in  bandicoots  (Bandicota  indica)  in  this 
area  in  1966  (Smith,  P.  C.  et  al ,  Nature  217:954,  1968). 

A  total  of  704  wild  rodents,  520  of  which  were  bandicoots,  were 
captured  in  the  Cholburi-Rayong  area  during  the  period  Sep  72  through 
Dec  72.  The  brains  were  removed,  frozen,  and  stored  for  later  exam¬ 
ination  for  rabies  virus  using  the  fluorescent  antibody  technique. 

To  date,  200  rodent  brains  have  been  examined  using  the  fluorescent 
antibody  technique  and  mouse  inoculation,  and  all  were  found  to  be 
negative  for  rabies.  The  remaining  rodent  brains  will  be  examined 
for  rabies  virus  infections  during  calendar  year  1973. 

b.  Ancillary  Studies  in  Mild  Rodents:  Wild  rodents  captured  in 
the  rabies  survey  described  above  were  examined  at  necropsy,  and  each 
animal  was  examined  for  enteric  and  blood  parasites.  The  results  of 
the  parasitologic  examinations  are  reported  elsewhere  in  this  volume. 
Bacteriologic  examinations  oF  lung,  liver,  kidney,  nasopharyngeal 
swabs,  and  feces  were  performed  on  167  animals.  In  one  Rattus  rattus, 
a  non-agglutinating  Vibrio  sp.  was  isolated.  No  other  significant 

772 


1 


bacterial  pathogens  were  Isolated.  Visceral  organs  from  all  animals 
were  preserved  In  10%  neutral  buffered  formalin,  and  histopathologic 
studies  are  In  progress. 

c.  Survey  of  Dogs  for  Rabies  Virus  Infection:  A  total  of  385 
canine  brain  specimens  were  obtained  from  the  Bangkok  Municipal  Health 
Department  dog  pound  and  from  cooperating  U.S.  Air  Force  Installations 
In  Thailand.  The  U.S.  Air  Force  specimens  were  obtained  In  collec¬ 
tions  of  stray  dogs  on  the  bases.  None  of  these  dogs  were  yet 
manifesting  clinical  signs  suggestive  of  rabies  at  the  time  of 
sacrifice.  Each  specimen  was  examined  by  the  fluorescent  antibody 
method.  Positive  cases  were  confirmed  by  mouse  Inoculation. 

The  results  of  the  fluorescent  antibody  examinations  are  shown 
in  Table  1.  The  overall  infection  rate  of  3.4%  is  within  the  2-6% 
range  reported  in  previous  surveys  during  the  past  5  years. 

The  results  of  these  surveys  indicate  that  rabies  continues  to 
be  a  significant  public  health  problem  among  the  stray  dogs  in  Thailand. 


Table  1.  Isolation  of  Rabies  Virus  from  Stray  Dogs  in  Thailand. 


Source 

No.  Specimens 
Exami ned 

No.  of  Rabies  Virus 
Isolations 

Percent 

Korat 

89 

4 

4.7 

Udorn 

72 

2 

2.8 

Ubon 

50 

0 

0.0 

Nakorn  Sawan 

38 

1 

2.6 

Nakorn  Panom 

36 

2 

5.6 

Bangkok 

100 

_4 

4.0 

Combined 

385 

13 

3.4 

F.  HEPATITIS  B 

1 .  A  Comparison  of  Complement  Fixation,  Imminoelectroosmophoresis 
and  Solid  Phase  Radioimmunoassay  for  the  Detection  of  Hepatitis  B 
Antigen  ifTTTial  and  American  Populations'! 

The  objective  of  these  studies  was  to  develop  the  radioimmunoassay 
(RIA)  for  detection  of  Hepatitis  B  antigen  (HB-Ag)  and  to  compare 
the  sensitivity  of  this  assay  with  that  of  other  tests  for  antigen 
used  previously  in  this  laboratory. 


In  previous  years  HB-Ag  has  been  detected  In  sera  submitted  to 
this  laboratory  by  three  methods:  agar  gel  diffusion  (AGO),  Immuno- 
electroosmophoresls  (IEOP)  and  complement  fixation  (CF).  Over  the 
past  several  years  the  prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B  antigen  has  been 
determined  by  these  methods  In  several  different  Thai  and  American 
populations.  These  populations  include  groups  of  United  States 
military  personnel  entering  the  Republic  of  Vietnam,  U.S.  military 
personnel  suffering  from  acute  hepatitis  in  the  RVN,  Thais  living  In 
a  low  income  urban  subdivision  of  Bangkok,  paid  Thai  blood  donors  at 
Phra  Mongkut  Klao  Hospital  and  Thai  children  with  acute  hepatitis 
seen  at  the  outpatient  clinic  at  Bangkok  Children's  Hospital.  Because 
of  the  Increased  sensitivity  attributed  to  the  solid  phase  radio¬ 
immunoassay,  the  sera  collected  from  these  populations  were  submitted 
for  HB-Ag  testing  by  this  method. 

The  sera  tested  were  taken  from  the  six  groups  described  above. 

The  method  for  AGO,  CF  and  IEOP  have  been  presented  before  (1971-1972 
Annual  Report,  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory). 

Reagents  for  the  solid  phase  radioimmunoassay  were  obtained  from 
Abbott  Laboratories,  Chicago,  Ill.  as  Ausria  kits.  The  tests  were 
performed  according  to  the  instructions  provided.  Briefly  1  ml  of 
a  sample  to  be  tested  was  placed  on  the  bottom  of  a  plastic  tube 
coated  with  guinea  pig  HB-Ag  antibody.  The  tube  was  stoppered  and 
allowed  to  incubate  at  room  temperature  for  16-18  hours  (overnight). 
The  sample  was  then  removed  and  the  tube  rinsed  5  times  with  2  ml  each 
of  0.01  M  Tris-HCl ,  pH  7.1.  One  tenth  milliliter  of  1Z5I-labeled 
HB-Ag  antibody  solution  (0.1  uCi)  was  then  delivered  to  the  bottom  of 
the  tube.  After  the  tube  was  capped  and  allowed  to  incubate  at  room 
temperature  for  90  minutes,  it  was  aspirated  and  rinsed  five  times  as 
above.  Seven  negative  control  tubes  were  prepared  in  the  same  manner 
with  a  standard  normal  human  plasma  provided  by  Abbott  Laboratories. 
Each  of  the  tubes  was  counted  in  a  gamma  ray  spectrometer  and  the  mean 
and  standard  deviation  of  the  serum  negative  control  tubes  were 
computed.  The  coefficient  of  variance  of  these  negative  control  tubes 
was  between  10  and  20%.  Samples  were  considered  positive  If  they  were 
greater  than  five  standard  deviations  above  the  mean  of  the  negative 
control  value.  Samples  equal  to  or  less  than  five  standard  deviations 
above  the  mean  were  considered  negative. 

Tables  1  and  2  illustrate  the  increased  sensitivity  of  the  RIA 
over  the  CF  and  IEOP.  Of  a  total  of  1638  samples  tested  145  or  8.8% 
were  positive  by  CF,  197  or  12.0%  were  positive  by  IEOP  and  233  or 
14.2%  were  positive  by  RIA.  The  increased  sensitivity  of  the  RIA 
over  the  CF  in  the  total  population  was  88/233  or  38%  while  the 
increased  sensitivity  of  the  RIA  over  the  IEOP  was  40/233  or  17%. 

That  the  RIA  is  capable  of  detecting  HB-Ag  later  in  the  course 
of  antigen  positive  hepatitis  than  other  methods  was  demonstrated  in 

774 


a  longitudinal  study  of  five  Thai  children  with  HB-antlgen  positive 
disease.  In  one  child  followed  for  one  year,  the  CF,  IEOP  &  RIA 
remained  positive,  and  this  child  was  considered  a  carrier.  In  two 
cases  followed  for  periods  of  time  up  to  8  months,  the  RIA  remained 
positive  beyond  the  IEOP  or  the  CF  for  1-3  months.  Follow-up  sera 
collected  on  both  American  and  adult  Thai  hepatitis  patients  are  at 
present  under  investigation. 

A  breakdown  of  the  total  population  tested  by  RIA  into  component 
groups  Is  shown  in  Table  3.  It  will  be  noticed  that  the  RIA  increases 
the  detection  of  antigen  in  all  of  the  groups  tested;  however,  when 
used  to  detect  HB-Ag  on  samples  obtained  from  American  personnel  the 
RIA  detected  3  to  4  times  as  many  additional  positive  samples  as  when 
it  was  used  to  study  Thai  populations.  Further  analysis  of  histograms, 
formed  by  plotting  the  counts/minute  or  standard  deviations  above 
control  mean  on  the  abscissa  and  number  of  persons  studied  on  the 
ordinate,  showed  different  curves  for  American  and  Thai  Hd-Ag  posi¬ 
tive  samples.  The  Thai  populations  showed  a  unimodal  curve  with  its 
mode  greater  than  100  standard  deviations  from  the  mean.  The  American 
military  hepatitis  patients  showed  a  bimodal  curve  with  peaks  at  about 
50  and  100  standard  deviations  from  the  standard  control  mean. 

The  increased  sensitivity  of  the  radioimmunoassay  over  previous 
methods  of  detecting  hepatitis  B  antigen  is  amply  demonstrated  by 
these  data.  The  RIA  not  only  detects  more  hepatitis  B  positive  samples 
in  point  prevalence  studies  but  also  allows  for  the  detection  of  HB 
antigen  for  longer  periods  in  the  convalescence  from  HB  antigen  posi¬ 
tive  disease. 

A  number  of  explanations  may  be  offered  for  the  differences  in 
concordance  of  RIA  with  IEOP  between  Thai  and  American  subjects.  It 
might  be  that  the  RIA  in  our  hands  is  less  sensitive  than  it  is  else¬ 
where.  This  seems  unlikely  since  results  of  the  RIA  done  in  this 
laboratory  compare  favorably  with  determinations  performed  on 
aliquots  of  the  same  Thai  samples  by  the  laboratory  of  Or.  Roger  Dodd, 
Red  Cross  Research  Laboratory,  Bethesda,  Maryland. 

It  might  be  that  Thais  carry  antigen  at  a  higher  titer  than  do 
carriers  in  temperate  zones.  The  majority  (45  of  62  or  73$)  of  the 
Thai  subjects  in  the  lower  socioeconomic  subsection  who  manifested 
antigenemia  by  the  radioimmunoassay  had  complement  fixation  titers 
of  1:64  or  greater  as  did  all  of  the  HB-Ag  positive  blood  donors 
tested.  In  the  American  soldier  population  only  1  of  5  (20$)  had  an 
antigenemia  of  thi;  titer;  however,  despite  the  high  CF  titer  in 
carriers,  there  were  also  relatively  small  differences  between  the 
number  of  IEOP  and  RIA  positive  Thais  with  hepatitis  despite  a  large 
number  (81$)  of  low  or  negative  titer  CF  tests. 

A  third  and  most  likely  explanation  is  that  the  higher  concordance 


775 


Table  1.  CF  &  RIA  Results  for  Total  Population 


RIA  Test 

NEG 

CF  Test 

POS 

TOTAL 

NEG 

1405 

0 

1405 

POS 

88 

145 

233 

TOTAL 

1493 

145 

1638 

Table  2 .  IEOP  &  RIA  Results  for  Total  Population 


RIA  Test 

NEG 

IEOP  Test 

POS 

TOTAL 

NEG 

1405 

0 

1405 

POS 

40 

193 

233 

TOTAL 

1445 

193 

1638 

776 


total  positive) 
ncgativc/total 


between  IEOP  and  RIA  tests  In  Thais  as  opposed  to  Western  populations 
Is  related  to  the  homogeneity  of  HB-Ag  in  Thais  and  the  heterogeneity 
In  U.S.  personnel.  All  antigens  thus  far  Identified  in  this  labora¬ 
tory  from  the  Thai  population  have  been  subtyped  ad  and  the  majority 
of  them  have  been  adr  (see  elsewhere  in  this  report).  Subtyping  of 
the  sera  from  American  hepatitis  B  carriers  and  hepatitis  patients 
showed  that  50%  of  samples  (18  of  36)  were  ayw. 

Both  the  CF  and  the  IEOP  are  performed  in  the  laboratory  using 
Thai  human  HB-Ag  antibody  which  has  been  shown  to  have  anti-ad  activity 
but  no  anti-y  activity.  Because  of  the  specificity  of  antibody  for 
the  Thai  antigen  tested,  a  high  sensitivity  of  the  IEOP  and  the  CF  test 
is  possible.  On  the  other  hand,  the  HB-Ag  subtypes  of  American  popu¬ 
lations  are  heterogeneous,  therefore  the  specificity  of  the  Thai  ad 
antibody  is  less  and  the  sensitivity  of  the  test  is  reduced. 

The  RIA  utilizes  a  guinea  pig  antibody  against  HB-Ag.  This 
antibody  pool  has  been  found  to  have  a  much  greater  anti-ad  activity 
than  anti-y  activity  and  for  this  reason  should  produce  higher  counts/ 
minute  with  equal  amounts  of  ad  versus  ay  antigen.  The  bimodal  curve 
that  was  seen  when  the  counts  of  sera  from  American  hepatitis  patients 
were  plotted  may  indicate  that  the  test  is  reading  two  subtype 
populations  while  the  plot  of  the  data  from  Thai  subjects  suggest 
that  only  a  single  antigen  population  ad  is  being  detected. 

2.  The  Epidemiology  of  Hepatitis  B  Antigen:  A  Defined  Urban  Thai 
Population;  Antibody  Acquisition.  ™ 

For  a  description  of  the  experimental  design  of  this  study  see 
the  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Progress  Report,  1971  - 
1972,  pp.  129-139.  Data  accrued  as  to  the  point  prevalence  of  antigen 
in  this  population  indicate  that  infection  is  acquired  early  in 
childhood.  The  early  acquisition  of  the  carrier  state  and  the  high 
prevalence  of  the  antigen  suggest  a  high  rate  of  HB-Ag  transmission 
through  this  population.  Studies  of  antibody  preval ence  were  under¬ 
taken  in  a  random  sample  of  urban  Bangkok  residents  to  determine  the 
prevalence  of  antibody  to  hepatitis  B  antigen  (HB-Ag). 

Sera  collected  from  this  population  were  submitted  to  the  labora¬ 
tory  of  Dr.  Roger  Dodd,  Red  Cross  Research  Laboratory,  Bethesda, 
Maryland,  U.S. A.,  for  antibody  assays  by  the  passive  hemagglutination 
method  described  by  Vyas  and  Shulman. 

Preliminary  reduction  of  the  data  on  the  prevalence  of  HB-Ag 
antibody  among  this  population  indicates  that  311  of  655  (47%)  had 
antibody  detectable  by  the  passive  hemagglutination  test  (see  Table  1). 
Breakdown  of  this  data  into  age  specific  antibody  prevalences 
demonstrates  a  14%  prevalence  of  antibody  in  the  1-4  year  age  group 
and  a  rapid  acquisition  of  antibody  to  a  plateau  of  about  60%  in  the 

778 


Table  1 

Prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B  Antibody  by  Age  In  Urban  Bangkok  Residents 


MALE 

_ 

FEMALE 

TOTAL 

Age 

No. 

HBAb(+) 

No. 

HBAb(+) 

No. 

HBAb(+) 

Tested 

No. 

% 

Tested 

No. 

% 

Tested 

No. 

% 

1-4 

32 

6 

19 

19 

1 

5 

wm 

7 

14 

5-9 

49 

15 

30 

51 

25 

■ 

28 

28 

10-14 

58 

25 

43 

63 

37 

121 

48 

40 

15-19 

38 

23 

67 

52 

38 

imm 

53 

59 

20-29 

38 

24 

63 

67 

29 

43 

53 

50 

30-39 

26 

20 

78 

51 

31 

61 

m 

51 

66 

40 

42 

27 

i 

64 

69 

44 

64 

U 

71 

64 

Total 

283 

1 

140 

49 

372 

161 

43 

655 

311 

47 

ages  above  20. 

This  data  is  undergoing  statistical  analysis  at  the  time  of  this 
writing  with  a  view  towards  early  publication. 

3.  Observations  of  HAA  in  a  Blood  Donor/ Recipient  System  in  Thailand. 

This  is  a  continuation  and  progress  report  on  Observations  of  HAA 
in  a  blood  donor/recipient  system  in  Thailand  as  It  appeared  in  the 
SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  Annual  Progress  Report,  1971-1972, 
pp.  140-155.  The  study  concerns  the  development  of  post-transfusion 
hepatitis  in  persons  receiving  units  of  blood  containing  hepatitis-B 
antigen  (HB-Ag,  previously  designated  HAA).  The  donated  units  are 
identified  and  when  transfused  the  unit  is  tested  and  the  recipient 
categorized  as  either  a  recipient  of  positive  or  negative  blood,  the 
recipients  of  negative  blood  acting  as  a  "control"  population. 

The  objective  of  these  studies  is  to  determine  the  results  of  the 
transfusion  of  blood  containing  hepatitis  B  antigen  to  a  population 
of  Thais  where  the  antigen  is  highly  endemic. 

Approximately  1000  more  persons  have  been  added  to  the  study.  The 
study  population  of  persons  followed  more  than  6  months  has  been 
expanded  to  over  125,  and  a  similar  number  of  controls  have  been 
followed  for  this  period.  In  a  number  of  cases,  patients  have  now 
been  followed  for  more  than  12-18  months.  New  patients  have  not  been 
admitted  to  the  study  since  November  1972  and  the  input  of  patient 
data  is  essentially  complete.  Presently,  improved  techniques  for  HB- 
Ag  and  HB-Ab  are  being  developed  and  will  be  used  with  the  stored  sera. 
Collation  of  the  data  is  in  progress.  The  data  should  provide  infor¬ 
mation  on  the  following  important  areas  of  consideration: 

a.  rate  of  development  of  HB-Ag  after  receiving  a  unit  containing 
the  antigen; 

b.  rate  of  development  of  clinical  and  subclinical  hepatitis 
following  transfusion  of  a  unit  containing  the  antigen; 

c.  persi stance  of  developed  HB-Ag; 

d.  time  sequence  of  the  development  of  HB-Ag  and  of  hepatitis; 

e.  time  sequence  of  SGOT  rise  and  SGPT  rise  and  an  indication  of 
the  relative  sensitivity  and  rpecificity  of  these  tests  for  evaluation 
of  liver  disease; 

f.  the  significance  of  prior  possession  of  antigen  or  antibody 
with  the  subsequent  receiving  cf  a  unit  of  blood  containing  HB-Ag  or 
HB-Ab; 


780 


g.  some  Indication  of  the  relationship  between  HB-Ag  and  liver 
disease; 

h.  an  Indication  of  the  prevalence  of  HB-Ag  and  HB-Ab  among  a 
population  of  ill  persons  requiring  transfusion; 

1.  blood  group  differences  in  HB-Ag  acquisition. 

This  study  has  just  completed  its  second  year  of  followup.  To 
date,  2840  persons  have  received  transfusions  and  been  followed  in 
the  study.  Approximately  300  persons  have  been  followed  for  6  months 
or  longer.  Early  data  indicate  that  overt  hepatitis  following  HB-Ag 
transfusion  is  a  surprisingly  rare  occurrence  in  the  study  population. 

4.  Prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B  Antigen  Carriers  in  American  Personnel 
Entering  and  Leaving  the  Republic  of  Vietnam. 

A  study  was  conducted  to  determine  whether  the  prevalence  of 
hepatitis  B  antigen  (HB-Ag)  among  American  personnel  increases  with 
exposure  to  indigenous  tropical  populations  with  a  high  carrier 
rate  of  antigen  and  endemic  hepatitis. 

The  prevalence  of  HB-Ag  has  been  determined  for  a  number  of 
defined  populations.  Chronic  HB  antigenemia  in  temperate  zones 
ranges  between  0.1  and  0.5%  while  tropical  populations  have  preva¬ 
lences  between  5  and  10%.  Prevalence  rates  in  the  Republic  of 
Vietnam  have  been  found  to  be  approximately  10%. 

Studies  of  HB-Ag  in  tropical  populations  indicate  that  children 
may  be  exposed  and  become  carriers  at  an  early  age.  It  is  not  clear 
whether  the  early  acquisition  of  antigen  in  these  populations  is 
related  to  differences  in  immune  mechanisms  due  to  infancy,  to  the 
prevalence  of  antigen  in  the  environment  and/or  to  other  factors  such 
as  a  genetk  predisposition  to  antigen  carriage. 

In  addition  to  studying  the  prevalence  of  HB-Ag  in  Americans 
leaving  Vietnam,  a  study  of  the  subtypes  of  these  individuals  was 
undertaken  in  an  attempt  to  discover  the  origin  of  these  infections. 
Subtype  adr,  the  predominant  subtype  found  in  Southeast  Asia,  is  rare 
in  temperate  climates. 

Sera  were  collected  from  1293  men  arriving  in  Vietnam  during 
October  and  November  1970  and  from  1072  men  leaving  Vietnam  in 
November  and  December  1970.  Only  those  personnel  who  had  been  in 
the  Republic  of  Vietnam  for  10  months  or  more  were  studied  at 
departure. 

Sera  were  tested  for  the  presence  of  HB-Ag  by  immunoelectroosmo- 
phoresis  (IE0P).  Complement  fixation  (CF)  titers  were  determined 


781 


on  those  sera  found  positive.  Antigens  were  subtyped  by  agar  gel 
diffusion,  using  rabbit  antisera  kindly  provided  by  LTC  William  H. 
Bancroft  of  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research.  The  method  of 
subtyping  Is  described  elsewhere  in  this  report. 

Of  the  1293  sera  obtained  from  men  arriving  in  Vietnam,  11  or 
0.85%  contained  HB-Ag  by  IEOP.  Five  of  1072  or  0.52  of  the  men 
leaving  after  a  tour  of  10  months  or  greater  had  antlgenemia  (see 
Table  1).  The  men  arriving  in  the  tropics  formed  two  radically 
different  groups.  The  first  group  of  1004,  who  were  entering 
Vietnam  for  their  initial  overseas  tour,  (mostly  low  ranking  enlisted 
men)  showed  a  prevalence  of  HB-Ag  of  0.42.  The  remaining  289,  who 
were  returning  to  Vietnam  for  subsequent  tours  (an  older  and  higher 
ranking  group)  haa  a  carrier  rate  of  2.42.  It  is  of  note  that  at 
least  one  of  these  individuals  returning  to  Vietnam  was  noted  to  have 
marks  of  repeated  injections  on  both  arms. 

Subtyping  of  antigen  was  undertaken  on  the  16  positive  specimens 
and  subtypes  were  defined  in  14  (see  Table  2).  Twelve  of  these  had 
complement  fixation  titers  of  antigen  greater  than  or  equal  to  1:16 
and  required  no  concentration  for  typing.  The  other  two  sera  required 
concentration  with  lyphogel  before  clear  precipitin  spurs  indicating 
subtype  were  demonstrable.  All  sera  showed  the  presence  of  the  group 
reactive  a  antigen.  There  were  four  ay  subtypes,  all  of  which  were 
ayw.  Ad  subtypes  accounted  for  eight  of  the  remaining  ten;  two  were 
adw  and  four  wer i  adr.  In  one  case  a  third  antigen  beyond  ad  could 
not  be  determined.  On  repeated  testing,  two  antigens  appeared  to  have 
four  determinants.  In  both  instances  the  a  and  the  w  component  were 
clearly  defined.  However,  the  d  and  the  y  determinants,  which  previ¬ 
ously  had  been  thought  to  be  mutually  exclusive,  were  both  present. 
Selective  adsorption  of  these  sera  with  antibody  containing  one  of 
these  determinants  appeared  to  absorb  out  the  other  indicating  that 
both  determinants  were  present  on  the  same  particle. 

Sera  from  three  groups  of  men  were  sampled  for  the  presence  of 
HB-Ag.  The  cohort  entering  the  tropics  for  an  initial  tour  showed 
a  prevalence  of  antigen  which  was  high  but  within  the  range  found  in 
populations  in  the  United  States.  Those  leaving  the  tropics  showed 
no  increase  in  the  percentage  of  men  carrying  HB-Ag  despite  consid¬ 
erable  mixing  with  the  local  population.  The  degree  of  mixing  can 
be  partially  estimated  on  the  basis  of  a  venereal  disease  incidence 
of  202  among  these  men  during  their  tours.  The  cohort  returning  to 
the  tropics  for  subsequent  service  showed  a  prevalence  of  HB-Ag  six 
times  that  of  those  entering  the  tropics  for  their  initial  tour. 

The  reason  for  this  markedly  increased  prevalence  of  antigen  carriers 
is  unknown. 

Subtyping  of  the  detected  antigens  showed  no  predominance  of  any 
one  subtype  in  any  of  the  three  groups  of  men  (see  Table  2).  Adw 


782 


Table  1.  Prevalence  of  Hepatitis  B  Antigen  among  US  Military 
Personnel  In  the  Republic  of  Vietnam 


#  Tested 

#  Positive 

%  Posit4’" 

Inprocesslng 

Initial  Tour 

S  1004 

4 

■ 

Subsequent  Tour 

289 

7 

Total  Inprocesslng 

1293 

11 

0.85% 

Out  Processing 

1072 

5 

0.47% 

Total  Tested 

2365 

i 

16 

0.68% 

78.3 


'>27 ■  H2*»  O  74  7 


— , 


1 


Table  2.  Hepatitis  B  Antigen  Positive  Subjects  among  U.S.  Military  Personnel  in  the 

Republic  of  Vietnam 


1 

Inprocessing 

Out  Processing 

_ 

Initial  Tour 

1 

Subsequi 

5nt  Tour 

20 

20 

25 

25 

31 

29 

22 

25 

38 

21 

23 

20 

26 

30 

21 

21 

E3 

E2 

SSG 

E3 

E6 

E6 

E6 

E6 

E6 

E5 

E6 

E4 

E5 

E5 

E5 

E4 

- 

adw 

adw 

adr 

ad  (?) 

i 

a  dr 

adr 

ayw 

ayw 

ayw 

adyw 

i 

i 

adr 

i 

ii 

ayw 

- 

adyw 

_ 

ad 

and  adr  were  both  found  In  men  entering  Vietnam  for  the  first  time. 
Ayw  was  found  In  those  subjects  returning  for  a  subsequent  tour  as 
well  as  those  leaving  the  tropics.  This  may  Indicate  that  they  had 
acquired  their  antigen  In  the  United  States  as  ayw  Is  a  rare  subtype 
In  Southeast  Aslan  populations.  It  Is  of  Interest  that  both  of  the 
adyw  subtypes  reported  above  were  found  following  Southeast  Aslan 
tours.  Further  Investigation  of  these  antigens  Is  underway. 

5.  Subtypina  of  Hepatitis  B  Antigens  In  Indigenous  and  Foreign 
Populations  in  Southeast  Asia. 

The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  develop  the  capability  of 
subtyping  hepatitis  B  antigen  (HB-Ag)  by  the  agar  gel  diffusion  and 
other  methods,  and  to  use  these  methods  to  Investigate  the  subtypes 
of  HB-Ag  found  In  Southeast  Asia  in  both  indigenous  and  foreign 
populations. 

The  heterogeneity  of  HB-Ag  was  origiiially  described  by  Blumberg 
and  associates  and  has  been  further  investigated  by  Le  Bouvier  and 
Bancroft,  et  al ,  among  others.  This  antigenic  heterogeneity  has  been 
investigated  using  the  Ouchterlony  agar  gel  diffusion  technique. 
Essentially,  three  major  sets  of  antigenic  determinants  have  been 
described.  The  first  is  a  single  determinant,  "a,"  which  appears  to 
be  common  to  all  antigens.  The  second  is  one  of  a  pair  of  determi¬ 
nants  y  or  d  which  have  been  considered  to  be  mutually  exclusive 
alleles,  and  the  third  also  contained  one  of  a  pair  of  mutually 
exclusive  alleles  which  have  been  labelled  w  and  r.  Thus  antigens 
described  by  these  means  are  ayw,  adw,  adr  and  most  recently  ayr. 

Observations  as  to  distribution  have  shown  geographical  areas  of 
prevalence  of  these  subtypes.  In  the  Far  East  ad  has  predominated 
and  adr  has  been  the  major  subtype  detected.  Recent  investigation 
has  also  demonstrated  the  ayr  subtype  in  samples  originating  from 
the  Far  East  and  it  has  been  suggested  that  this  subtype  might  emerge 
through  mutation  or  recombination  of  separately  infecting  viral 
genomes.  The  unique  opportunity  in  Thailand  of  studying  both  indi¬ 
genous  and  foreign  populations  and  the  admixture  of  these  two  led  to 
an  effort  to  perfect  methods  of  subtyping  hepatitis  B  antigen  in 
Thailand. 

Sera:  Over  the  past  several  years  serum  samples  have  been  acquired 
from  a  number  of  different  U.S.  and  Thai  groups  for  both  point 
prevalence  studies  of  HB-Ag  in  populations  and  for  identification 
of  HB-Ag  positive  hepatitis.  These  samples  have  been  tested  for 
HB-Ag  by  several  different  methods  (see  elsewhere  in  this  report)  and 
those  that  were  found  to  be  positive  were  submitted  for  subtyping  by 
the  agar  gel  diffusion  method. 


Immunodiffusion  Test:  Alcohol-cleaned  1  x  3  inch  microscope  slides 

785 


1 


were  flooded  with  3.0  ml  of  hot  0.8%  agarose  (Seakem)  in  0.01  M  trls 
EDTA  buffer,  pH  7.6.  The  agarose  was  allowed  to  solidify  and  then  a 
pair  of  7-well  patterns  were  punched  Into  It,  forming  wells  which 
were  2  millimeters  In  diameter  and  5  millimeters  apart  arranged  in  a 
hexagonal  pattern  around  the  central  seventh  well.  The  slides  were 
stored  in  a  moist  chamber  until  used. 

Sera  to  be  tested  were  concentrated  with  Lyphogel.  Concentration 
from  five  to  ten  fold  was  accomplished  by  placing  0.3  ml  of  serum  in 
a  tube  with  two  granules  of  Lyphogel  and  incubating  at  room  tempera¬ 
ture  for  two  hours.  Concentration  was  helpful  for  serum  in  which 
antigen  titered  <1:16  by  complement  fixation.  Reference  antisera  adw 
and  adr  were  obtained  from  blood  donors  at  the  Phra  Mongkut  Klao  Hospi¬ 
tal  in  Bangkok.  Reference  antigen  ayw  and  rabbit  antisera  against  all 
three  subtypes  were  kindly  provided  by  LTC  William  H.  Bancroft  of  the 
Department  of  Virus  Diseases,  Walter  Reed  Amy  Institute  of  Research. 
The  sera  were  arranged  on  the  slides  placing  each  unknown  serum  next 
to  a  reference  antigen  so  that  lines  of  identity  or  partial  identity 
could  be  easily  detected.  One  of  the  antisera  was  placed  in  the 
central  well. 

Slides  were  incubated  in  a  moist  chamber  at  37°C  for  24  hours  and 
then  at  21°C  for  a  further  48  hours  or  more.  Slides  were  read  at  24 
hour  intervals.  Results  were  read  as  complete  identity  when  test  sera 
and  reference  antigen  produced  precipitation  lines  which  fused  without 
spurs.  The  presence  of  spurs  was  read  as  partial  identity. 

Table  1  shows  the  results  of  subtyping  of  antigens  found  in 
both  American  and  Thai  populations.  Out  of  a  total  of  198  antigens 
detected  in  all  groups,  subtyping  was  possible  in  109  or  55%.  In  14 
of  these  (13%)  only  a  and  d  determinants  could  be  detected;  w  and  r 
determinants  could  not  be  defined.  In  93,  however,  three  sets  of 
determinants  were  identified.  Among  these,  ayw  made  up  23%,  adw  made 
up  10%  and  adr  made  up  67%.  No  ayr  subtypes  were  found  among  American 
or  Thai  sera  in  this  study.  On  repeated  testing,  two  antigens  from 
the  U.S.  troops  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  appeared  to  have  four 
determinants.  They  clearly  contained  the  common  "a"  determinant  and 
the  "w"  determinant.  The  d  and  the  y  determinant,  which  previously 
had  been  thought  to  be  mutually  exclusive,  were  both  present  (see 
elsewhere  in  this  report). 

These  data  can  be  analyzed  in  two  ways.  First,  subtypes  obtained 
from  hepatitis  patients  may  be  compared  with  subtypes  obtained  from 
carriers  detected  on  point  prevalence  studies.  It  is  of  note  that  the 
percentage  of  subtypeable  antigens  in  those  subjects  with  hepatitis  was 
much  lower  than  those  detected  in  point  prevalence  studies.  This  re¬ 
flects  largely  the  titer  of  the  antigen  in  the  serum,  which  is 
generally  higher  in  carriers  than  in  individuals  suffering  from 
disease. 

786 


i 

L 


Table  1  HB-Ag  Subtypes  if  Thai  and  American  Populations  in  Southeast  Asia 


Population 

Number 

Studied 

With 

Typable 

Antigens 

With 

ADR 

With 

AD'V 

With 

AYW 

Thai  lowef 

socioeconomic  Group 

687 

** 

40(73) 

*** 

502) 

0 

3(0.8) 

Thai  Blood  Donors 

100 

8(8) 

8(100) 

8(100) 

0 

0 

0 

Thai  Adult  Hepatitis 

113 

40 

51(45) 

**** 

11(28) 

11(100) 

0 

0 

m 

Thai  Total 

■ 

114(13) 

59(52) 

51(86) 

5(8) 

0 

3(5) 

US  Troop  in  VN 

16(0.6) 

16(88) 

4(28) 

2(14) 

4(28) 

2(14) 

2(14) 

US  Hepatitis 

174 

68(39) 

36(53) 

7(19) 

2(6) 

18(5  1) 

9(25) 

Total  US 

2539 

84(33) 

50(60) 

11(22) 

4(8) 

22(44) 

l3(2t>) 

Grand  Total 

3439 

198(6) 

1 09  (S  5) 

eatssssssaa 

62(57) 

9(8) 

22(20) 

l33JtaS32«S 

14(13) 

2(2) 

*  IEOP  positive  ***  Number  of  subtype  {%  of  total  subtyped) 

**  Number  subtyped  {%  of  total  positive)  ****  were  submitted  to  subtype 
*****  a(jyw 


787 


Second,  a  comparison  cf  subtypes  obtained  from  Thai  and  Americans 
may  be  made.  The  total  number  of  Thai  subjects  studied  was  900  of 
which  114  or  13%  were  positive  by  IEOP.  Of  these,  subtypes  were 
Identified  in  59  or  57*' ,  and  In  all  of  these  the  subtype  was  ad.  In 
3  of  these  or  5%  no  fur  ;her  determinants  could  be  detected,  however, 

51  or  86%  of  the  subtyj  ible  antigens  were  adr  and  5  or  8%  were  adw. 
There  were  no  ayw  subt.y,ies  found  among  the  Thai  population  studied, 
confirming  the  observations  of  Bancroft,  et  al ,  on  smaller  numbers 
of  sera  of  a  predominate  of  adr  in  Thailand.  The  adw  subtypes  were 
found  in  the  point  prevt’len'.e  study  of  a  lower  socioeconomic  Bangkok 
subdivision  (see  Annual  Report,  1971-1972,  pp.  129-139)  and  were  found 
in  three  families,  two  in  cmc'  of  two  families,  and  one  in  a  third 
family.  In  three  addi  i  I  rrriers  in  these  families  subtyping  was 
not  accomplished.  All  in  the  carriers  in  these  three  families  in  which 
subtypes  could  be  iden  f  .  ..ere  adw.  This  finding  tends  to  support 
either  intrafamil ial  spread  of  hepatitis  B  antigen  or  a  genetic  predis¬ 
position  of  families  to  certain  subtypes. 

The  exclusive  subtype  detected  among  Thai  adult  populations  with 
HB-Ag  antigen  positive  hepatitis  presenting  at  Phra  Mongkut  Klao  Army 
Hospital  was  adr.  Among  this  group  of  113  individuals,  hepatitis,  b 
both  positive  and  negative  for  HB-Ag,  occurs  2-4  times  as  conmonly  in 
the  decade  between  20-30  as  in  any  other  age  group  (Annual  Report, 
1971-1972,  pp.  117-120).  This  suggests  that  further  investigation 
might  show  considerable  cross-infection  with  hepatitis  among  Thai 
military  personnel  similar  to  that  seen  with  adenovirus  respiratory 
disease  in  United  States  military  recruits. 

In  the  American  groups  on  the  other  hand,  2539  individuals  were 
studied  of  which  84  or  3%  were  positive  by  IEOP  for  antigens  and  59% 
of  these  or  50  were  subtypable.  The  point  prevalence  study  of  HB-Ag 
in  United  States  military  personnel  in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  has 
been  reported  elsewhere  in  this  report.  Little  can  be  determined 
from  the  distribution  of  subtypes  in  this  population  because  of  the 
small  number  of  carriers  detected  and  the  varied  background  of  the 
men  sampled.  It  is  of  note,  however,  that  the  two  antigens  subtyped 
as  "adyw"  were  found  in  men  who  had  spent  at  least  one  year  in  the 
Republic  of  Vietnam. 

The  subtyping  of  antigens  obtained  from  Americans  with  hepatitis 
in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  is  more  revealing.  36  or  53%  of  68 
antigens  positive  by  IEOP  were  subtypable.  Of  these,  18  or  50%  were 
ayw.  The  remaining  18  were  ad  with  7  adr,  2  adw  and  9  in  which  only 
"a"  and  "d"  could  be  detected.  Although  we  have  not  yet  investigated 
the  subtypes  found  among  the  Vietnamese  population,  it  is  highly 
probable  that,  like  the  Thais,  the  subtypes  are  predominantly  ad.  If 
this  assumption  is  correct,  the  high  proportion  of  ayw  subtypes  de¬ 
tected  in  HB-Ag  positive  disease  among  Americans  in  the  Republic  of 
Vietnam  would  indicate  considerable  cross- infection  among  American 

788 


military  populations  In  Vietnam  as  opposed  to  acquisition  of  antigen 
from  the  Indigenous  population.  Nine  of  the  antigens  Isolated  from 
these  American  hepatitis  cases  were  not  fully  typed.  Investigation  of 
these  specimens  Is  continuing  to  determine  whether  these  may  not  also 
show  adyw  or  adyr  subtypes. 

In  summary,  HB-Ag  subtyping  by  the  agar  gel  diffusion  method  has 
been  established  in  this  laboratory.  Results  of  early  testing  are 
shown  in  Table  1.  Further  investigations  of  Thai  and  American 
hepatitis  B  antigen  positive  subjects  may  shed  light  on  transmission 
of  hepatitis  among  military  populations  In  Southeast  Asia. 

G.  PROTEIN-CALCRIE  MALNUTRITION 


1.  Mechanisms  of  Defective  Delayed  Cutaneous  Hypersensitivity  in 
Children  with  Protein-Calorie  Nalnutrltion. 

Cell-mediated  immunity  (CMI)  plays  an  Important  role  In  determin¬ 
ing  the  outcome  of  Infections  characterized  by  intracellular  parasitism. 
Included  among  these  infections  are  tuberculosis,  moniliasis,  herpes 
simplex,  chicken  pox,  and  measles,  and  these  pathogens  may  produce 
unusually  severe  morbidity  and  mortality  in  malnourished  individuals. 
Several  investigators  have  recently  reported  defective  CMI  in  African 
and  Indian  children  with  protein-calorie  malnutrition  (PCM).  The 
possibility  thus  arises  that  a  defective  CMI  response  may  be  one 
immunological  mechanism  accounting  for  the  severity  of  these  selected 
infections. 

One  test  commonly  employed  for  assessing  cell-mediated  immunity  is 
the  delayed  cutaneous  hypersensitivity  (DCH)  reaction.  According  to 
current  immunological  concepts,  DCH  is  a  multistep  reaction  composed 
of  at  least  three  separate  components  (Figure  1).  The  sensitization 
(afferent)  limb  entails  immunization  of  thymic-derived  (T)  lymphocytes 
against  a  macrophage- processed  antigen.  The  recognition  (efferent) 
limb  is  characterized  by  lymphokine  production  by  sensitized  T-lympho- 
cytes  after  they  recognize  and  interact  with  the  antigen  deposited  in 
the  skin.  The  inflammatory  reaction,  probably  induced  by  lymphokines 
released  at  the  skin  site,  is  ultimately  read  as  a  positive  DCH  skin 
test.  An  intact  inflammatory  response  is  thus  required  for  full 
expression  of  DCH,  but  it  is  not  imnunologically  specific  in  that  many 
irritants  other  than  lymphokines  can  induce  it.  A  defect  in  any  one 
of  the  three  components  of  DCH  depicted  in  Figure  1  may  account  for 
the  impaired  skin  test  responses  previously  reported  in  PCM  patients. 

The  present  study  was  designed  to  elucidate  which  of  these  three 
mechanisms  was  impaired  in  children  with  PCM  and  to  measure  immuno¬ 
logical  recovery  during  hospitalization  and  treatment. 

Malnourished  Patients:  The  patients,  1  to  5  years  of  age,  were 

789 


admitted  to  the  research  ward  of  the  Anemia  and  Malnutrition  Research 
Center  In  Chlangmal,  Thailand,  where  they  remained  throughout  the  70- 
day  study  period.  On  admission  the  patients  were  diagnosed  as  having 
marasmus  (M),  marasmus-kwashlorkor  (M-K),  or  kwashiorkor  (K),  using  ' 
accepted  criteria.  Children  admitted  to  the  study  had  primary  malnu¬ 
trition  and  weighed  between  3.0  and  12.0  kg.  All  patients  were 
treated  for  fluid  and  electrolyte  Imbalance  during  the  first  seven 
hospital  days  and  received  supplemental  vitamins  and  minerals.  Virtu¬ 
ally  all  patients  on  admission  had  bacterial  infections  and  received 
appropriate  antibiotic  therapy  until  the  infections  cleared.  Children 
were  placed  on  gradually  increasing  calorie  and  protein  milk-base 
formula  diets,  to  a  maximum  intake  of  175  calories  -  4  gm  protein/kg/ 
day,  which  was  started  by  hospital  day  30  for  all  patients.  Nutri¬ 
tional  repair  was  judged  complete  when  the  clinical  stigmata  of  PCM 
had  disappeared,  and  the  abnormal  laboratory  tests,  such  as  low  serum 
albumin,  had  returned  to  normal  levels.  Virtually  all  patients  in 
this  study  had  clinically  recovered  by  4  to  8  weeks  after  admission. 

Dinitrofluorobenzene  Skin  Tests:  2,  4-dinitrofluorobenzene  (DNFB),  a 
potent  skin  irritant  and  contact  allergen,  was  diluted  in  90%  acetone. 
A  sensitizing  and  inflammatory  dose  of  2000  ug  was  applied  to  the 
forearm,  allowed  to  dry,  and  protected  for  24  hours  with  an  occlusive 
dressing.  At  48  hours,  the  degree  of  non-specific  inflammation  at 
the  DNFB  contact  site  was  graded  as  follows:  negative  =  no  reaction 
or  mild  induration  and/or  erythema;  positive  -  induration,  erythema, 
and  vesicle  or  bulla  formation. 

At  varying  time  intervals  from  14  to  70  days  after  application  of 
the  2000  ug  DNFB  sensitizing  dose,  DCH  responses  were  elicited  by 
applying  100  ug  DNFB  to  the  opposite  forearm.  The  degree  of  inflamma¬ 
tion  at  the  100  ug  test  dose  site  was  graded  48  hours  later.  Presence 
of  erythema,  induration  and  vesiculation  was  considered  skin  test 
positive.  No  reaction  or  presence  of  only  induration  and/or  erythema 
was  considered  skin  test  negative.  These  rigorous  criteria  for  a 
positive  skin  test  were  selected  in  order  to  minimize  possible  confu¬ 
sion  with  the  mild  non-specific  cutaneous  inflammatory  reactions 
occasionally  produced  by  100  ug  DNFB. 

Candida  albicans  Skin  Tests:  0.1  ml  of  a  1:100  dilution  of  Candida 
albicans  skin  test  antigen  (Hollister-Stier  Laboratories,  Spokane, 
Washington)  was  injected  intradermally  into  the  forearm.  Reactions 
measuring  greater  than  5  mm  induration  at  48  hours  were  considered 
positive. 

Lymphocyte  Counts:  Peripheral  blood  lymphocyte  counts,  performed  on 
the  first  25  patients  aomitted  to  the  study,  were  within  normal  limits. 

Cutaneous  Inflarrmatory  Response:  Patients,  presumed  not  to  be  immune 
to  DNFB,  were  exposed  to  a  2000  ug  dose  on  admission;  only  13%  had 


790 


responded  with  a  marked  Inflammatory  reaction  when  measured  two  days 
after  exposure  (Table  1). 

More  patients  had  an  Inflammatory  reaction  when  first  tested  on 
day  15  (during  clinical  recovery),  while  the  largest  percentage  res¬ 
ponded  on  day  56  (after  clinical  recovery).  The  difference  in  the 
percentage  of  positive  Inflammatory  responses  between  day  1  and  day  56 
Is  statistically  significant  (chi-square  ®  9.4,  P<  .01). 

Evaluation  of  the  Sensitization  Component:  We  Investigated  the  status 
of  the  sensitization  component  of  tne  DCH  reaction  by  attempting  to 
sensitize  three  groups  of  patients  against  2000  /ig  DNFB.  These 
patients,  exposed  to  DNFB  for  the  first  time  either  on  day  1,  15,  or 
56,  were  all  skin  tested  for  possible  sensitization  on  day  70.  The 
results  are  shown  in  Table  2.  The  difference  between  the  low  propor¬ 
tion  of  patients  sensitized  on  day  1  and  the  high  proportion  sensitized 
on  day  56  was  statistically  significant  (chi-square  =  4.7,  P< .05) . 

The  data  also  suggest  that  the  impaired  sensitizing  component  appar¬ 
ently  existing  on  day  1  may  not  be  repaired  until  after  day  15.  It 
was  of  interest  to  examine  the  relationship  existing  between  DNFB 
inflammation  and  subsequent  sensitization.  Accordingly,  these  two 
reactions  were  examined  in  each  of  the  23  patients  listed  in  Table  2, 
and  the  comparisons  are  shown  in  Table  3.  Of  the  10  patients  who  were 
inflammation  positive,  7  were  subsequently  found  to  have  been  sensi¬ 
tized.  A  similar  direct  association  exists  for  the  negative  reactors, 
so  that  of  the  13  inflammatory  negative  patients,  10  failed  to  be 
sensitized.  However,  the  numbers  of  patients  in  each  group  are  small 
and  the  differences  do  not  reach  statistical  significance  (chi-square  * 
3.27,  .05<  P<  .10). 

Evaluation  of  Immunological  Recall:  Recall  in  DCH  is  a  response 
characterized  by  recognition  and  interaction  of  sensitized  lymphocytes 
with  specific  intracutaneous  antigen  which  leads  to  inflammation  at 
the  skin  site  (Fig.  1).  Recall  was  tested  with  Candida  albicans  skin 
test  antigen.  We  assumed  most  patients  had  been  naturally  immunized 
against  Candida  prior  to  their  illness.  This  assumption  is  based  on 
the  observation  that  70%  of  well-nourished  Thai  children  over  the  age 
of  1  year  are  Candida  skin  test  positive. 

Only  14%  of  PCM  children  were  Candida  skin  test  positive  on 
admission  (Table  4).  Skin  test  negative  patients  were  retested  on 
day  29  and  70  and  an  increasing  percentage  had  converted  to  positive 
on  these  two  days.  Repeated  skin  tests  with  Candida  antigen  did  not 
induce  DCH  to  Candida  in  seven  well -nourished  skin  test  negative 
children,  thus  indicating  that  the  increasing  number  of  positive  skin 
tests  during  hospitalization  was  not  simply  due  to  immunization  by 
skin  test  antigen.  The  differences  in  numbers  of  skin  test  positive 
responders  on  days  29  and  70  compared  to  day  1  was  statistically 
significant  (McNemar  test  corrected  for  continuity;  chi-square  =  9.1, 
P<.  .01  for  day  70).  7qi 


1 


Table  1,  Cutaneous  Inflammatory  Response  to  2000  pg 
Dinitrofluorobenzene 


Day 

Tested 

1 

No.  of 
Patients 

Skin  Res  Don  se 

Positive 

Negative 

Percent  Positive 

1 

30 

4 

26 

13% 

15 

5 

3 

2 

60% 

56 

8 

6 

2 

75% 

1 

Table  2.  Attempt  to  Sensitize  PCM  Patients  against  2000  pg 
Dinitrofluorobenzene 


Day  Sensitizing 
Dose  Applied 

No.  of 
Patients 

s: 

kin  Test  Response* 

Positive 

Negative 

Percent  Positive 

1 

10 

2 

8 

20% 

15 

5 

1 

4 

20% 

56 

8 

7 

1 

88% 

*  Skin  test  dose  of  100  pg  DNFB  applied  on  day  70  and  read  on 
day  72 . 


792 


d 


Table  3.  Correlation  of  Cutaneous  Inflammation  and  Sensitization 
by  2000  pg  Dlnltrofluorobenzene 


Sensitized  * 

Number  of  Patients  Who  Were  Inflammation* 

Positive 

Negative 

Yes 

7 

3 

No 

3 

10 

*  DNFB  skin  test  either  positive  or  negative  on  day 
70. 

+  Inflammatory  response  graded  2  days  after 

application  of  2000  yg  DNFB  on  hospital  day 
1,  15,  or  56. 


Table  4.  Candida  albicans  Skin  Test  Recall  Response 


Day  Tested 

Number  of 
Patients 

Skin  Test  ResDonse* 

Accumulated 
Percent  Positive 

Positive 

Negative 

1 

14 

2 

12 

14% 

29 

12 

8 

4 

72% 

70 

4 

3 

1 

92% 

* 


Skin  tests  read  2  days  after  0.1  ml  1:100  antigen  injected 
intradermally  positive  =  >5  mm  induration)  , 


793 


SENSITIZATION 


non-immune 


<K> 

immune 


Figure  1.  Schematic  Drawing  of  Components  of  Delayed  Cutaneous  Hypersensitivity 


4 


794 


We  attempted  to  evaluate  the  three  principal  components  of  the 
delayed  cutaneous  hypersensitivity  (DCH)  response  In  children  hospital¬ 
ized  with  protein-calorie  malnutrition.  The  lymphocyte  sensitization 
component  (afferent  limb)  and  the  cutaneous  Inflammatory  reaction  were 
evaluated  with  the  contact  allergen  and  skin  irritant,  dlnitrofluoro- 
benzene  (DNFB);  the  immune  lymphocyte  recognition  component  (efferent 
limb)  was  tested  with  Candida  albicans  skin  test  antigen.  The  results 
indicated  that  60  to  80*  of  PCM  patients  on  admission  had  malfunction 
of  both  their  afferent  limb  and  their  cutaneous  Inflammatory  response. 
Two  patients  with  intact  inflammatory  responses  to  DNFB  on  admission, 
but  with  negative  Candida  skin  tests,  later  displayed  positive  Candida 
skin  tests,  suggesting  that  the  efferent  limb  was  defective  on 
admission.  Except  for  these  two  patients,  the  impaired  inflammatory 
reaction  precluded  independent  evaluation  of  the  efferent  limb  In  vivo. 
The  DCH  components  were  intact  in  most  patients  after  nutritional" 
repair,  1  to  2  months  later. 

2.  Complement  and  C.B  Proactivator  Levels  in  Children  with  Protein- 
Calorie  Malnutrition  and  the  Effect  of  Dietary  Treatment!" 

It  is  generally  stated  that  malnutrition  is  associated  with 
increased  susceptibility  to  infection  and  that,  in  malnourished 
individuals,  the  infection  is  often  more  severe  and  recovery  is  slower 
than  in  well -nourished  persons.  Although  association  between  protein- 
calorie  malnutrition  (PCM)  and  the  increased  susceptibility  to 
infection  has  never  been  adequately  proven  by  carefully  controlled 
clinical  studies,  the  weight  of  clinical  experience  by  many  investi¬ 
gators  suggests  that  such  a  relationship  does  indeed  exist.  On  the 
other  hand,  slow  recovery  from  infection  in  PCM  has  been  adequately 
documented,  especially  in  experimental  animals.  It  is  difficult  to 
design  and  control  experiments  in  humans  showing  that  malnourished 
individuals  are  more  susceptible  to  infection;  one  can,  however,  look 
for  changes  in  components  known  to  be  associated  with  defense 
mechanisms  against  infection,  e.g.,  cell-mediated  immune  function, 
antibody  and  inflammatory  responses,  phagocytic  and  microbicidal 
activities  of  leukocytes,  and  the  complement  system. 

The  effect  of  PCM  on  the  humoral  immune  response  has  been  exten¬ 
sively  investigated;  the  results  are,  however,  inconclusive.  While 
antibody  response  to  some  antigens  was  markedly  depressed  in  PCM, 
the  response  to  most  antigens  was  unaffected.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
cell-mediated  immune  function  in  a  malnourished  population  is  depressed 
somewhat.  The  hemolytic  complement  activity  of  the  serum  from 
malnourished  children  is  also  less  than  that  of  the  well-fed  children. 
Because  a  defect  of  the  complement  system  is  known  to  be  associated 
with  increased  susceptibility  to  infection  and  malnourished  children 
are  prone  to  develop  a  gram-negative  septicemia,  impairment  of  the 
complement  system  in  these  children  might  be  expected.  The  present 
study  was  therefore  designed  to  examine  the  effect  of  protein-calorie 

795 


malnutrition  on  both  the  classical  complement  system  and  the  newly 
discovered  alternate  C3-act1vat1ng  system.  The  serum  levels  of  Indi¬ 
vidual  complement  proteins,  Including  Clq,  Cls,  C3,  C4,  C5,  C6,  C8  and 
C9,  and  of  C3- proactivator  (C3PA)  of  children  with  kwashiorkor  and 
marasmus  were  determined  on  hospital  admission  and  at  Intervals  there¬ 
after  during  dietary  treatment.  The  results  showed  that,  although  the 
admission  levels  of  these  complement  components  and  of  C3PA  were 
significantly  lower  than  those  of  well -nourished  children  of  the  same 
age,  most  components  rose  to  "normal"  levels  after  appropriate  dietary 
treatment. 

Patients:  The  patients,  age  1  to  5  years,  were  admitted  to  the 
research  ward  of  the  Anemia  and  Malnutrition  Research  Center  in 
Chlangmal,  Thailand,  and  remained  in  the  hospital  throughout  the  study 
period.  On  admission,  the  patients  were  clinically  evaluated  and 
classified  as  having  marasmus  or  kwashiorkor  according  to  the  clinical 
criteria.  Only  children  with  primary  malnutrition  who  weighed  more 
than  3  kilograms  but  less  than  12  kilograms  were  admitted  to  the  study. 
AM  patients  were  evaluated  on  admission  for  evidence  of  infection, 
using  clinical  impression  and  the  results  of  differential  leukocyte 
counts,  chest  x-ray,  and  blood,  urine  and  stool  cultures.  By  these 
criteria,  a  majority  of  the  20  malnourished  patients  available  for  the 
present  study  were  considered  to  be  infected  on  admission.  Those  who 
were  infected  were  placed  on  broad  spectrum  antibiotic  therapy  which 
included  one  or  more  of  the  following  antibiotics  depending  on  the  site 
of  infection:  ampicil  1  in,  methicillin,  gentamycin  and  cephalothin. 

The  patient's  71-day  hospital  course  was  divided  into  three  main 
periods.  During  the  stabilization  period  (days  1-7),  all  patients  were 
given  a  gradually  increasing  caloric  intake,  from  25  calories-  1  g 
protein  per  kilogram  per  day  at  day  1  to  100  calories-1  g  protein  per 
kilogram  per  day  at  day  7.  The  stabilization  period  was  followed  by  a 
3-week  study  period  (days  8-29)  when  the  patients  were  randomly 
assigned  to  1  of  4  dietary  treatment  schemes  (Table  1).  All  patients 
again  received  the  same  diet  (175  calories-4  g  protein  per  kilogram  per 
day)  after  hospital  day  29.  In  addition  to  the  above  milk-base  formula 
diets,  a  complete  vitamin  and  mineral  supplement  was  given  starting  on 
day  2. 

Collections  of  specimens:  Blood  was  collected  on  days  1,  8,  29,  and 
?l(venipuncture)and  allowed  to  clot  at  room  temperature.  Serum  was 
collected  and  immediately  frozen  at  -20°C  for  a  period  of  up  to  three 
months  before  analysis.  In  some  cases,  only  plasma  was  available. 
Because  both  serum  and  plasma  give  identical  results  in  the  analysis 
for  the  complement  and  the  C3PA  levels  by  radial  immunodiffusion,  for 
ease  of  communication,  they  are  referred  to  as  serum  throughout  the 
remainder  of  this  report. 


796 


Quantitative  determination  of  Individual  coiwlementprote1nsandC3- 
proactivator;  the  concentrations  of  Clq,  Cls,  C3,  C4,  C5,  C6,  C8, 

C9,  and  C3PA  were  measured  by  the  radial  irrciiunodif fusion  technique 
using  Immunoplates  containing  antiserum  specific  for  Individual 
complement  components  and  for  C3PA.  The  Immunoplates  and  the  reference 
standards  were  kindly  suppled  by  Dr.  H.  J.  Muller-Eberhard  (Scrlpps 
Clinic  and  Research  Foundation,  La  Jolla,  California,  U.S. A.).  Seven 
microliters  of  reference  standards  and  test  specimens,  appropriately 
diluted  in  a  pH  8.0  Isotonic  buffer  that  contained  0.1M  sodium  chloride, 
0.03M  potassium  phosphate,  and  0.01  M  tri sodium  ethyl enedl ami netra- 
acetate,  were  placed  in  the  antigen  wells.  The  plates  were  incubated 
at  room  temperature  for  48-72  hours,  and  the  precipitin  rings  were 
measured  directly  with  a  calibrated  magnifier  instead  of  from  photo¬ 
graphs  as  originally  described.  The  reproducibility  of  the  technique, 
as  performed  in  this  laboratory,  was  between  15  and  20%.  All  specimens 
were  provided  in  coded  form.  The  values  reported  for  each  specimen 
were  the  average  of  values  determined  at  two  different  sirum  dilutions. 

Complement  and  C3-proactivator  levels  in  malnourished  children:  As 
shown  in  Figure  1 ,  the  mean  concentrations  of  7  of  the  8  complement 
proteins  (C4  excepted)  and  of  C3PA  in  the  serum  obtained  on  day  1  from 
10  marasmic  and  10  kwashiorkor  children  were  significantly  lower  than 
the  means  of  samples  from  19  normal  children  of  similar  age  residing  in 
the  same  area  (P  less  than  0.05).  The  mean  concentration  of  C*  was 
less  than  that  of  controls,  but  the  difference  was  not  statistically 
significant  (P  greater  than  0.05).  The  8  complement  proteins  did  not 
appreciably  increase  during  the  initial  8  day  stabilization  period. 
However,  on  day  29,  a  marked  increase  in  the  level  of  all  components 
except  C9  was  observed.  The  levels  of  Clq,  Cls,  C3,  C4  and  C5  reached 
maxima  on  days  29  or  71  which  were  significantly  higher  than  the  normal 
mean.  It  appeared  that  the  relative  rise  in  concentrations  of  the 
late-acting  components,  i.e.,  C5,  C6,  C8  and  C9,  was  not  as  dramatic 
as  that  r»\e  the  early-acting  components,  particularly  C3  and  Cls.  The 
level  of  C9  did  not  return  to  normal  during  the  71 -day  period.  The 
concentration  of  C3PA  reached  normal  levels  by  day  29.  The  composite 
results  shown  in  Figure  1  were  next  analyzed  according  to  clinical 
groups  and  to  the  types  of  dietary  treatment. 

Comparison  of  complement  and  C3  proactivator  levels  in  marasmic  and 
kwashiorkor  children:  The  admission  levels  of  7  of  the  8  complement 
pro te i ns  ( C4  excepted )  and  of  C3PA  in  the  10  children  with  kwashiorkor 
were  lower  than  the  corresponding  levels  of  the  10  marasmic  children 
of  the  same  age  (Figure  2).  The  differences  between  the  two  groups 
were  statistically  significant  at  the  5 %  level  only  for  Clq,  C6,  and 
C8.  Of  the  9  proteins  analyzed,  only  the  concentrations  of  C5,  C6  and 
C3PA  from  the  marasmic  group  were  significantly  lower  than  the  "normal" 
controls  (P  less  than  0.05),  suggesting  that  malnourished  children  of 
the  marasmic  type  were  less  severely  affected  by  PCM.  However,  by 
day  8  the  complement  and  the  C3PA  levels  were  similar  in  both  clinical 

797 


groups  and  remained  so  throughout  the  study. 


Effects  of  dietary  treatment  on  the  recover  of  complement  and  of  C3 
proactivator  levels"  because  preliminary  analysis  of  the  data 
discussed  above  Indicated  that  the  children  with  marasmus  and  kwashior¬ 
kor  responded  similarly  to  dietary  treatment,  the  data  from  these  two 
groups  were  combined  for  analysis  of  the  effects  of  the  different 
dietary  treatments.  The  20  children  were  divided  into  four  dietary 
groups  as  shown  in  Table  1. 

The  quantity  of  dietary  protein  markedly  influenced  the  levels  of 
complement  proteins  and  C3PA  (Figure  3).  The  concentrations  of  the 
complement  proteins  and  C3PA  of  the  high  and  low  protein  dietary  groups 
were  both  low  before  institution  of  special  dietary  treatment  on  day  8. 
The  stimulating  effect  of  higher  protein  intake  was  apparent  on  day  29, 
three  weeks  after  the  start  of  the  treatment  diets;  the  children  who 
received  4  g  of  protein  per  kilogram  per  day  (group  4)  had  reached 
normal  or  above  normal  complement  levels,  whereas  the  children  who 
received  1  g  of  protein  per  kilogram  per  day  (group  3)  had  not  only 
failed  to  increase  their  complement  levels,  but  also  suffered  a  further 
reduction  of  some  components.  Forty-one  days  after  their  diet  was 
changed  from  1  g  to  4  g  of  protein  per  kilogram  per  day,  the  low  pro¬ 
tein  group  showed  significant  improvement  in  the  complement  levels 
(day  71).  As  shown  in  Figure  3,  the  concentrations  of  the  seven 
complement  proteins  (C4  excepted)  and  of  C3PA  of  both  dietary  groups 
we  re  indistinguishable  on  day  71. 

The  effect  of  caloric  intake  on  the  recovery  of  the  complement  and 
C3PA  levels  was  not  as  dramatic  as  that  for  protein  (Figure  4). 

Although  the  number  of  cases  was  small,  the  children  who  received  the 
high  caloric  diet  (group  4)  tended  to  respond  better  than  those  on  t!ie 
low  caloric  diet  (group  2). 

Because  only  two  children  comprised  diet  group  1,  the  changes  after 
dietary  treatment  may  not  be  representative  of  the  group.  It  appeared 
however,  that  some  improvement- of  the  complement  levels  were  achieved 
on  a  diet  of  100  calories-1  g  protein  per  kilogram  per  day.  The 
recovery  seemed  to  be  slower  and  less  complete  than  in  the  other  groups. 

Effect  of  infection  on  the  complement  profile  in  PCM  children:  Serum 
samples  taken  from  two  infected,  malnourished  children  a  few  days 
before  or  on  the  day  of  death  showed  the  complement  and  the  C3PA  levels 
to  be  markedly  depressed  (Table  2).  All  complement  components  and  C3PA 
were  noticeably  lower  than  those  from  PCM  children  who  recovered. 

Many  components,  in  fact,  dropped  below  the  lower  limits  of  sensitivity 
of  the  detection  method. 

Summary:  The  serum  levels  of  complement  proteins  (Clq,  Cls,  C3,  C4, 

798 


Mm** 


Table  2.  Complement  and  C3PA  levels  In  malnourished  children  who  died 


800 


subjects  who 


p%tm\ 


pg  /ml 


ADMISSION  SERUM  COMPLEMENT  LEVELS  IN  MARASMUS 
AND  KWASHIORKOR  CHILDREN 


Cl  q  CIs  C3  C4  C5  C6  C8  C9  C3PA 
COMPLEMENT  COMPONENT 


Figure  2.  Mean  Admission  Concentrations  of  Complement  Proteins  in 
10  Children  with  Kwashiorkor  and  Marasmus 


802 


_  Mton  Volut  from  19  Norm«l  CMIdrtfi 
•  0ro«#4(lT9e«l -4f  /  hf/doy )  • 

■  Gcouf3( ITS©*  -  If  *©♦•»« /*f 


figure  3.  Effect  of  Amount  of  Dietary  Protein  on  Serum  Complement  Protein  Concentration 


nsm 


soo 


\oo 


Moon  Voluo  From  It  Nor  mol  Children 
>•  Group  4  ( 175  col.  -  4  9  protein/ kg /doy )  •  Potlonte 
4  Group  2  (IOO  col.  -4g  protoln/kg/doy )  4Patlont$ 


Figure  4.  Effect  of  Caloric  Intake  on  Recovery  of  Complement 
Protein  Levels 


Ntww 


C5,  C6,  C8  and  C9)  and  of  C3  proactivator  in  20  children  with  protein- 
calorie  malnutrition  were  compared  with  those  of  "normal"  children  of 
thi  same  age  residing  in  the  same  geographical  area.  These  components 
were  determined  on  admission  and  at  intervals  during  different  dietary 
treatment  regimens.  All  components,  except  C4,  were  markedly  lower  in 
the  malnourished  children  on  admission  than  in  the  "normal"  children, 
and  the  children  with  kwashiorkor  were  more  severely  affected  than  the 
children  with  marasmus.  The  quantity  of  dietary  protein,  and  to  a 
lesser  extent  the  caloric  intake,  had  a  marked  influence  on  the  repair 
of  the  complement  system. 

3 .  Complement  Activity  in  Protein-Calorie  Malnutrition. 

Several  defective  host  defense  mechanisms  have  been  implicated  by 
us  and  others  as  increasing  the  susceptibility  of  children  with 
protein-calorie  malnutrition  (PCM)  to  infection.  Recent  studies 
described  elsewhere  in  this  Annual  Report  have  indicated  that  comple¬ 
ment  protein  concentrations  are  abnormally  low  in  untreated  PCM.  In 
an  effort  to  further  evaluate  the  competence  of  the  complement  system, 
28  children  with  PCM  were  evaluated  for  serum  hemolytic  complement 
(CHcq)  activity  and  for  anti-complementary  (AC)  activity  during  the 
acute  phase  of  the  disease  and  throughout  recovery. 

Children  were  studied  on  admission  and  on  hospital  days  2,  4,  8, 
29,  71,  and  84  for  CHg«  and  AC  activity.  CHcq  was  measured  using 
standard  methods.  AC3 activity  was  measured  By  mixing  equal  volumes  of 
unheated  patients'  ser.m  with  standard  serum  of  known  CHcq  titer.  The 
CH50  activity  of  the  mixed  serums  was  then  determined.  Dilution 
controls  were  also  run.  The  sera  of  48  w^l- nourished  Thai  children 
mixed  with  a  standard  serum  always  resulted  in  a  titer  of  480  units/ml 
or  more.  If  a  serum  (PCM)  reduced  the  standard  serum  CH5Q  activity 
to  below  480  units/ml  after  mixing  the  PCM  serum  was  considered  to 
contain  AC  activity.  The  48  normal  Thai  children  all  had  serum  CHCq 
titers  greater  than  160  units/ml.  Thus  a  CHcq  titer  was  considered 
abnormally  low  in  PCM  if  it  measured  less  than  160  units  per  ml. 

Serum  CHcq  activity  was  depressed  in  60%  of  children  with  PCM  on 
hospital  admission  (Figure  1).  After  nutritional  repair  there  were 
fewer  patients  with  depressed  CHcq  activity.  Anticomplementary 
activity  was  present  during  the  first  week  after  admission  in  the 
plasma  of  50%  of  children  studied  (Figure  1).  After  nutritional 
repair  the  number  of  patients  showing  AC  activity  decreased  or  disap¬ 
peared.  The  patient  group  which  received  4  gms  of  protein/kg/day 
appeared  to  have  more  rapid  regeneration  of  CHcq  activity  than  the 
group  receiving  1  gm  of  protein/kg/day. 

The  low  complement  functional  activity  may  reflect  the  low  comple¬ 
ment  protein  concentrations  found  in  PCM.  Like  complement  protein 


805 


Q31S31  SiN3liVd  JO  lN33U3d 


806 


concentrations,  the  low  hemolytic  complement  activity  responds  better 
to  a  high  protein  than  to  a  low  protein  diet.  Depressed  CHcg  activity 
may  be  In  part  due  to  depressed  complement  synthesis  in  protein  star¬ 
vation  and  to  the  presence  of  AC  activity  In  some  sera.  The  nature 
of  the  AC  activity  (immune  complexes  or  endotoxin)  is  being  investi¬ 
gated.  In  addition,  studies  of  C3  turnover  with  I1Z5-labelled  C3 
have  been  Initiated  In  order  to  determine  whether  the  depression  in 
CHcn  activity  may  be  secondary  to  Increased  consumption  of  complement 
inTCM. 

4.  Secretory  and  Serum  IgA  In  Protein-Calorie  Malnutrition. 

Malnourished  children  suffer  from  an  increased  incidence  and 
severity  of  infections.  We  have  previously  demonstrated  an  impairment 
of  the  cell -mediated  immune  function,  of  the  inflammatory  response, 
and  of  complement  and  C3-activating  systems  in  children  with  protein- 
calorio  malnutrition  (PCM).  (See  this  year's  Annual  Report). 

Because  children  suffering  PCM  are  prone  to  infection  at  the  body 
surfaces,  the  local  irnnune  system  was  investigated  in  these  children. 

As  shown  in  Figure  1,  the  total  nasal-wash  protein  concentrations 
in  untreated  PCM  patients  and  well -nourished  Thai  children  were  similar 
as  were  nasal-wash  IgG  and  albumin  levels.  By  contrast,  the  level  of 
secretory  IgA,  expressed  as  percent  of  nasal  wash  protein,  was 
significantly  lower  than  that  of  control  children  ( P  < . 01 ) .  The 
deficiency  in  secretory  IgA  failed  to  respond  after  70  days  of  treat¬ 
ment  with  175  calories  and  4  gm  protein  per  kilogram  per  day.  There 
was  significant  improvement  in  other  immune  functions  after  this  same 
dietary  treatment.  Late  convalescent  nasal  washes  are  being  examined 
now  in  order  to  determine  how  long  the  secretory  IgA  defect  persists. 
Children  with  kwashiorkor  and  with  marasmus  were  equally  deficient  in 
secretory  IgA. 

In  contrast  to  secretory  IgA,  serum  IgA  concentrations  were 
markedly  elevated  at  the  time  of  hospital  admission  in  PCM  patients. 

The  mean  serum  IgA  concentrations,  however,  decreased  to  the  control 
level  after  dietary  treatment. 

The  results  suggest  that  (1)  the  systemic  and  the  local  IgA 
systems  respond  differently  to  dietary  treatment  of  PCM  ar.d  (2)  the 
apparent  deficiency  of  secretory  IgA  found  in  severe  PCM  could  relate 
to  the  clinical  observations  that  malnourished  children  seem  prone  to 
develop  mucosal  infections. 


807 


10  >d 


o 

ro 


NISlOdd  HSVM 

O 

CVI 

_ » 


"IVSVN  JO  !N30d3d 

o 

_ I _ 


I - 1  "  •  "  I 

o  o  o 

g  o  to 

( |Ui  OOl  6UJ )  NI310dd  HSVM-1VSVN  IViOi 


808 


Co«par1son  of  IUs«1  -Mash  Protein  Content  of  Well -Nourished  and  Protein- 
Calorie  Malnourished  Children.  The  Mean  values  *  one  S.D.  are  Indicated 
by  the  bars.  The  number  of  patients  studied  and  probability  levels  are 
shown. 


Project  3A0621 1 QA831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropfcal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research. 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications: 

1.  Muangman,  D.,  Edelman,  R.,  Sullivan,  M.  J.,  Gould,  D.  J.: 
Experimental  transmission  of  Japanese  encephalitis  virus  by  Culex 
fuscocephala.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  21_: 482-486,  1972. 

2.  Edelman,  R. ,  Nisalak,  A.,  Pariyanonda,  A.,  Udomsakdi,  S. : 
Immunoglobulin  response  and  viremia  in  dengue- vaccina  ted  gibbons 
repeatedly  challenged  with  Japanese  encephalitis  virus.  Am.  J.  Epld. 
March,  1973. 

3.  Edelman,  R.,  Suskind,  R.,  Sirisinha,  S.»  Olson,  R.  E.: 

Mechanisms  of  defective  delayed  cutaneous  hypersensitivity  in 
children  with  protein-calorie  malnutrition.  Lancet  J_,  506-509,  1973. 


Project  3A062110AS31  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  tropical  and  subtropical  mHitaryrtiedlcal  research 


Investigators  . 

Principal:  CPT  M.  Talmage  M'cMinn,  MSC;  Chiraphun 

Duangmani,  M.D.;  Pijitra  Karasudhi,  M.D.;  MAJ 
Herbert  E.  Segal,  MC;  MAJ  Michael  W.  Benenson, 

MC;  Udom  Lexomboon,  M.D.;  MAJ  Eliot  J. 

Pearlman,  MC;  Suchittra  Nimmannitya,  M.D.; 

LTC  Franklin  H.  Top,  MC;  MAJ  Robert  McNair 
Scott,  MC;  Sukachart  Kirdpon,  M.D.;  Pethai 
Mansuwan,  M.D. 

Associate:  Pramool  Sukwatana,  M.D.;  Chitra  Sailabada,  M.D.; 

Chanphen  Srimunta,  B.Sc.;  Pannee  Srangsomwong; 
Sajee  Pinnoi;  Somnuk  Lumjiak;  Trakarn 
Schooncharoenporn,  B.Sc.;  SFC  William  G.  Pruitt; 

COL  William  T.  Kemmerer,  MC,  USAF;  CPT  Ira  J. 

Strum pf,  MC,  USAF;  CPT  William  D.  Hollar,  MSC, 
USAF;  CPT  James  G.  Whitecavage,  MSC,  USAF; 

Anong  Pariyananda;  CPT  Stephen  Barcay,  MC,  USN; 
SFC  Richard  Townsend;  MAJ  Duong  Hong  Huan,  MC , 
RNVAF;  Yachai  Ampaipast,  B.Sc.,  Tatsanee 
Occeno,  B.Sc. 

1.  Mycotic  Disease 

This  laboratory  routinely  conducts  mycologic  examination  of 
clinical  specimens  submitted  from  various  sources  throughout 
Thailand.  While  no  active  mycological  investigations  were  under¬ 
taken  during  the  reporting  period,  a  sufficient  quantity  of  specimens 
were  studied  to  insure  an  adequate  exposure  of  our  technicians  to 
examination  techniques.  Such  service  to  outside  clinical  facilities 
enables  this  laboratory  to  monitor  mycotic  diseases  in  Thailand,  to 
maintain  adequately  trained  technicians,  and  to  insure  media  and 
reagent  rotation.  A  stock  of  typical  fungal  cultures  enables  this 
laboratory  to  train  medical  technicians  sent  to  us  for  such  training 


810 


Sputum  8  2  2  Candida  albicans 


812 


813 


Two  isolates  from  one  specimen 


from  throughout  Thailand. 

During  the  past  year,  we  have  examined  122  specimens.  The 
majority  of  these  specimens  came  trom  the  US  Army  Hospital  in 
Bangkok,  others  from  the  Thai  Army  Hospital  in  Bangkok,  and  some 
25  specimens  were  referred  to  this  facility  from  hospitals  through¬ 
out  Thailand.  From  these  122  specimens,  42  pathogenic  fungi 
were  recovered,  the  majority  (23)  being  Candida  albicans .  Table  1 
presents  the  results  of  these  examinations . 

2 .  Gone  rhea  in  Asymptomatic  Females . 

While  it  has  been  demonstrated  in  several  Western  clinics  that 
up  to  8%  of  females  seen  at  routine  hospital  visits  harbour  Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae  infections,  no  such  survey  has  ever  been  conducted  in 
Thailand.  Our  study  was  designed  to  observe  the  incidence  of 
clinical  gonorrheal  infections  in  asymptomatic  Thai  females. 

Women  from  20  years  of  age  to  50  yeurs  of  age  were  seen  at 
Women’s  Hospital,  Bangkok,  and  at  the  Thai  Army  Hospital, 
Bangkok.  These  patients  were  seen  for  routine  Papanicolaou  smears 
and  for  OB-GYN  complaints  other  than  cervicitis.  Routine  cervical 
cultures  on  prewarmed  Thayer-Martin  chocolate  agar  and  on  blood 
agar  were  made.  Plates  were  immediately  placed  in  CO2  (candle) 
jars  and  incubated  at  35-37°C  within  one  hour.  All  plates  were 
examined  at  SMRL  the  next  day  and  routine  identification  proce¬ 
dures  for  N .  gonorrhoeae  were  conducted . 

One  hundred  sixty-four  patients  seen  at  Women's  Hospital  were 
examined  and  seven  (4.2%)  were  found  to  be  infected  with 
N.  gonorrhoeae.  Table  1  presents  this  data  by  age  group.  Of  141 
patients  (military  dependents)  seen  at  the  Thai  Army  Hospital,  five 
(3.5%)  were  found  to  be  infected. 

This  survey  has  brought  to  the  attention  of  the  investigators  the 
need  for  routine  N.  gonorrhoeae  cultures  in  asymptomatic  females. 


814 


Table  1 


Gonorrhea  in  Asymptomatic  Females 
Women's  Hospital 
Bangkok.,  Thailand. 


Number  of 
Patients 

Age  (yis.) 

Positive 

Cultures 

35 

20-30 

5 

79 

31-40 

2 

50 

41-50 

0 

815 


3 .  The  Efficacy  of  Trlmethoprlm/Sulphamethoxazole  as  an  Oral 
Treatment  of  Neisseria  gonorrhoeae  Infection  of  Females. 


An  oral  medication  for  the  treatment  of  gonorrhea  is  desirable 
for  several  reasons;  1)  the  large  amounts  of  penicillin  required  to 
effectively  treat  gonorrhea  in  South  East  Asia  is  often  associated 
with  a  great  deal  of  pain,  2)  some  individuals  report  a  sensitivity 
to  penicillin,  and  3)  as  an  alternative  for  treatment  of  penicillin 
resistant  Neisseria  gonorrhoeae.  A  real  problem  in  this  area  of  the 
world  with  oral  medications  is  that  the  full  regimen  is  often  not  com¬ 
pleted  by  the  patient.  This  may  be  due  to  an  apparent  abeyance  of 
symptoms  or  the  desire  to  share  the  medication  with  a  friend  or 
partner.  We  have  therefore  designed  an  efficacy  protocol  to 
evaluate  the  use  of  trimethoprim/sulphamethoxazole  (co-trimoxa- 
zole)  in  increased  quantities  capable  of  being  administered  orally 
in  the  clinic  for  the  treatment  of  gonorrhea  in  females. 

Promiscuous  Thai  females  reporting  to  a  VD  control  clinic  for 
routine  examination  were  selected  for  this  study.  Those  girls  with 
positive  (intracellular,  gram  negative  diplococci)  cervical  smears 
were  selected  and  assigned  a  two  digit  random  number.  Those 
with  numbers  totaling  an  even  number  were  assigned  to  one  protocol, 
those  with  odd  sums,  the  other  protocol. 

One  protocol  (Y)  called  for  immediate  culture  of  the  urethra, 
cervix,  rectum,  and  vagina,  acquisition  of  history  and  explanation 
of  the  study,  and  IM  treatment  with  4.0  mega  units  of  penicillin  G. 
Patients  in  group  Y  were  requested  to  return  to  the  clinic  at  24  and 
72  hours.  At  these  visits,  cultures  were  made  of  the  same  four 
sites  to  determine  treatment  cure  or  failure. 

Protocol  X  called  for  cultures  as  above,  history  acquisition 
with  specific  questions  regarding  pregnancy,  known  blood  dyscra- 
sias,  or  any  known  sensitivity  to  drugs.  Those  patients  with  affirma¬ 
tive  responses  to  the  above  three  questions  were  eliminated  from  the 
study.  After  the  history,  the  patients  in  group  X  were  g.ven  4  tab¬ 
lets,  each  containing  80  mg  trimethoprim  and  400  mg  snlphameth- 
oxazole.  These  tablets  were  administered  with  at  least  300  ml  of 
water.  The  patients  were  observed  for  any  side-effects  for  2  hours 
and  then  blood  was  obtained  from  the  patients  in  group  X  to  be  used 
to  monitor  haemoglobin,  erythrocyte  count,  leukocyte  count, hema¬ 
tocrit,  and  cell  morphology.  At  this  time  an  additional  4  tablets  of 
co-trimoxazole  were  again  carefully  administered.  These  patients 

816 


TABLE 


.0  mega  units  penicillin  G 


were  told  to  return  to  the  clinic  in  24  hours.  The  next  day  cultures 
were  made  from  the  4  sites  indicated  above,  blood  for  CBC  was 
obtained,  and  another  4  tablets  of  co-trimoxazole  were  administered. 
The  patients  were  requested  to  return  the  next  day  (72  hours  after 
initial  treatment)  for  final  cultures.  At  each  visit,  the  patient  was 
examined  and  asked  questions  regarding  side-effects. 

To  date,  we  have  placed  106  females  in  this  study.  72  have 
returned  for  the  second  and  third  visit  with  3  of  these  excluded 
because  their  initial  cultures  were  negative  for  N.  qonorrhoeae. 

One  of  these  had  a  positive  culture  on  the  third  visit  but  was  still 
excluded  because  we  considered  that  culture  the  possible  result 
of  a  new  exposure. 

With  a  positive  culture  from  any  one  of  the  four  culture  sites 
on  the  third  visit  as  our  definition  of  treatment  failure,  we  found 
that  co-trimoxazole  had  a  cure  rate  of  52.7%  while  4.0  mega  units 
of  penicillin  G  had  a  cure  rate  of  66.6%.  Table  1  presents  this 
data.  Chi  square  test  reveals  that  with  this  population,  the 
difference  in  cure  rate  is  not  significant.  We  have  not  observed 
any  blood  dyscrasias  due  to  either  of  these  two  drug  regimens. 

Four  patients  receiving  co-trimoxazole  complained  of  headache,  2 
of  headache  and  nausea,  and  another  2  complained  of  vomiting 
within  1-2  hours  after  taking  the  second  series  of  tablets.  Three 
patients  being  treated  with  4.0  mega  units  of  penicillin  G  had 
complaints,  with  2  fainting  after  the  injection  and  1  reporting  a  rash 
within  an  hour  after  receiving  medication. 

It  is  evident  from  our  data  that  the  efficacy  of  co-trimoxazole 
cannot  be  evaluated  with  this  sample  size.  We  are  continuing 
with  this  study  and  will  increase  the  sample  size. 

4.  Penicillinase  Activity  of  Sta phylococcus  sp_.  Associated  with 

Neisseria  qonorrhoeae  Infections. 


Experiments  have  been  conducted  to  determine  the  frequency  of 
penicillinase  producing  Staphylococcus  sp.  found  in  association 
with  gonococcal  urethritis. 

Penicillin  is  still  the  drug  of  choice  for  the  treatment  of  gonor¬ 
rhea  in  Thailand.  Treatment  failures  or  disease  recurrences 
continue  to  appear,  howevei,  when  up  to  4.8  mega  units  of 
penicillin  G  are  administered  as  is  reported  elsewhere  in  this  report. 

818 


1 


While  the  reasons  for  such  treatment  failures  probably  include 
impaired  antibiotic  absorption  and  the  emergence  of  resistant 
N.  gonorrhoeae,the  possible  presence  of  antibiotic  neutralizing 
substances  in  close  asscciation  with  the  infection  should  also  be 
considered.  In  view  of  the  widespread  use  of  non -prescribed  peni¬ 
cillin  in  this  part  of  the  world,  we  became  especially  concerned  with 
penicillin  neutralizing  enzymes  (penicillinase)  produced  by  some 
mutants  of  staphylococci. 

Sta phylococcus  sp.  were  obtained  from  blood  agar  plates 
inoculated  with  urethral  exudate  of  male  patients  seen  at  a  venereal 
disease  clinic.  Patients  were  diagnosed  as  positive  for  N.  gonorrhoe- 
ae  when  intracellular  gram  negative  diplococci  were  observed  in 
smears  of  urethral  exudate.  Penicillinase  activity  was  determined 
by  the  methods  of  Workman  and  Farrar'1'  after  the  isolates  had  been 
identified  by  biochemical  means. 

Of  the  104  isolates  of  Staphylococcus  sp.  isolated  from  79 
cases  of  gonorrhea  and  from  25  cases  of  non-gonococcal  urethritis, 

82  (78.8%)  were  found  to  be  producers  of  penicillinase.  Table  1 
presents  this  data. 


Table  1 

Penicillinase  Producing  Staphylococcus 
in  Male  Urethritis 


Staphylococcus  sp. 

Gonococcal 

Urethritis 

Non-gonococcal 

Urethritis 

Penicillinase 

64 

18 

positive 

Penicillinase 

15 

7 

negative 

The  collection  of  additional  data  is  continuing.  Experiments  with 
mixed  cultures  of  N  gonorrhoeae  and  penicillinase  producing 
Staphylococcus  sp.  are  being  conducted  to  determine  alterations  in 
penicillin  minimum  inhibitory  concentrations.  Additional  studies 
involving  in  vivo  testing  of  such  enzymes  in  rabbits  are  being  under¬ 
taken  . 


819 


5 .  Diarrheal  Diseases. 


This  laboratory  continues  to  serve  as  a  reference  laboratory 
for  complete  identification  of  enteric  bacteria .  Specimens  (includ¬ 
ing  clinical  materials  and  pure  cultures)  are  sent  to  this  facility 
for  complete  biochemical  and  serologic  testing.  Such  a  service 
insures  complete  training  of  technicians  at  this  facility  and  enables 
students  from  other  medical  facilities  to  train  here.  This  laboratory 
monitors  the  occurrence  of  enteric  pathogenic  bacteria  in  diarrheal 
diseases  in  Thailand. 

Of  the  1610  specimens  examined  during  the  past  year,  some 
382  were  from  infants  being  treated  at  Childrens  Hospital,  Bangkok. 
517  specimens  were  from  Thai  military  and  dependent  patients 
being  examined  at  the  Thai  Army  Hospital  in  Bangkok,  while  113 
came  from  US  Peace  Corps  volunteers  at  stations  throughout  Thai¬ 
land.  Tables  1-6  report  the  findings  of  our  examinations  for 
enteric  pathogens. 


1 


■o 

c 

a 

H 


<0 

£. 

fc 


3  r- 
O  cr> 
<  - 
x:  x: 

>  *- 
> 

«  2 

c  o 

0)  ro 

1  • 

CL  rsi 

6  £ 

o  — 


*0  £ 

2  < 

0 

</) 


4) 

*) 

OJ 

u 

-2 

<u 

♦-> 

u 

5 

0 

u 

Q 

♦-> 

c 


0|  OH 


i 

uil 


c  2“ 

0  C 
.  1> 

0  «3 

2  ^ 


o 

u, 

> 


I  . 


a  a! 

B 


Oj  0) 
<0 


W| 


0  <2 
.  c 
O  .2 
2  £ 
<0 
CL 


tf) 

c 

°1 
6  g 
2  2. 
W 


O 

2 


(  |  *4  f-4  I 


—*  **  fM  i  n  ^  n  I  <—•  i 


n  n  n  i  i  —«  t  i  i  i  <-«  i 


HONin^OfOHNff)  CO<rv 

•-•(MPsa— «^cmc4»>h^-(<<sj  oiro 


(MNni'inNClNNO  t>»PvJ 


NN^4)n®mN(7iinv 


NOroaiN^MTfQo^pHfn 
r0C0C0^>00Cr»O— «CDrsJ  tD  <7> 


Tnooioa^'-'flOf^NiftUJ 

rtooaDNflO^o^aicn  4)  o 


45  §  3  3  &  C  o  »  g  •§  « 


o 

00 


o 

o 


2 

o 

H 


821 


823 


Total 


825 


826 


827 


6.  An  Outbreak  of  Gastrointestinal  Disease  at  the  RTAFB  Udorn, 

Thailand. 

A  three  day  epidemiological  consultation  took  place  in  Novem¬ 
ber,  1972  at  the  RTAf  Base  at  Udorn.  This  visit  was  prompted  by 
the  admission  to  the  432nd  USAF  Hospital  of  six  acutely  ill  patients, 
USAF  personnel,  with  symptoms  of  chills,  fever,  abdominal  pain, 
and  diarrhea. 

P n  initial  survey  showed  an  increase  in  both  the  number  of  out¬ 
patient  visits  and  in  the  number  of  hospital  admissions  for  gastro¬ 
intestinal  problems  with  the  above  symptoms.  Consequently 
attack  rates  were  calculated  for  the  various  units  on  post,  and  the 
hospital  admission  rate  by  unit  was  determined.  The  unit  with  the 
highest  admission  rate  and  second  highest  attack  rate  was  subject¬ 
ed  to  a  chunk  sampling.  Although  several  members  of  the  unit  com¬ 
plained  of  malaise  and  diarrhea,  the  carrier  rate  for  enteric  patho¬ 
genic  organisms  based  on  rectal  swabs  was  zero. 

In  four  of  the  hospitalized  patients.  Shigella  sonnei  organisms 
were  cultured  from  stool  specimens.  Extensive  questioning  of 
these  four  individuals  failed  to  reveal  any  common  food  or  water 
source  history.  While  a  fecal-oral  mode  of  transmission  was 
hypothesized  no  particular  defect  in  sanitary  practice  was  found 
in  spite  of  extensive  examination  of  food  handlers,  mess  halls, 
and  water  points . 

7 .  Transition  of  A  Kanagawa  Negative  Isolate  of  Vibrio  para- 

haemolyticus  to  Kanagawa  Positive. 


The  ability  of  strains  of  V.  para  ha  em  olyticu  s  to  haemolyze 
human  or  rabbit  red  blood  cells  in  Wagutsuma  agar  has  been  used 
to  signify  pathogenicity  for  humans.  ^  ^  This  test  is  based  on 

the  fact  that  some  investigators  have  noted  that  isolates  of  V. 
parahaemolyticus  obtained  from  human  diarrhea  sources  are  rather 
universally  haemolytic  (Kanagawa  positive)  while  those  from 
natural  sources  (sea  foods,  sea  water)  are  usually  nonhaemolytic. 
Our  findings  in  Thailand,  however,  show  that  v.he  vast  majority  of 
natural  isolates  from  the  warmer  coastal  water  of  the  Gulf  of  Siam 

positive  -  as  are  our  isolates  from 


predominately  Kc 

i a  n  rliArrho^ 


are 

human  diarrhea. 


While  there  is  no  data  indicating  that  the  route  of  human 

829 


infection  is  other  than  the  eating  of  contaminated  sea  foods;  the 
question  that  remains  is  how  does  apparently  nonpathogenic 
(Kanagawa  negative)  V.  parahaemolvticus  became  pathogenic 
(Kanagawa  positive)  ? 

In  order  to  study  the  possible  development  of  a  beta  haemoly- 
sin  in  a  Kanagawa  negative  sixain  of  Vibrio  parahaemolvticus .  this 
laboratory  obtained  a  Kanagawa  negative  isolate  (F/674)  in 
December  1972  from  Dr.  Richard  J.  Gilbert  of  the  Central  Public 
Health  Laboratory  in  England.  This  isolate  was  originally  from  a 
natural  source  in  Japan.  Haviny  in  our  laboratory,  for  the  first 
time,  a  100%  Kanagawa  negative  strain  of  V.  parahaemolyticus ,  we 
designed  an  experiment  to  study  any  possible  natural  transition 
from  Kanagawa  negative  to  Kanagawa  positive  in  this  isolate. 

V.  parahaemolvticus ,  strain  F674,  was  grown  in  brain  heart 
infusion  (BHI)  broth  with  3%  NaCl  to  a  density  of  10  cells/ml.  A 
series  of  mouse  passages  was  initiated.  For  each  mouse  passage, 
0.5  ml  of  this  culture  was  injected  into  the  peritoneal  cavity  of 
each  of  two  21-33  gram  mice.  Within  4-5  hours,  the  animals  were 
clinically  ill  and  often  had  bloody  stools.  We  were,  however, 
never  able  to  recover  V.  parahaemolvticus  from  these  stools . 

Within  7-8  hours  after  the  intraperitoneal  injection,  the  mice  were 
usually  dead.  Dead  mice  were  stored  at  4  C  overnight  and 
aseptically  opened  for  examination  the  next  morning,  24  hours 
after  the  initial  inoculation. 

Opened  mice  were  examined  and  cultures  made  from  the 
peritoneal  cavity  onto  thiosulfate-citrate-bile  salts  (TCBS)  agar. 
Pure  cultures  of  V_.  parahaemolvticus ,  F/674,  were  always  obtained 
from  these  animals.  In  the  instance  of  obviously  severe  trauma, 
possibly  resulting  in  peritoneal  contamination  from  the  intestine, 
the  specimen  was  withheld  from  the  study.  A  second  cotton  swab 
was  then  used  to  absorb  additional  material  from  the  peritoneum. 
This  swab  was  placed  in  2  ml  of  BHI  with  3%  NaCl  and  swirled 
about  in  an  effort  to  wash  the  material  from  the  swab.  The 
V.  parahaemolvticus  from  this  material  was  considered  as  a 
complete  mouse  passage.  0.5  ml  of  this  material,  was  again 
injected  into  the  peritoneal  cavity  of  mice  for  another  mouse 
passage.  The  entire  process  was  repeated.  The  same  culture  was 
also  immediately  tested  for  haemolytic  activity  on  Wagutsuma  agar. 


830 


Table  1  shows  the  observation  of  haemolysis  on  Wagutsuma  agar 
from  duplicate  mouse  passages.  Controls  included  inoculation  onto 
the  Wagutsuma  agar  of  a  nonhaemolytic  Escherichia  coll,  and  of  a 
haemolytic  isolate  of  V.  parahaemolyticus .  Each  plate  was  also 
inoculated  with  the  F/674  strain  that  had  not  been  passed  in  the 
mouse.  While  the  test  occasionally  appears  somewhat  insensitive, 
in  every  case  this  isolate  of  unpassed  F/674  was  either  nonhaemo¬ 
lytic  or  ”+"  .  In  no  case  was  this  artificially  cultured  strain  (culti¬ 
vated  on  thiosulfate-citrate-bile  salts  (TCBS)  agar,  brain  heart 
infusion  with  3%  NaCl,  etc.)  more  haemolytic  than  the  identical 
strain  maintained  in  vivo  in  the  mouse. 

Table  1. 

Haemolysis  of  Vibrio  parahaemolyticus 
F/674  after  passage  in  mouse  peritoneum. 


Mouse 

Passage 

F/674 

Control 

Mouse  A 

Mouse  B 

1* 

2* 

0 

- 

- 

3+ 

5 

+ 

± 

- 

3+ 

8 

± 

1+ 

- 

3+ 

10 

1+ 

+ 

+ 

3+ 

13 

2+ 

4+ 

- 

4+ 

17 

2+ 

2+ 

± 

3+ 

21 

2+ 

3+ 

- 

3+ 

24 

3+ 

3+ 

|  + 

4+ 

28 

2+ 

2+ 

3+ 

30 

2+ 

2+ 

- 

2+ 

34 

3+ 

- 

- 

2+ 

41 

2+ 

2+ 

± 

4+ 

1*  V.  parahaemolyticus  F/674  maintained  on  aritificial  media. 
2*  V.  parahaemolyticus .  Kanagawa  positive,  Thai  source. 


831 


It  has  consistently  been  our  experience  that  variations  in  the 
osmotic  fragility  of  the  rabbit  or  human  erythrocyte  affect  the  out¬ 
come  of  the  naemolysis  test.  Results  of  the  Kanagawa  test  in  our 
laboratory  are  always  more  varied  (usually  more  sensitive)  after  the 
Wagutsuma  agar  is  more  than  eight  days  old .  In  order  to  alleviate 
the  possibility  that  our  media  contributed  to  the  above  results, 
isolates  of  Vibrio  para  haem  olyticus  were  sent  to  other  laboratories 
in  the  United  States.  These  facilities  confirmed  our  results  on 
unidentified  strains  of  our  test  organisms.  We  also  feel  confident 
that  our  media,  manufactured  each  week  in  our  laboratory,  gives 
more  consistent  results  than  the  commercially  available  media. 

Additional  work  is  in  progress  to  define  the  haemolysin  in  these 
in  vivo  passed  strains.  The  work  presented  here  is  a  preliminary 
study  and  only  a  beginning  step  in  the  determination  of  why  human 
isolates  are  Kanagawa  positive  and  natural  isolates  (presumably 
the  source  of  human  infections),  Kanagawa  negative. 

8.  The  Occurrence  and  Transmission  of  Vibrio  parahaemolyticus  in 

a  Thai  Fishing  Village  Population. 

Gastroenteritis  has  long  been  a  threat  to  military  operations. 
Numerous  studies  to  determine  the  agents  responsible  for  gastro¬ 
intestinal  disease  among  United  States  Servicemen  in  Southeast 
Asia  have  been  reported.  In  these  studies  there  were  large  numbers 
of  cases  from  whom  a  causative  agent  could  not  be  isolated.  Recent 
work  indicates  that  the  organism,  V.  parahaemolyticus  may  be 
responsible  for  a  number  of  these  "undiagnosed"  cases. 

We  wish  to  define  the  variables  important  in  the  transmission 
of  the  organism  Vibrio  parahaemolyticus  and  to  further  define  the 
disease  it  causes.  The  study  population  will  consist  of  persons 
residing  in  an  isolated  Thai  fishing  village.  An  isolated  village 
will  increase  the  likelihood  that  sea  food  (the  presumed  vehicle  of 
transmission)  is  obtained  in  that  village  market  place,  and  will 
allow  periodic  sampling  of  that  food.  The  village  will  be  mapped 
and  censused,  at  which  time  basic  demographic  information  will  be 
obtained . 

A  study  population  will  be  randomly  selected.  Families, 
rather  than  individuals,  will  comprise  that  sampling  frame. 
Individuals  in  the  study  population  will  be  interviewed  regarding 

832 


past  medical  and  social  history.  Rectal  swabs  will  be  performed 


on  a  regular  weekly 


house.  Each  week  a  history  of  gastrointestinal  symptoms  from  the 


previous  week  will  1 
will  be  taken  and  si 


basis,  with  culture  plates  streaked  at  the 


|>e  obtained.  Where  indicated  a  food  history 
spected  food  items  will  be  cultured. 


An  initial  survey  of  sea  water,  beach  sand,  sea  food  in  the 
market  place  and  cooking  utensils,  for  V.  parahaemolvticus ,  will 
provide  data  on  the  prevalence  of  the  organism  in  natural  (non¬ 
human)  sources  in  the  village  area.  Particular  attention  will  be 
devoted  to  areas  potentially  contaminated  through  village  waste 
disposal  practices . 


Feasibility  visits  were  made  to  Ban  Koh  Lan  during  February 
and  March  1973.  There  is  a  class  2  health  center  in  the  village 
staffed  with  a  public  health  worker  (2  years  training) .  The  first 
class  health  center  on  the  mainland  supplies  a  physician  and  a 
mobile  health  team  on  an  irregular  basis.  During  the  initial  visit 
contact  was  made  with  these  people  and  their  cooperation  sought 
and  readily  obtained. 

On  the  second  visit  in  March  a  chunk  sample  of  persons  both 
ill  and  well  was  done.  A  total  of  62  persons  were  questioned 
regarding  dietary  habits  and  gastrointestinal  history.  Responses  to 
questions  concerning  gastrointestinal  history  indicate  these  persons 
average  3.6  episodes  of  diarrhea  a  year.  In  a  random  sample  of 
the  island  using  approximately  one-quarter  of  the  population  we 
could  expect  roughly  15  diarrhea  cases/week.  These  persons 
were  also  sampled  by  rectal  swab  for  V.  parahaemolvticus .  (See 
Table  1) .  There  were  two  people  (3%)  with  positive  cultures  for 
V.  parahaemolvticus .  One  of  these  was  a  65  year  old  female, 
apparently  asymptomatic.  The  other,  a  2  year  old  child,  had  watery 
diarrhea  at  the  time  the  swab  was  done. 


Seventy  percent  of  these  persons  obtain  their  seafood  at  the 
village  market;  15%  get  their  sea  food  from  the  mainland.  Sea  food 
is  also  obtained  from  boats  (15%)  and  from  self-catching  (27%) . 

The  persons  eat  sea  food  on  the  average  of  6. 1  days/week. 

Plans  are  underway  to  do  a  larger  prevalence  survey  and  if 
indicated  proceed  with  a  prospective  longitudinal  study. 


833 


Table  1 


Ages  and  Sexes  of  Persons  Submitting 
Rectal  Swabs. 


Age 

Male 

Female 

0-5 

11 

10 

6-10 

4 

2 

11-20 

1 

6 

21-30 

0 

7 

31+ 

5 

16 

Total 

21 

41 

9.  The  Determination  of  Complement  Levels  in  Typhoid  Fever 

Tnformation  concerning  alterations  in  the  concentrations  of 
complement  components  in  infectious  diseases  is  limited.  Over 
the  past  several  years  this  laboratory  has  demonstrated  the  involve¬ 
ment  of  complement  in  dengue  shock  syndrome,  a  viral  illness 
which  developes  in  situations  of  antibody  excess  with  the  formation 
ft  immune  complexes.  Complement  activation  is  triggered  by  two 
known  mechanisms.  The  classical  pathway  involving  complement 
components  C.,  C^,  and  C  is  activated  by  immune  complexes, 
and  the  recently  described  alternate  pathway  involving  C^PA  is 
triggered  by  endotoxin  and  immunocomplexes .  Typhoid  fever  is 
caused  by  a  gram  negative  bacillus.  Salmonella  typhosa .  In  cases 
of  typhoid  high  levels  of  antibody  are  often  reached  in  the  continr- 
ued  presence  of  bacilli  in  the  blood.  Also  S.  typhosa  is  a  gram 
negative  organism  and  produces  endotoxin.  In  typhoid  fever,  con¬ 
ditions  for  complement  activation  by  both  pathways  are  present. 

This  study  was  designed  to  determine  if  a  complement  mediated 
immune  mechanism  is  involved  in  the  causation  of  typhoid  fever 
and,  if  so,  to  determine  the  possible  mechanisms  of  this  activity. 

Patients:  All  patients  admitted  to  Bangkok  Children's  Hospital  with 
a  clinical  diagnosis  of  fever  of  unknown  origin  or  enteric  fever, 
whose  duration  of  illness  was  longer  than  one  week  but  not  longer 


834 


than  10  days  were  admitted  to  the  study. 


Specimens:  Each  patient  admitted  to  the  study  had  blood  taken  for 
complete  blood  count,  Widal  serology,  and  determination  of  com¬ 
plement  components  on  the  day  of  admission  and  on  the  first, 
second,  fourth,  seventh,  tenth  and  fourteenth  day  of  hospitaliza¬ 
tion.  Also,  blood  for  bacterial  culture  was  obtained  on  the  day  of 
admission  and  on  the  1st,  2nd,  and  4th  day  of  hospitalization. 

Stools  were  collected  for  culture  on  the  same  days  as  the  blood 
samples  were  drawn.  Antibiotic  therapy  on  patients  diagnosed  as 
having  typhoid  fever  was  commenced  on  the  3rd  hospital  day. 

Bacteriological  cultures:  All  isolations  were  performed  in  the 
clinical  laboratory  of  the  Bangkok  Children's  Hospital. 

Serology:  The  Widal  test  was  performed  by  the  Bacteriology 
department  of  this  laboratory  simultaneously  on  all  specimens 
obtained  from  a  single  subject.  A  rise  in  the  titer  of  both  "O"  and 
"H"  antigens  or  high  fixed  titers  (>1:160)  of  both  were  considered 
positive.  Rises  in  either  the  "H"  or  "O"  titers  were  considered 
equivocal  and  titers  <1:160  with  both  antibodies  were  considered 
negative. 

Complement  Studies:  Primary  screening  of  complement  level  was 
done  in  the  virology  department  of  this  laboratory  using  commer¬ 
cially  prepared  Radial  Immunodiffusion  tests  for  Aliquots 

of  sera  collected  each  day  were  frozen  at  -70°C  immediately  upon 
separation  of  sera  for  determination  of  other  complement  components. 

At  the  time  of  writing ,  sampling  and  initial  testing  have  been 
completed  on  21  patients  aged  17  months  to  13  years.  Of  these  21 
patients,  15  had  serological  evidence  of  typhoid  fever  by  the 
Widal  test,  one  was  equivocal,  and  five  had  negative  antibody 
titers.  Of  the  fifteen  positive,  eleven  had  high  fixed  titers.  Five 
of  these  eleven  had  clear  reductions  in  B^c/B  levels  on  admission 
and/or  on  the  1st  day  of  hospitalization.  In  all  of  these  an  increase 
in  concentration  was  noted  starting  on  the  4th  to  7th  day  and 
approached  the  mean  of  the  5  typhoid  negative  febrile  controls  by 
the  fourteenth  day.  There  was  no  particular  serological  pattern 
associated  with  the  reduction  and  rise  in  B,/B,a  level.  A  search 
for  clinical  correlation  with  the  complement  findings  will  be  under¬ 
taken. 


10.  Investigation  of  Suspected  Meningococcal  Meningitis  at 

RVNAF  Recruiting.  Induction,  and  Training  Centers; 

Outbreaks  of  meningitis  had  occurred  at  twelve  recruit  train¬ 
ing  centers  of  the  Republic  of  Vietnam  Armed  Forces  from  March 
through  September  1972.  During  this  period  1371  cases  of  sus¬ 
pected  meningitis,  including  338  deaths  (case  fatality  ratio  = 
24.6%}  were  reported.  Neisseria  meningitidis  was  reportedly 
isolated  from  28  of  these  cases.  All  recruits  routinely  received 
sulfadiazine  prophylaxis  (2  grams  per  day  for  3  days)  at  the 
Induction  Center  and  again  at  the  Reception  Center.  Group-speci¬ 
fic  polysaccharide  vaccine  had  not  been  employed. 

The  Office  of  the  Command  Surgeon,  Headquarters,  Military 
Assistance  Command,  Vietnam,  requested  the  assistance  of  SMRL 
to  verify  that  the  disease  reported  as  "suspected  meningococcal 
meningitis"  was  caused  by  infection  with  N.  meningitidis;  to 
isolate  and  characterize  strains  of  N.  meningitidis  causing 
disease  and  circulating  in  the  population  in  which  disease  was 
prevalent;  to  study  the  variables  contributing  to  the  outbreak  and 
severity  of  disease,  and  to  make  recommendations  appropriate  to 
the  further  study  and  control  of  these  outbreaks . 

Centers  at  which  cases  were  still  a  frequent  occurrence  and 
medical  facilities  serving  these  Centers  were  visited.  These 
included,  in  the  Third  Military  Region,  the  Quang  Trung  Training 
Center  (44  cases  and  7  deaths  in  September  1972).  C^ng  Hoa 
Hospital,  and  the  Third  Induction  Center,  adjacent  to  Quang  Trung. 
In  the  Fourth  Military  Region,  The  Fourth  Induction  Center,  Can 
Tho  (24  cases,  6  deaths),  Chi  Lang  Training  Center  (49  cases,  3 
deaths)  and  Phan  Thanh  Gian  Hospital  were  visited. 

At  each  Center,  following  a  briefing,  the  dispensaries, 
barracks  complexes,  and  training  areas  were  seen.  Many  of  the 
physicians  and  training  cadre  were  questioned.  Units  in  which  we 
wanted  to  determine  the  prevalence  of  N .  meningitidis  carriers  were 
placed  at  our  disposal.  The  procedures  employed  involved  swab¬ 
bing  the  posterior  nasopharnyx  with  bent  wire  Calcium  Alginate 
swabs,  streaking  the  swab  contents  on  chocolate  agar,  placing  the 
streaked  plates  immediately  into  C02  cans,  and  incubating  at 
35-37°C,  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  cultures  were  taken. 

At  the  dispensaries  and  hospitals,  recruits  admitted  and 

836 


treated  for  suspected  meningococcal  meningitis  were  examined. 
Where  spinal  fluid  or  petechial  isolates  were  available,  the 
organism  was  subcultured  for  later  studies . 

Overcrowding  of  the  barracks  and  mess  hall  facilities  was 
observed  at  all  Centers.  Unit  integrity  was  maintained  during 
training  sessions,  but  opportunities  to  interact  with  recruits  from 
other  units  occurred  in  and  around  the  mess  hall,  during  the  night¬ 
time  political  indoctrination  sessions,  and  during  sick  call.  The 
number  of  cadre  with  each  recruit  company  varied  considerably. 
Cadre  at  all  Centers  appeared  to  be  well  sensitized  to  the  problem 
of  meningitis.  Screening  of  recruits  reporting  sick  was  performed 
by  battalion  aid-men.  All  recruits  with  febrile  upper  respiratory 
conditions  were  reportedly  hospitalized.  Therapy  routinely 
consisted  of  penicillin,  20  million  units  per  day  IV  drip,  oc  casion¬ 
ally  with  chloramphenicol,  4  grams  per  day,  added.  Shock  was 
treated  with  volume  replacement,  Solucortef,  Isuprel,  and 
bicarbonate.  The  majority  of  hospitalized  recruits  reportedly 
recovered  rapidly  on  this  regimen.  Those  who  recovered  appeared 
to  do  so  completely. 

Spinal  fluid  isolates  from  five  patients  whose  disease 
coincided  with  our  visit  were  subcultured.  Patients  CSP  1-3  are 
from  Phan  Thann  Gian  Hospital;  CSP  4-5  are  from  Cong  Hoa 
Hospital.  A  sample  of  healthy  recruits  in  the  Induction  and 
Reception  Centers  was  swabbed.  Neisseria  meningitidis  was 
isolated  from  115  of  209  specimens  obtained  (Table  1).  These  and 
the  five  case  isolates  were  sero-grouped  (Table  2)  and  sulfadiazine 
sensitivities  determined  (Table  3).  These  data  indicate  that 
carrier  rates  were  high,  that  sero-groups  "B"  and  "C"  were  most 
common  and  similar  in  prevalence,  and  that  most  strains  were 
sulfadiazine  sensitive.  Four  of  the  five  case  isolates  were  sero- 
group  "B"  and  all  were  sulfadiazine  sensitive. 

The  following  recommendations  were  made  as  a  result  of  these 
investigations: 

1.  That  bacteriologic  capability  to  confirm  a  greater 
proportion  of  suspected  cases  from  Induction  and  Training  Centers 
and  to  support  a  system  for  surveillance  of  new  outbreaks  be 
established. 

2.  That  the  provision  of  adequate  sleeping  space,  well 
ventilated  billets,  adequate  nutrition,  adequate  periods  of  sleep. 


837 


alternating  head  and  foot  sleeping  arrangements,  avoidance  of 
overfatigue,  and  the  importance  of  early  diagnosis  and  treatment 
receive  increasing  command  interest. 

3.  That  the  training  schedule  provide  for  adequate  numbers  of 
cadre,  for  the  maintenance  of  unit  integrity,  and  for  adequate  num¬ 
bers  of  daily  formations  at  which  ill  recruits  could  be  identified. 

4.  That  sick  call  and  hospital  admission  policies  remain 
liberal  and  all  febrile  URI  patients  should  continue  to  be  hospi¬ 
talized. 


5.  That  the  apparent  ineffectiveness  of  sulfadiazine  may  be 
due  to  sulfadiazine  whose  activity  has  decayed  or  to  imperfect 
discipline.  Both  these  possibilities  needed  to  be  studied  further. 

6.  That  utilization  of  Group  C  meningococcal  vaccine  was 
not  indicated  at  the  time,  since  the  case  strains  isolated  were  pre¬ 
dominately  Group  B . 


838 


CO  | 

M 

♦J 

QQ 

£ 


841 


Tube  dilution  revealed  MIC  for  this  isolate  to  be  400  mcg/ml. 


Project  3A062110A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 


Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Workman,  R.G.  and  Farrar,  W.E.,  Jr.:  Activity  of  Penicil¬ 
linase  in  Staphylococcus  aureus  as  studied  by  the  Iodo- 
metric  method.  J.  Inf.  Dis:  12_1  ,  April  4,  1970. 

2.  Sakazaki,  R.:  The  Present  Status  of  Studies  on  Vibrio 
parahaemolyticus  in  Japan.  Seminar  for  FDA,  Washington, 
D.C. ,  July  30,  1971. 

3 .  Dadisman,  T.A. ,  Jr. ,  et  al:  Vibrio  parahaemolyticus 
gastroenteritis  in  Maryland:  Am.  J.  Epid.,  9_6  #6 ,  1973. 

4.  M’cMinn,  M.T. ,  et  al:  Vibrio  parahaemolyticus  in  Thai¬ 
land  .  SEATO  Annual  Report,  1972  . 

Publications: 

1.  Neumann,  D.A.,  and  Benson,  M.W.:  Vibrio  parahaemolyticus 
in  the  Republic  of  Vietnam.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  &  Hyg. , 

21:  464-466,  1972. 

2.  Lexomboon,  U.,  Mansuwan,  P. ,  Duangmani,  C.,  Benja- 
dol,  P.,  and  M'cMinn,  M.T.:  Clinical  evaluation  of 
co-trimoxazole  and  furazolidone  in  treatment  of  shigello¬ 
sis  in  children.  Brit.  Med.  J.,  3:  23-26,  1972. 


842 


Project  3A0621 10A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 
Investigators. 

Principal:  MAJ  Michael  W.  Benenson,  MC;  COL  John  Canby,  MC; 

Prof  Svastl  Daengsvang,  Med.D.;  LTC  David  E.  Davidson, 
VC;  LTC  Carter  L.  Diggs,  MC;  1LT  James  F.  Dispanet, 
MSC;  CPT  Robert  0.  McAlister,  MSC;  Vicharn  Panich, 
M.D.;  Katchrinnee  Pavanand,  M.D.;  Stitaya  Sirisinha, 
D.D.S.,  Ph.D.;  MAJ  Douglas  R.  Stutz,  MSC. 

Associate:  MAJ  Eliot  Pearlman,  MC;  SS6  Elisandro  Rodriguez; 

MAJ  Harry  Rozmiarek,  VC;  CPT  John  W.  Sagartz,  VC; 

MAJ  Herbert  E.  Segal,  MC;  Pravan  Sunthornsamai ,  M.D.; 
Prayot  Tanticharoenyos,  DVM;  Markpol  Tingpalapong.DVM. 

Assistant:  Nipon  Chuanak;  Thipchuta  Charmasarathul ,  B.Sc.; 

Rapee  Machimasatha ,  B.Sc.;  Barnyen  Permpanich,  R.N.; 
Pirom  Phisphumvidhi ,  B.A.;  Prasit  Sookto;  Paisarl 
Yingyourd,  B.Sc. 


1 .  Adenosine  Triphosphate  Level  ot  In  Vitro  Erythrocyte-Free 
P.  falciparum.  - 


These  studies  were  undertaken  to  determine  the  ATP  levels  of 
erythrocyte-free  P_.  falciparum  during  the  course  of  maturation  in 
vitro. 

Extensive  studies  are  underway  by  many  investigators  to  explore 
the  ATP  Malaria  Hypothesis '"4.  Many  investigators  have  theorized 
that  erythrocytic  ATP  levels  of  the  host  may  play  an  important  role 
in  supporting  the  initial  growth  of  the  parasite,  and  that  erythro¬ 
cytes  with  low  levels  of  ATP  would  be  less  viable  and  tend  to  rupture 
easier  than  erythrocytes  with  high  ATP  levels.  In  addition,  a 
positive  direct  correlation  of  the  erythrocytic  ATP  level  with  the 
severity  of  the  primary  clinical  course  of  malaria  is  evident. 
Experiments  in  humans  have  been  limited  to  the  very  early  stage  of 
infection  to  avoid  undue  risk  to  volunteers.  Although  supporting 
data  may  be  obtained  from  experiments  on  Rhesus  monkeys,  the 
effects  of  low  ATP  levels  on  inhibition  of  parasite  development 
have  not  been  elucidated.  It  has  been  suggested  that  in  addition 
to  the  fact  that  red  cells  containing  low  ATP  level  may  not  survive 
to  support  the  parasites,  the  initial  ATP  requirements  of  the 
parasite  may  be  more  than  the  cell  can  provide. 

843 


With  the  technique  of  In  vitro  culture  of  native  P.  falciparum 
developed  here  at  this  laboratory,  the  growth  of  parasites  can  be 
followed  through  maturity.  The  cell-free  parasitic  ATP  level  will  be 
determined  at  different  stages  of  development  throughout  the  culture 
period  and  related  to  the  morphology.  The  Increase  In  parasitic  ATP 
levels  during  the  course  of  maturation  in  vitro  will  indicate  the 
direct  relationship  between  the  intraerythrocytic  parasites  and  their 
host  cells. 

The  in  vitro  culture  system  of  £  falciparum  is  the  same  as  that 
previously  described 5  with  the  exception  that  '^C-isoleucine  is  not 
added  to  the  culture  media.  The  contents  of  several  wells  will  be 
lysed  by  one  of  three  methods  being  considered,  under  controlled  con¬ 
ditions  to  prevent  lysis  of  the  parasites.  Ammonium  chloride  lysis, 
selective  pressure  and  immune  lysis  are  three  techniques  to  be 
attempted.  The  ATP  levels  of  the  freed  parasites  will  be  determined 
by  the  luciferase  enzyme  method  as  described  by  Stanley®. 

The  luciferase-ATP  measurement  system  is  being  standardized  and 
selective  lysis  studies  are  underway.  No  conclusive  data  have  been 
produced  to  date. 

2.  A  Quantitative  Study  on  the  Level  of  Adenosine  Triphosphate  in 
Human  Erythrocytes  by  Luciferase  Enzymic  ” 

The  objective  of  these  studies  was  to  establish  a  quantitative 
assay  of  ATP  in  human  erythrocytes  for  determination  of  normal  erythro¬ 
cytic  ATP  levels  in  a  Thai  population  and  their  relationship  to  malaria 
infections. 

It  is  known  that  there  is  considerable  variation  in  the  levels  of 
erythrocytic  ATP  between  individuals  in  a  population,  and  that  this 
level  is  constant  in  healthy  individuals1,3.  Comparative  studies  in 
American  Negroes  and  Caucasians  indicated  the  existence  of  different 
mean  quantities  of  erythrocytic  ATP  between  these  two  groups?.  Since 
the  gene  pool  of  the  American  Negroes  is  derived  from  an  African  Negro 
stock  exposed  to  malaria  for  many  generations,  the  lower  mean  levels 
of  ATP  in  this  group  rjggest  selection  pressure  for  malaria.  Further 
studies  revealed  that  there  is  a  strong  positive  correlation  between 
the  erythrocytic  level  of  ATP  and  £.  falciparum  parasitemia?.  In 
human  as  well  as  simian  infections,  high  ATP  levels  were  directly 
associated  with  relatively  high  peak  parasite  counts^.  It  has  been 
suggested  that  the  protective  mechanism  against  malaria  infection  may 
result  from  the  following: 

a.  Erythrocytic  ATP  levels  of  the  host  play  an  important  role  in 
supporting  the  initial  increase  of  parasitemia.  With  the  lower  level 
of  ATP,  a  retardation  of  the  primary  increase  in  parasitemia  will  be 
seen,  resulting  in  a  less  severe  clinical  course  of  infection. 

844 


T 


b.  The  role  of  ATP  In  maintaining  metabolism  and  viability  of 
living  cells  Indicates  that  red  cells  with  low  ATP  levels  would  be  less 
capable  of  maintaining  their  viability.  This  will,  In  turn,  result  In 
Inability  of  the  Intraerythrocytlc  asexual  parasites  to  develop  through 
completion  and  rupturing  of  the  parasitized  erythrocytes  may  occur 
prematurely. 

It  Is  our  aim  to  investigate  erythrocytic  ATP  levels  In  Thai  popi- 
latlons  continuously  exposed  to  malaria  infection  and  to  compare  them 
with  populations  from  non-endemic  areas.  Results  obtained  may  reveal 
a  significant  protective  mechanism  against  P.  falciparum  infection. 

A  technique  for  quantitative  assay  of  erythrocytic  ATP  utilizing 
a  firefly  luminescence  method  described  by  Stanley  and  Williams®  Is 
being  established.  A  standard  curve  of  ATP  is  obtained  by  adding  an 
aliquot  of  fresh  extract  of  desiccated  firefly  lanterns  to  various 
known  concentrations  of  ATP  in  phosphate  buffer,  pH  7.4.  The  resulting 
light  pulses  are  counted  in  the  liquid  scintillation  spectrometer. 

A  comparative  study  utilizing  fresh  and  frozen  (in  liquid  nitrogen) 
blood  specimens  is  in  progress.  Although  the  firefly  luminescence 
method  assay  of  ATP  has  advantages  over  other  techniques  described,  a 
limitation  of  this  procedure  is  that  blood  specimens  must  be  processed 
soon  after  collection  to  prevent  a  reduction  of  ATP  levels.  Modifica¬ 
tions  of  the  method  of  red  cell  lysate  preparation  are  being  developed. 
It  is  anticipated  that  results  obtained  in  these  experiments  will 
provide  a  means  for  measurement  of  ATP  in  erythrocytes  collected  from 
field  surveys. 

3.  Evaluation  of  Refinement  of  a  Radioimmunoassay  for  the 
Quantitative  Estimation  of  Malarial  Antibody. 

Experiments  are  in  progress  to  refine,  field  test  and  evaluate  a 
radioimmunoassay  for  quantitative  estimation  of  specific  malarial 
antibody.  A  radioimmunoassay  was  developed  at  WRAIR  for  the  purpose 
of  quantitatively  estimating  specific  malarial  antibodies  in  human 
serum.  Specific  antibody  is  measured  by  inhibition  of  binding  between 
monospecific  antiglobulin  and  radioiodinated  purified  immunoglobulin. 
Preliminary  experiments  indicated  that  the  method  can  be  used  to  detect 
quantities  of  specific  antibody  as  low  as  0.05>jg/ml  and  purified  IgG 
in  concentrations  of  0.01  /ig/ml .  The  development  of  the  assay  and 
tests  for  sensitivity  and  reliability  were  accomplished  using  pools  of 
sera  obtained  from  individuals  living  in  areas  of  high  endemicity. 

The  assay  proved  to  be  reliable  and  the  data  easily  reproducible. 

The  insolubilization  method  chosen  for  this  assay  was  that  of 
sensitizing  sheep  red  blood  cells  (SRBC)  with  the  antigen  and  using 
a  prescribed  number  of  cells  per  tube  as  the  standardized  antigen. 

Three  major  problems  are  inherent  in  this  system:  (1)  the  actual 


845 


amount  of  antigen  bound  to  the  cells  is  difficult  to  determine;  (2) 
different  antigen  preparations  are  difficult  to  standardize;  and 
(3)  all  sera  have  to  be  adsorbed  onto  SRBC  prior  to  being  used  in  the 
assay.  Due  to  these  problems,  a  new  means  of  insolubilizing  the 
antigen  was  sought.  Catt  and  Trager8  found  that  immunoglobulins  would 
bind  to  polymers  of  plastics  which  are  used  in  making  disposable 
culture  tubes.  Further  experimentation  indicated  that  other  proteins 
would  also  bind.  The  malaria  antigen  used  in  the  radioimmunoassay  is 
basically  protein  in  nature,  therefore  this  technique  was  selected  for 
evaluation  as  a  better  means  of  antigen  insolubilization. 

The  antigen  preparation  is  radiolabeled  with  and  varying 
concentrations  are  used  to  coat  12  x  75  mm  polypropylene  tubes.  The 
tubes  are  positioned  so  that  a  prescribed  amount  of  fluid  will  cover 
the  same  surface  area  of  the  tube  each  time.  Care  is  taken  not  to 
splash  any  antigen  on  the  side  of  the  tube.  A  coating  period  of  2 
hours  at  room  temperature  has  been  shown  to  be  the  nost  satisfactory 
of  those  tried.  No  significant  increase  in  antigen  binding  is  observed 
with  lomer  periods  of  time.  A  concentration  of  10  /ig/ml  was  found  to 
provide  optimal  coating.  Approximately  11%  of  the  radiolabeled  antigen 
is  bound  to  the  tube  at  this  concentration.  After  the  antigen  solution 
is  removed,  the  tube  is  washed  5  times  and  filled  with  a  3%  human  serum 
albumin-phosphate  buffered  saline  solution  to  fill  the  remainder  of  the 
binding  sites  and  to  remove  the  loosely  bound  antigen. 

Repeated  experiments  with  this  tube  coating  process  have  shown  that 
when  0.5  ml  of  a  10  >ig/ml  coating  solution  is  used,  0.285  |ig  (*0.023) 
is  bound  to  the  tube.  A  pH  of  7.5  is  optimal  as  opposed  to  that  found 
by  Catt  and  Trager  (pH  9.5  -  10.0).  Experiments  conducted  at  4°,  22° 
and  370C  indicate  that  22°C  (room  temperature)  is  optimal  for  binding. 
Coated  tubes  have  been  stored  at  4°C  for  as  long  as  7  days  and  no  loss 
of  antigenicity  was  observed.  Experiments  are  presently  being  conducted 
to  determine  how  long  these  coated  tubes  can  be  stored  at  4°  and  -70°C 
without  loss  of  antigenicity. 

The  protocol  for  the  radioimmunoassay  requires  a  standard  curve  to 
be  established  for  each  assay  conducted.  In  order  to  have  comparable 
conditions  existing  in  both  the  standard  and  the  antigen  tubes,  a 
series  of  experiments  were  conducted  on  the  binding  capability  of 
purified  human  IgG.  These  experiments  indicated  that  the  samo  optimal 
conditions  existed  for  the  IgG  as  for  the  malaria  antigen.  It  is 
possible  to  bind  approximately  50%  of  varying  concentrations  (0.25  to 
4 . 0  /jg/ml )  of  '  Z5I- IgG  to  the  tubes  and  the  repeatability  is  within  a 
5%  error. 

Preliminary  experiments  with  the  pooled  iimiune  serum  indicate  that 
results  are  comparable  to  those  obtained  with  the  SRBC  carrier. 

Initial  experiments  with  individual  serum  samples  collected  in  Thailand 
indicate  that  the  tube-bound  malaria  antigen  will  detect  specific 

846 


antibody  in  relatively  low  concentrations  (  5  |jg/ml).  Future  experl 
ments  will  be  designed  to  Increase  the  sensitivity. 

4.  In  vitro  Drug  Sensitivity  Testing  of  Plasmodium  falciparum. 


In  the  previous  Annual  Report^,  the  in  vitro  system  for  drug 
sensitivity  testing  of  human  P.  falciparum  util izing  radioactive 
isoleucine  as  a  growth  marker  was  described.  The  results  Indicated  a 
low  culture  failure  and  a  good  reproducibility.  Comparison  of 
parasite  C'4-isoleucine  incorporation  and  the  morphology  of  the  para¬ 
site  during  the  course  of  maturity  indicated  an  excellent  correlation. 
The  present  investigation  was  done  to  obtain  additional  data  on 
chloroquine  sensitive  £.  falciparum  for  establishment  of  a  base  line 
growth  curve  for  a  susceptible  strain. 

It  has  been  previously  reported  that  strains  of  £.  fal ci parum 
resistant  to  chloroquine  are  widely  spread  in  Thailand.  In  some  areas 
nearly  100%  of  the  £.  fal ci parum  is  resistant^.  The  parasite  source 
for  cultures  is  primarily  from  Choi  bur i  Province,  where  the  prevalence 
of  resistant  £.  falciparum  also  approaches  100%.  Results  obtained  from 
in  vitro  cultures  support  this  observation,  although  the  in  vivo  com¬ 
parison  has  not  been  possible  in  every  case. 

In  the  first  part  of  this  study  a  test  for  assessing  the  in  vitro 
susceptibility  of  £.  falciparum  has  been  described.  The  culture 
system  utilizes  the  protein  incorporation  of  C'4-isoleucine  as  a  growth 
marker.  Results  obtained  indicate  a  good  reproducibility  with  the 
multiplication  rate  of  2:1  or  better  and  culture  failure  was  low. 
Patients  admitted  to  Yala  Provincial  Hospital  were  used  for  in  vivo  - 
in  vitro  comparison  studies,  but  the  number  of  patients  for  a  cTTnTcal 
follow-up  was  not  sufficient  to  make  an  adequate  number  of  observations 
on  susceptible  parasites. 

Collaborative  studies  were  established  with  the  Faculty  of  Tropical 
Medicine,  Mahidol  University,  Bangkok.  Blood  specimens  obtained  from 
patients  with  native  JP.  falciparum  were  processed  in  in  vitro  culture 
utilizing  the  previously  described  technique.  An  aliquot  of  each 
specimen  was  washed  and  preserved  in  liquid  nitrogen  for  later  reference 
when  required.  A  standard  therapeutic  course  of  chloroquine  was  admin¬ 
istered  to  the  patient  and  parasitemia  was  followed  for  evaluation  of 
clinical  response.  The  type  of  chloroquine  resistance  was  established, 
utilizing  WHO'O  criteria  for  definition  of  resistance.  Clinical 
response  was  later  compared  with  the  j_n  vitro  growth  curve  determined 
from  C^-isoleucine  uptake.  The  in  vitro  drug  sensitivity  test  was 
performed  on  35  blood  specimens,  obtained  from  Somdej  Sri  Racha 
Hospital  and  the  Faculty  of  Tropical  Medicine,  Bangkok.  The  growth 
curves  obtained  from  the  C'^-isoleucine  parasite  incorporation  were 
available  from  25  in  vitro  cultures  of  which  20  were  from  Somdej 
Sri  Racha  Hospital  and  5  from  the  Faculty  of  Tropical  Medicine.  Among 

847 


these,  24  in  vitro  cultures  were  resistant  to  chloroquine  and  1  was 
susceptible.  Comparative  results  for  In  vivo  and  jji  vitro  studies  were 
obtained  from  5  cases  admitted  to  the  Faculty  of  Tropical  Medicine.  The 
resistance  of  P.  falciparum  to  chloroquine  was  observed  both  In  vitro 
and  in  vivo  in  4  cases.  TFe  patients  were  treated  with  other  antima- 
lariaTs  after  the  assessment  of  chloroquine  resistance.  One  case 
assessed  as  chloroquine  susceptible  in  vitro  is  still  under  clinical 
observation.  Parasitemia  in  this  case  lasted  24  hours  after  commence¬ 
ment  of  a  standard  therapeutic  course  of  chloroquine. 

It  is  obvious  that  the  in  vitro  studies  described  have  the 
limitation  of  depending  on  a  natural  human  infection  for  the  supply  of 
infected  blood.  With  the  high  prevalence  of  resistant  infection,  a 
base  line  growth  curve  of  susceptible  parasites  will  support  the 
evaluation  process  of  the  _in  vitro  test.  Attempts  are  being  made  to 
obtain  a  sufficient  number  of  samples  of  susceptible  parasites  to  pro¬ 
vide  a  reference  for  comparison  with  the  quinine  growth  curve. 

Additional  studies  are  being  done  with  the  in  vitro  sensitivity 
test  utilizing  the  currently  reported  effective  antimalarials  for 
comparison  with  quinine.  The  plasma  levels  for  each  antimalarial  are 
being  used  as  reference  for  the  concentration  to  be  tested  jji  vitro. 
Antimalarials  presently  being  tested  are: 

1.  Pyrimethamine 

2.  Dapsone 

3.  Sulfadoxine 

4.  Sulfadoxine  in  combination  with  pyrimethamine 

5.  Primaquine  phosphate 

The  morphological  variations  of  the  parasites  observed  during  the 
incubation  period  in  the  presence  of  various  antimalarials  will  be 
correlated  with  the  growth  curve  of  C'^-isol eucine  incorporation. 

This  observation,  if  possible,  will  be  made  on  susceptible  parasites 
and  be  correlated  with  the  _in  vivo  response. 

5.  In  vitro  Infection  Rate  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  in  Human 
Erytnrocyfes'  with  Different  Hemoglobin  lypes. 

It  has  been  proposed  that  resistance  to  P.  falciparum  infection  is 
related  to  different  natural  factors.  Among* these,  the  red  blood 
cell  defects,  namely  Hb  S,  Hb  Et  thalassemia  and  G-6-PD  deficiency 
have  been  extensively  studied.''"17.  Evidence  supporting  the  theory 
that  Hb  S  deficiency  conferred  natural  resistance  to  the  host  were 
convincing,  but  controversial  results  were  obtained  in  thalassemia 
and  Hb  EJ8 

Significant  numbers  of  individuals  with  different  hemoglobin 
types  and  thalassemia  exist  in  Thailand.  A  number  of  such  cases  are 

848 


available  at  th»  Division  of  Hematology,  Department  of  Medicine, 
Slrlraj  Hospital.  Extensive  studies  on  hematological  aspects  of 
hemoglobin  differences  have  been  performed  at  the  Division.  A 
collaborative  study  has  been  designed  to  study  these  differences 
utilizing  the  capability  of  In  vitro  culture  techniques  developed  at 
this  laboratory. 

Heparinized  blood  from  patients  with  native  Infection  of  P. 
falciparum  is  the  source  for  parasites.  Blood  group  and  hemoglobin 
type  are  established  and  hematological  Investigations  are  performed 
on  each  case.  Compatible  uninfected  blood  with  the  various  hemoglobin 
types  are  included  In  In  vitro  culture  serving  as  target  for  reinva¬ 
sions.  The  proportion  of  erythrocytes  containing  different  hemoglobin 
types  in  each  culture  will  be  determined. 

The  proportion  of  cells  in  each  In  vitro  culture  is  prepared  as 
follows: 


Row  1  Row  2 

Patient  infected  cells (AA)  1  volume  1  volume 

Target  cells  (AA)  1  volume 

Recipient  cells  (AE)  -  1  volume 

%  of  AA  cells  100  50 

%  of  AE  cells  -  50 


Erythrocytes  containing  different  Hb  types  can  be  differentiated, 
e.g.,  Hb  E  containing  erythrocytes  and  Hb  F  containing  erythrocytes 
can  be  distinguished  by  the  technique  of  Hb  staining  by  differential 
elutions.  The  parasite  density  rate  of  different  hemoglobin  contain¬ 
ing  erythrocytes  can  be  detemp;ied  by  counter- staining  with  Giemsa 
stain. 

If  the  results  obtained  from  such  cultures  reveal  a  lower  in  vitro 
infection  rate  of  thalassemic  erythrocytes  or  erythrocytes  containing 
abnormal  hemoglobin,  it  will  suggest  that  intra erythrocytic  conditions 
of  these  cells  will  not  readily  support  the  parasite.  However,  if  an 
equal  infection  rate  is  found,  a  conclusion  against  this  hypothesis  of 
protection  cannot  be  made.  The  selective  mechanism  against  malaria 
infection  may  be  operating  outside  the  red  blood  cells  or  by  a  combina¬ 
tion  of  the  red  blood  cells  and  other  organs,  e.g.,  the  reticuloendo¬ 
thelial  system,  especially  the  spleen. 

To  avoid  such  controversial  results,  our  experiments  are  designed 
differently  from  the  previous  described  in  vitro  systems.  A  later 
stage  of  P.  falciparum  trophozoites  will”Fe  used  in  our  study  to  allow 
a  longer  period  of  observation  of  the  young  merozoltes  after  reinvasion. 

Collections  of  ini  acted  blood  are  being  made  at  the  present  time. 

A  portion  of  each  sample  is  cultured  immediately  while  the  remainder 

849 


Is  frozen  In  liquid  nitrogen  for  later  comparison.  The  Initial 
experiments  are  to  determine  If  freezing  will  have  an  effect  on  cells 
with  different  types  of  hemoglobin.  The  Infected  cells  of  certain 
hemoglobin  types  are  difficult  to  obtain  at  some  times  of  the  year, 
and  therefore,  adequate  preculture  storage  methods  are  necessary. 

6.  A  Malaria  Survey  Conducted  at  Panom  Sarakam  In  Cha  Choeng  Sao 
Province,  Thailand.  “  '  - 

A  malaria  survey  has  been  performed  on  a  stable  population  of 
workers  and  families  located  in  the  forest  at  a  lumber  camp.  An 
earlier  visit  to  this  lumber  camp  indicated  that  this  area  may  be  satis¬ 
factory  for  detailed  study  of  the  immune  response  to  malarial  infections. 
Although  the  population  is  relatively  small,  it  is  stable  and  would 
provide  a  continuing  source  of  material  for  several  studies.  The  camp 
is  located  within  a  2  hour  drive  from  the  laboratory  thereby  providing 
good  accessibility.  Migration  is  limited  and  the  population  is  willing 
to  participate  in  a  malaria  study. 

The  survey  was  conducted  over  a  two  day  period  and  included  a 
majority  of  the  workers  and  their  families.  The  name  of  each  individual 
was  recorded  and  blood  samples  were  obtained  by  venipuncture  on  every¬ 
one  possible.  Finger  or  heel  sticks  were  made  on  infants.  Two  thick 
and  thin  blood  smears  were  made  for  each  individual,  hematocrit  tubes 
were  filled,  and  a  collection  of  the  blood  was  made  on  filter  paper 
(Whatman  No.  1)  in  a  predescribed  area.  The  remainder  of  the  blood  was 
allowed  to  clot  and  the  serum  was  removed.  After  the  hematocrit  reading 
was  obtained,  the  tubes  were  cut  at  the  cell -plasma  interface,  both 
ends  of  the  plasma  containing  portion  of  the  tube  sealed  with  clay  and 
the  tube  placed  on  ice.  Upon  return  to  the  laboratory  the  tubes  were 
emptied  and  the  plasma  frozen.  The  filter  papers  were  appropriately 
labeled,  allowed  to  dry  and  placed  in  air  tight  containers.  The  serum 
from  the  clot,  plasma  from  the  hematocrit  tubes  and  the  filter  paper 
extracts  will  be  assayed  by  radioimmunoassay  to  determine  antibody 
levels,  and  results  of  the  three  collection  methods  compared.  Each 
individual  was  examined  for  enlargement  of  the  spleen  and  a  history  of 
malaria  infections  was  obtained.  With  the  individuals  complaining  of 
fever,  one  thick  blood  smear  was  immediately  stained  with  aqueous 
Romanowsky's  stain  and  examined  for  the  presence  of  parasites.  All 
individuals  with  complaints  were  either  treated  or  referred  to  one  of 
the  local  hospitals  for  further  examination  and  treatment. 

The  resident  population  consists  of  approximately  400  individuals 
of  which  100  are  classified  as  full  time  employees.  An  additional  100 
employees  live  off  the  plantation  and  conmute  to  work  on  a  daily  basis. 
The  age  at  which  an  individual  enters  the  jungle  to  work  on  a  full¬ 
time  basis  is  IE;  however,  children  as  young  as  10  are  employed  on  a 
part-time  basis  to  clear  weeds  and  underbrush.  A  total  of  327  indi¬ 
viduals  were  included  in  the  survey.  Venipunctures  were  done  on  262 

850 


Individuals  with  hematocrit  tubes  being  filled  by  finger  or  heel 
sticks  on  25  more,  giving  a  total  of  297  collections  of  serum  and/or 
plasma  and  corresponding  filter  paper  collections.  A  total  of  315 
Individuals  were  examined  for  spleen  size  (Table  1)  with  a  spleen  rate 
of  10.48*. 


Table  1.  Results  of  Spleen  Examinations 


Category 

Splet 

■  i 

•n  Size 

Rate 

0 

1 

2 

3 

4 

Males  under  15 

23 

0 

2 

5 

1 

11.27* 

Females  under  15 

57 

0 

1 

2 

0 

5.00* 

Males  15  and  older 

95 

1 

5 

11 

0 

15.18* 

Females  15  and  older 

1 

67 

1 

0 

4 

0 

6.94* 

Total 

282 

2 

8 

22 

1 

10.48* 

A  total  of  294  thick  and  thin  smears  were  examined  twice  by  WHO 
standards  with  59  positive  for  a  parasitemia  rate  of  20.07*  (Table  2). 


Table  2.  Results  of  Blood  Film  Examination 


Category 

NPS* 

P.  falciparum 

P.  vivax 

Mixed 

Rate 

Males  under  15 

44 

'7 

3 

0 

18.52* 

Females  under  15 

41 

6 

1 

0 

14.29* 

Males  15  and  older 

84 

20 

10 

0 

26.32* 

Females  15  and  older 

66 

8 

2 

2 

15.38* 

Total 

235 

41 

16 

2 

20.07* 

*NPS  -  No  parasites  seen 


The  asexual  parasitemia  rate  was  low  (Table  3).  Both  palpable 
spleens  and  parasitemia  were  observed  primarily  in  individuals  15 
years  of  age  and  older.  Approximately  18*  of  the  observed  parasitemias 


851 


were  In  children  of  age  14  and  under.  Hematocrit  values  were  within 
a  normal  range  (35-50%)  for  the  majority  of  the  persons  Included  In 
this  study.  Approximately  75%  of  the  Infections  were  asymptomatic  as 
Indicated  by  the  medical  histories. 


Table  3.  Observed  Gametocytemla 


Category 

P.  falciparum 

P.  vivax 

Mixed 

Sexual  parasite  rate 

0.0% 

0.0% 

0.0% 

Asexual  parasite  rate 

1.0% 

0.0% 

0.0% 

'lixed 

12.88% 

5.76% 

0.36% 

Total 

13.88% 

5.76% 

0.36% 

Data  from  the  radioimmunoassay  are  not  yet  available  to  determine 
the  specific  antibody  levels;  however,  the  relatively  high  prevalence 
of  malaria  infections  during  the  dry  part  of  the  year  indicates  that 
this  area  will  be  adequate  for  a  study  of  the  immune  response  as 
measured  by  specific  antibody  levels  and  by  in  vitro  evaluation  of 
the  antibody  molecule. 

7.  Evaluation  of  the  Effectiveness  of  Experimental  Antimalarial 
Drugs  in  Rhesus  Monkeys  Infected  with  Plasmodium  cynomolgi. 

These  studies  are  designed  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  experi¬ 
mental  antimalarial  drugs  in  rhesus  monkeys  infected  with  blood- 
induced  Plasmodium  cynomolgi.  The  experimental  drugs  are  furnished 
by  the  Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry,  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research. 

Rhesus  monkeys  (Macaca  mulatta)  of  either  sex,  weighing  2-4  kg. 
are  infected  by  the  intravenous  administration  of  5  x  10°  parasitized 
cells  from  a  donor  monkey  infected  with  Plasmodium  cynomolgi  strain-B. 
Four  days  later,  when  the  parasitemia  is  well-established,  a  7  day 
course  of  daily  drug  administration  is  initiated.  Drugs  are  routinely 
prepared  in  a  suspension  and  given  orally  by  stomach  tube,  but  other 
methods  of  treatment  are  used  on  occasion.  The  effectiveness  of  the 
drug  is  determined  by  following  the  parasitemia  over  a  thirty  day 
period.  At  the  end  of  thirty  days,  monkeys  with  negative  blood  smears 
are  splenectomized.  Only  those  monkeys  which  remain  negative  for  30 
days  after  splenectomy  are  classified  as  CURED.  In  addition  to 
parasite  counts,  each  monkey  is  observed  daily  for  clinical  signs  of 

852 


Table 


1 


U 

?  $ 

l~>  t, 

2  3 

Pi 

5  nl 


•  o  o  — *  —  — «  m  q 

. . . 

—  —  —  oooo  — 


* 
fe 

a;  a) 

>  > 

o  X*  £  u>  . 

,  o  u  •  o  •  * 

O  4)  il  "  i  o  - 

— «  n  fi  co 

(H  M 

ft)  ft)  ft) 

c  c  c 


;  o  vo 


in 

a) 

co 

o 

Q 

a; 

> 

4-> 

fO 

u, 

D 

u 

£ 

3 

£ 


ol 


CQ 
0 
3 

Q  0 
£ 
o 


fO 

u 

CO 

03 

£ 


C  'D 
<  0 

-  £ 

ID  CO 

c  S 

CD  Oh 

§  -C 

Z  s 
<1)  > 
a  > 

W  Q) 


w 

0) 

C 

O 

2 

CO 

a 

CO 

0) 

jC 

(X 


C  K 


oft  o 

<  ^ 


£ 

H 


*  3 


u  ° 

5< 

2  a 

d  e 

SJ 

|  o 
2  d( 


2  Ui 

<  3 

Oft  or 

5  Q 


^  ^  2  ^  ^ 

i>  ini  tn  oo  cm 

*  ^  £  £  £  ® 


1  n  N  ®  ▼  n  n 

1  N  -  »  °  ^  1/1 

>  —  ^  0°  —  —  <7> 


6  a 
*  8 

?! 

its 


—  ©  2  2  ^  n 
-r  ®  O  CD  oo  m 

£  £  ~  ^  E 


o 

Z 


U  £ 


l:  —  o 
<n  (O  a 

rsj  _  — , 


o  . 

*.8 

CM  £ 


O 

z 


8 

Ti 

i 


O  O  i£>  •  lO  VO  O 

•  •  •  o  •  «  • 

oo-o-^o 


00'U)lDOvDiDiDO«)«D 
*  O  M  *4  O  M  •  •  O  m*  * 


c,  zr  ® 
ro  2 
2  ^  — 
O  ID  S 


o^rcM^unvousuD 
cnoo^r^^roo 
tt  1/5  to  in  in  i/i  id  cd 
rgr^.f>»romrom'r 

V  N  N  CD  CD  00  00  00 


in(D(TiiOinr5(jvN(7ioo 

LOOtncMmmJrt-ir^cNCM 

TCDtNnina^O'Ov 

NmiOOinm^moomo 

(siT'TiniciDNNNaa 


Sf?  %%%%%%%% 


!  5 


>«.  ~ 
x:  o 

II 

1  e 

C  c 


CM  O 


853 


drug  toxicity  or  intercurrent  disease.  Necropsy  examinations  are 
performed  terminally. 

Each  experimental  drug  is  evaluated  over  a  series  of  doses  to 
determine  a  minimum  curative  dose,  a  minimum  effective  dose  and  a 
maxin"im  tolerated  dose.  Normally  two  monkeys  are  treated  at  each  dose 
level,  with  doses  spaced  0.5  Log  10  apart  (316,  100,  31.6,  10.0,  3.16, 
1.0  mg/ kg,  etc.). 

During  the  15  month  period  terminating  1  April  1973,  47  drugs 
were  evaluated  for  antimalarial  efficacy  in  £ .  cvnomoloi- infected 
rhesus  monkeys.  A  tabulation  of  the  drugs  studied  and  their  minimum 
curative  doses  is  presented  in  Table  1. 


Immunochemical  Studies  of  Gibbon  Anti-DNP  Antibody 


The  affinity  of  antibody  produced  in  gibbons  against  the  hapten 
dinitrophenol  (DNP)  is  being  studied.  The  gibbon  has  been  used  as  an 
experimental  animal  for  studies  involving  the  immune  response  to 
various  pathogenic  organisms.  Little  is  known  about  the  kinetics  of  a 
specific  antibody  response.  To  learn  more  about  antibody  produced  in 
the  gibbon  a  series  of  experiments  were  designed  usinn  a  hapten 
system  for  purposes  of  simplicity.  Dinitrophenol  (DNP)  was  selected 
as  the  hapten  since  this  system  has  been  defined  in  several  other 
species.  A  test  antigen  of  DNP-  protein  was  prepared  by  linking  DNP 
to  bovine  gamma  globulin  (BGG)  by  nucleophilic  substitution  using  a 
sul phonic  acid  derivative,  sodium  dinitrobenzyne  sulphonate.  The 
epsilon-NH?  groups  of  lysine  residues  are  essertially  the  only  substi¬ 
tutions  made  in  this  system  thus  allowing  better  definition  of  the 
hapten-carrier  combination. 


Each  animal  was  injected  subcutaneously  with  2.5  mg  DNP-BGG 
(mixed  l:i  with  Freund's  complete  adjuvant).  A  minimum  of  4  injection 
sites  was  used.  A  second  injection  of  DNP-BGG  in  Freund's  incomplete 
adjuvant  was  administered  30  days  after  the  initial  dose.  A  third 
inoculation  of  alum  precipitated  DNP-BGG  was  administered  60  days 
after  the  initial  injection.  Each  animal  was  bled  once  a  week  through¬ 
out  the  inoculation  schedule. 


Five  gibbons  were  selected  for  these  experiments,  and  3  have  been 
immunized  through  the  first  two  injections.  Two  gibbons  were  kept  as 
controls  and  were  bled  according  to  the  immunization  schedule.  Immuno 
adsorbents  of  DNP-lysine  conjugated  to  sepharose  have  been  prepared 


and  a  new 
and  found 


new  technique  for  elution  of  purified  antibody  has  been  tested 
und  to  be  better  than  previous  techniques  (Hill,  1972). 20  This 


particular  technique  has  not  been  reported  for  a  hapten-antibody 


system.  Experiments  have  been  designed  for  adsorbing  anti-DNP  anti¬ 
body  from  each  of  the  successive  bleedings  from  each  animal,  and  for 
determining  the  affinity  of  the  antibody  by  the  fluorescence  quenching 


854 


technique.  The  antibody  affinity  data  obtained  In  these  experiments 
will  be  correlated  with  the  agglutinating,  precipitating,  and 
complement  fixing  activity  of  these  same  sera. 

9.  Immunodlagnosls  of  Filarial  Infections 

Studies  are  In  progress  to  determine  the  Incidence  of  Dlrofllarlasls 
In  humans  and  dogs  with  above  normal  numbers  of  circulating  eosinophils. 

Eosinophil  la  frequently  appears  In  patients  with  certain  parasitic 
Infections,  allergies  and  dermatosis.  The  actual  role  of  the  eosinophil 
leuxocyte  has  not  yet  been  elucidated,  but  there  Is  evidence  that  the 
mechanism  of  eosinophil  la  may  be  mediated  by  Immune  processes.  Most 
of  the  experimental  evidence  for  this  Is  based  on  experimental  Infec¬ 
tions  with  Trichlnel  1  a  spiralis  In  rats  and  mice.2*  The  clinical 
syndrome,  Tropical  Eosinophil  la,  has  been  recognized  for  many  years  and 
high  titers  of  antibody  against  filarial  antigens  have  been  detected  In 
active  cases.  These  titers  subside  after  treatment  with  dl ethyl carbama- 
zine. 22,23  This  syndrome  has  been  reported  from  many  areas.  Including 
a  large  part  of  Southeast  Asia.  The  Inciting  organism  Is  believed  to  be 
Wucher ia  bancroftl  In  many  Instances. 2^ 

An  Increase  In  circulating  eosinophils  is  often  observed  in 
Americans  in  Thailand  without  any  other  symptoms  of  Tropical  Eosinophil  la. 
Exposure  to  W.  bancroftl  is  limited  In  Bangkok,  but  exposure  to 
Dirofilaria  Timrttls,  a  parasite  of  dogs,  could  be  high  as  the  Incidence 
of  heartworms  in  dogs  in  Bangkok  Is  high.  A  survey  of  outpatients  seen 
at  the  U.S.  Army  Hospital,  Bangkok,  with  an  above  normal  number  of 
eosinophils  was  performed  to  determine  if  serological  titers  for  0. 
immitis  antigens  could  be  demonstrated. 

All  outpatient  records  were  screened  to  select  patients  with 
eosinophil  counts  above  8  percent.  These  individuals  were  bled  and  a 
portion  of  each  serum  sample  kept  while  the  remainder  was  processed  by 
the  Knott's  Concentration  Method  for  circulating  microfilaria.  The 
sera  were  tested  against  £.  immitis  antigen  by  the  indirect  hemagglu¬ 
tination  assay  (IHA)  using  antigen  prepared  from  a  saline  extract  of 
adult  worms.  Specificity  of  the  assay  was  determined  by  using  sera  of 
patients  with  known  helminthic  infections  (e.g.,  gnathostomiasis)  In 
assays  against  the  filarial  antigen  and  by  using  antigens  of  other 
parasites  and  the  sera  of  patients  positive  for  fllaria.  All  sera  will 
be  tested  in  the  Soluble  Antigen  Fluorescent  Antibody  Test  (SAFA)  as 
an  additional  verification  of  the  positives  obtained  with  the  IHA. 

Control  sera  (100)  were  obtained  from  the  U.S.  Army  Hospital,  Bangkok, 
from  outpatients  demonstrating  less  than  4%  eosinophils.  When  a  member 
of  a  family  had  eosinophil  la,  the  remaining  members  of  the  family  and 
pets,  if  any,  were  included  in  the  study.  Dogs  which  were  brought  to 
the  Veterinary  Clinic  were  routinely  checked  for  J).  Immitis  and  those 
that  were  positive  or  demonstrated  eosinophil  ia  were  included  in  the 


855 


Table  1:  Results  of  IHA  for  Human  Samples 


re 

+-» 

<x> 

r^ 

CO 

• 

0 

to 

o 

H 

co 

H 

+ 

o 

co 

• 

eg 

eg 

lO 

eg 

cd 


i 

lO 


I 

OvJ 


! 

LO 


rr 

t 

o 


t^ 

CD 


VO 

eo 


-Q 

CD 


co 

eo 


(Q 

CD 

eg 


co 

C 

o 


<D 

> 


c 

0) 

o 

CL 

O 

c 

re 

£ 

0 

tf) 

0 

a. 

+j 

c 

0 

o 

0) 

> 

■H 

4-» 

i-4 

VI 

V) 

<c 

L 

V) 

0) 

o 

X) 

0) 

0 

CL 

u 

o 

i— i 

Cl 

CL 

0 

x: 


o 

H 


VO 

co 


Q) 

-C 


u 

0) 


+ 

o 

CM 


re 

P 

TJ 


rtf 

73 


C  re 
P 

to  "9 


o 


x» 

c 


00 

eg 


856 


o 

CO 


CO 

00 


o 

o 


TJ 

re 

^0 

TJ 

a 

<D 

CD 

e 

a 

CO 

0) 

<— < 

r-H 

| 

O' 

o 

re 

E 

V£> 

eg 

r-  1 

co 

re 

a 

H 

co 

eg 

CO 

CO 

E 

a 

D 

0 

u 

CO 

a 

P 

re 

CO 

Q) 

O' 

o 

c 

L 

O' 

'H 

c 

uo 

l-H 

CD 

>1 

rO 

1 

• 

00 

•H 

£  • 

<e  .2 
lh  z} 

o  £ 

o 

eg 

00 

• 

o> 

•H  ^ 

E  .2 

re  rj 

L-t  j£ 

t 

0 

g-i 

H 

CD 

00 

00 

u  a 

^  a 

s 

to  o 

°  o 

Cl 

o 

ft  5 

co  .2 

M 

VM 

H 

iH 

• 

o 

eg 

-Q  V) 

55  2 

o 

1 

o 

• 

E  o 

X'  o 

CO 

4-1 

00 

CO 

00 

»— H 

CD 

o  0 

E  ® 

6  a) 

<D  CD 

3 

O 

£  | 

0) 

5  o 
■*-» 

E  > 

re 

(D  «n 

u 

0)  o 

>  4-1 

CO 

0 

a: 

D- 

o 

• 

o 

uo 

a 

P  T3 

> 

o  rO 

eg 

1 

lO 

CO 

CO 

o 

r-H 

eg 

o  c 

9r  C 

0 

C  P 

2 

O'  o 

2  o 

XI 

Lh 

O'  *“* 

„  to 

re 

00 

• 

-2  CO 

H 

o 

JZ  re 

M  > 

.2  ^ 

1 

o 

H 

> 

r- 

jC  5 

O 

eg 

r-H 

LO 

XI 

.3 

3  -o 

•H  P 

cO  ^ 

co 

*— H 

CO 

C 

O 

0 

> 

*  rH 

X 

o  x 

■rH 

x: 

•rH 

4-» 

-M 

■  i—4 

0 

0 

4~> 

£ 

a 

re 

CO 

X5 

r-4  TJ 

Cl 

o 

£ 

O 

.3 

i-h  r< 

<  -5 

o 

p 

■rH 

0 

a 

u 

CO 

CO 

< 

O' 

0 

-Q 

£ 

• 

a 

t-j 

O 

* — » 

X> 

o 

> 


10 

o  o 


CL  CL 


i  d,ai»,\,yuaihiu£jt 


study  with  the  owners  and  families. 

To  date,  349  human  samples  and  36  canine  samples  have  been  tested 
In  the  I  HA.  Of  these  samples  57  (16.3%)  human  (Table  1)  and  30  (83.3%) 
canine  (Table  2)  samples  were  serologically  positive  for  fllarlasls. 

Of  the  177  human  samples  with  8%  eosinophil  la  or  greater  19  were 
positive  (10.7%). 

Of  the  29  IHA  positive  sera  from  Individuals  with  less  than  4  per¬ 
cent  eosinophils,  28  were  from  members  of  family  groups  which  had  been 
sampled  based  on  the  eosinophil ia  of  the  index  member.  There  were  no 
IHA  positive  sera  among  the  100  control  sera  obtained  from  the  hospital 
laboratory. 

Future  plans  call  for  the  data  to  be  statistically  analyzed  to 
determine  whether  it  supports  the  hypothesis  that  Individuals  in  close 
contact  with  infected  dogs  will  develop  eosinophil ia  and  antibody  to 
the  microfilaria.  No  microfilaria  were  Isolated  from  human  samples; 
however,  a  number  of  the  canine  samples  had  microfilaria.  Family 
groups  will  be  studied  and  the  canine-human  relationship  Investigated. 

A  number  of  the  sera  obtained  from  military  guard  dogs  were  IHA 
positive  and  the  handlers  of  these  dogs  will  be  included  in  the  study. 
All  sera  presently  on  hand  will  be  tested  with  the  SAFA  test  and  all 
future  collections  will  be  tested  with  both  the  IHA  and  the  SAFA. 

10.  A  Survey  of  Rodent  Parasites  in  Southeastern  Thailand. 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  survey  a  rodent  population, 
primarily  Bandicota  indica,  to  determine  what  intestinal  and  blood 
parasites  were  present  and  to  ascertain  if  jl.  indica  could  be  acting 
as  a  reservoir  for  parasites  which  infect  man. 

Traps  w»re  set  in  both  rural  and  urban  areas  for  a  period  of  3 
months.  Material  for  parasitological  study  was  processed  as  follows: 

a.  Intestinal  contents:  The  gastrointestinal  tracts  of  rodents 
trapped  in  the  field  were  placed  in  10%  Buffered  Formalin  and  sent 
immediately  to  SMRL.  In  the  laboratory  the  intestines  were  removed 
from  the  fixative  and  excised  longitudinally  to  expose  their  contents. 
This  material  was  then  placed  in  a  Kimax  conical  graduated  cylinder. 

Tap  water  was  added  to  the  one  liter  mark  and  the  material  allowed  to 
settle.  The  supernatant  was  removed  and  the  above  procedure  repeated 
until  a  clear  supernatant  could  be  observed.  After  the  last  wash  the 
supernatant  was  removed  and  the  sediment  placed  in  a  petri  dish  and 
examined  for  adult  parasites. 

b.  Cecal  contents:  Cecal  material  was  processed  according  to 

the  Ritchie  modification  of  the  Formalin  Ether  Concentration  Technique. 
The  resulting  sediment  was  then  treated  with  Lugol's  iodine  and 
examined  microscopically  for  parasites. 

857 


c.  Blood  smears;  Thick  and  thin  smears  were  made  from  the  blood 
of  decapitated  rodents.  After  air  drying,  the  smears  wera  fixed  with 
methanol  and  shipped  to  the  main  laboratory.  After  staining  with  a 
2%  solution  of  Giemsa  stain  (commercial),  the  slides  were  examined 
microscopically  for  blood  parasites.  Fifty  thick  microscopic  fields 
were  examined  before  reporting  a  slide  negative. 

In  two  provinces  in  Southeastern  Thailand  704  rodents  were  trapped 
(Table  la).  Of  these,  514  (73fc)  were  Bandicota  Indica.  The  parasites 
found  in  the  study  are  shown  in  Table  lb  and  are  grouped  according  to 
province  in  Tables  2a,  2b  and  3a,  3b. 

All  the  nematodes,  which  accounted  for  the  majority  of  the 
parasites  found,  are  routinely  reported  in  rodents.  Some  have  been 
reported  in  man  but  only  rarely.  One  hookworm,  Cyclodontostomum  sp. , 
which  has  not  previously  been  reported  in  Thailand,  was  found  in  "28.4* 
of  the  B.  indica  trapped  in  the  Ban  Thapong  area.  Further  study  is 
require?  to  determine  its  possible  relationship  (if  any)  to  man. 
Another  organism,  an  acanthocephalan  (Moniliformis  moniliformis),  has 
been  reported  in  man  before  but  is  considered  by  some  as  an  incidental 
parasite. 

All  three  cestodes  found  in  the  study  can  be  considered  as  being 
transmissible  to  man.  One  tapeworm  (Rail! ietina  sp.)  has  been  discov¬ 
ered  among  infants  in  Thailand  (Chandler  and  Pradatsundarasar,  1957)?5 
This  finding  is  not  surprising  since  this  tapeworm  presumably  requires 
arthropods  such  as  cockroaches  as  an  intermediate  host  and  some  of  the 
children  infected  had  a  history  of  playing  with  cockroaches.  It  is 
also  of  interest  to  note  that  all  nine  cases  of  Rail! ietina  infection 
found  in  Thailand  up  to  1960  have  been  children  under  5  years  of  age 
(Pradatsandarasar,  1960). 26  The  two  remaining  cestodes  H.  nana  and 
H.  diminuta  have  been  reported  before  in  man.  _H.  diminuta.in  fact, 
was  reported  in  a  study  of  the  Thai  populationTn  Bangkok  (Baughn  and 
Morales,  1971).  27 

Only  one  fluke  of  the  genus  Echinostoma  was  found  in  our  survey. 
This  parasite  has  been  previously  reported  in  rodents  in  Thailand 
(Bhaibulaya,  1964). 28  This  fluke  requires  snails  as  an  intermediate 
host,  and  it  is  not  unusual  to  see  man  infected  with  this  parasite 
since  snails  are  included  in  the  diet  of  the  local  populace. 

Nymphs  of  Armillifer  moniliformis,  an  arthropod,  were  found 
encysted  around  the  mesentery  of  a  rodent  (II.  indica)  intestine.  It 
has  been  reported  before  in  man  but  only  rarely. 

As  illustrated  in  Table  3a,  we  found  four  kinds  of  Amebae  and 
Flagellate  protozoa  during  the  survey.  All  these  organisms  have  been 
reported  in  rodents  in  Thailand  before.  This  laboratory  has  routinely 
reported  these  organisms  before  from  humans  and  Baughn  and  Morales 


858 


Table  la:  MAP  SHOWING  RODENT  TRAPPING  SITES 


Table  lb:  Parasites  Found  in  Rodent  Survey 


Genus 


Nematodes 

Physaloptera 

Syphacia 

Strongyloides 

Trichuris 

Nippostrongylus 

Rictularia 

Cyclodontostomum 

Tricho^omoides 

Cestodes 

Hymanolepis 

Hymenolepis 

Raillietina 

Trematodes 

Echinostoma 

Acanthocephala 

Moniliformis 

Protozoa 

Entamoeba 

Chilomastix 

Giardia 

Endolimax 
Trypanosoma 
Erythrocytic  protozoa 
Sarcocystis 

Arthropods 

Armillifer 

Other 

Spirochetes 

Species 

sp. 

obvelata 

sp„ 

muris 

muris 

sp. 

sp0 

crassicauda 

diminuta 

nana 

sp„ 

sp. 

moniliformis 

coli 

mesnili 

lamblia 

nana 

lewisi 

sp. 

moniliformis 


860 


c 

0) 

-M 

c 

o 

O 


r0 

c 

■H 

■M 

tO 

0) 

■M 

.3 

o 

U 

-*-> 

CO 

ro 

O 


C 

o 


0) 


,c 

i  tl 
1  5 


3«  3? 

3?  3?  3? 

a* 

as 

<J)  H 

VO  f'*  ID 

00  1 

1  CM 

LO 

UO  1 

1  00 

•  • 

•  0  • 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0 

co  ro 

H  fO  H 

CM 

ro 

o 

r— 4 

LO 

CM 

r-i 

CM 

w 

U 

o  o 
co  X! 
a  U 

NP 

>sp 

as 

2 

ro  .2 

ro 

CM  1 

1 

o 

o 

ro 

to  1 

• 

• 

0 

• 

• 

• 

D  • 

CM 

O 

O 

C\j 

rH 

H 

O  ! 

col 

O' 

a 

1 

i 

O 

i 

1 

u 

1  vP 

V  (J  ' 

as 

as 

as 

as 

O 

z:  93 

o 

1 

1  1 

1  H 

CM 

LO 

00 

d  -c 

• 

O 

o 

• 

< 

1  10 

ro 

00 

CM 

LO 

ce 

ro  O 

Cn 

c 

o 


as 


i  i 


i  i  i  i  i 


u 

—t 

E 

r0 

a 

1  x 

1  £ 

r0| 

O 

as 

Np 

as 

as 

nP 

Np 

cN 

\5> 

0s* 

X 

i  * ' 

X5 

(D 

I 

1  CM 

CM  1 

1  CD 

XJ 

1  c 

e 

0 

0 

o 

o 

• 

o 

• 

!  co 

••-<1 

CM 

O 

LO 

CO 

o 

O 

V- 

03 

CM 

r—i 

CM 

CM 

CD 

■M 

i 

CQ| 

i  i  i 


"O 

CD 


no 

-M 

XI 

O 


3 

to 

CD 

CX 


rO 

r\j 


X 

rO 

H 


XJ 

j  § 
0 

I  ^ 
I  W 
I  O 


CO 

.  c° 

I  u* 

I  Jp 
I  ou 


I 


i 

L. 


<0 
.  +j 

a  j2 

5/5  0) 

2^ 

a)  o 

+-j 

a  ro 
O  Tt 


<0 

to 

>< 


>, 
a> 
c 
o 

CU  GO  C/D 


£ 

10 

3 

iH  • 

>;  a 
5  w 
£ 

O  ro 

ii  C 

to  ro 

o  ^ 
a  2 
.2  o 

*.H 

2  a: 


a 

to 

E 

s 

o 

4-J 

CO 

O 

■M 

§ 

X5 

O 


ro 
C 
rO 

C  • 

a 

.2  w 

o-  ro 

<D  j- 

o  '5 

C  0) 

6  x) 

^ 

O  as  ffi  o: 


ro 

TO 

:o 

rO 

O 

•H 

CO 

CO 

ro 

u 

O 

a  co 

(O  CD 


(0 

■*H 

E 

k  w 

O  'H 

E 

*— <  t  > 
?  ° 
o  3 
E 


-a 

•H 

O 

E 

o 

to 

O 

X 

o 


x: 

U  u, 

W  H 


o  £ 
2  % 


X5 

(D 

u 

CD 

> 

O 

0 

CD 

rO 

> 

O 

*  ■  I 

c 

O 


861 


■  i  . 1 1 ..  j,  mMiimmiiitu 


m  **  d?  S*!  d? 

f  O  I  I  ^  VO 

+J  •  •  •  • 

O  1/5  cm  rv 


II  Is 


g.3 

O  ro  ro 

?  2  H 

*8 

<2  - 


a*  *S  a*  &S 

I  CO  LO  I  CO  I 


dS  ^ 

in  i  i  i 


a* 

I  CM  I 


C0| 

u  a? 

as 

as 

<D  *—•  1  1 

1  1  LO  1 

1  LO 

JZ 

• 

• 

6 

o 

o 

I  I  I  I  I  I  I 


u 

0) 

as 

as 

as 

as 

,c 

CO 

LO  1  1 

1  t  LO  1 

1  o 

d 

H 

o 

• 

o 

• 

lO 

u  &  &  as 

*3  o  r^  i  eg 

C  *  ' 

-r-i  LO  CD  o 


as  as  as 

l  co  co  co 


*  »-*H  •  -iH 

1/1  V  '  u 

:|  2*  1 

I  0  8  .2  w 

I  ^  +J  U,  -iH 

£  w  (0  hj 

c  R3  5 

•  8  §  o  a 

■  *j  _  ^  >- 

W  Z  ttl  H 


ex  <0 

w  3 
£  -5  fO 

3  E  c 

£  -r3  fO 

o  c 

to  W  w 

X  H  -M 

O  a  a 
c  <u  a> 
0  o  o 
V.  c  c 
o  <D  0) 
o  £  £ 
>*>*>, 
O  K  K 


•  w  o 

a  w  p 

a  w  ® 
t/>  ro  32  <2 

-  E  o  ? 
§  o  £  E 

2tiS£ 

2  2  o  ^ 

—  p  n  C 

(0  u  C  ^ 

o;  w  h  4 


862 


e  cove  re 


fO 

ro 

CL) 

X) 

ro 

H 


863 


*>2 7  -  H2B  0  -74  12 


reported  all  but  one  of  them  during  their  1971  survey  in  Thailand. 

Except  for  Giardia  lamblia  all  the  organisms  encountered  are  commensals, 
although  the  finding  of1  these  parasites  in  the  rodents  clearly  impli¬ 
cates  their  rol(  as  reservoir  hosts  for  these  parasites. 

Only  four  blood  parasites  were  encountered  during  our  survey. 
Trypanosoma  lewisi  as  shown  in  Table  4  was  found  more  in  other  rodents 
than  in  B.  indica  and  is  generally  a  strict  parasite  of  its  definitive 
host.  Some  mention  Is  made  of  a  girl  being  infected  with  this  parasite 
In  Malaya,  but  no  description  is  given  of  the  parasite.  A  spirochete 
which  can  cause  a  variety  of  diseases  was  also  found.  This  parasite 
could  not  be  identified  as  to  species  from  blood  smears  alone.  The 
finding  of  this  parasite  in  the  rodent  blood  smears  is  hardly  note¬ 
worthy,  since  rat  bite  fever  is  caused  by  a  spirochete,  and  is 
transmitted  by  rat  bites.  Sarcocystis,  which  is  a  parasite  of  tissue, 
was  also  found  in  the  blood  smears;  this  organism  was  considered  a 
contaminant  since  the  blood  used  to  make  the  smears  was  taken  from 
rodent  muscle  tissue.  The  last  organism  encountered  was  an  erythro¬ 
cytic  protozoan  of  unknown  species.  More  work  is  required  before 
definite  identification  can  be  accomplished. 


Table  4.  Incidence  of  Blood  Parasites  in  Rodents 


B.  indica 

Other 

Trypanosoma  lewisi 

1.0% 

8.0% 

Sarcocystis 

19.0% 

3.4% 

Erythrocytic  protozoa 

17.4% 

0.5% 

Spirochetes 

0.8% 

0.0% 

11 .  Intestinal  Parasitism  in  the  Rhesus  Monkey. 

Studies  have  been  initiated  to  determine  the  incidence  of 
intestinal  parasites  in  rhesus  monkeys  upon  arrival  from  Inrlia  and  to 
evaluate  the  efficacy  of  treatments  used  to  control  them. 

Over  500  rhesus  monkeys  per  year  are  needed  to  support  a  malaria 
drug  screening  program  at  SMRL.  These  animals  are  received  in  groups 
of  85  every  60  days,  weigh  2-3  kg.  upon  arrival,  and  come  directly 
from  the  wild  in  India.  After  a  45  day  quarantine  period  in  our  colony, 
they  are  utilized  and  then  sacrificed  within  60-90  days. 

In  February  1973,  a  one  year  study  was  initiated  to  monitor  the 
incidence  of  internal  parasites  in  the  rhesus  monkeys  being  received 

865 


Table  1 


Internal  Parasites  Found  in  Rhesus  Monkeys 


Before  Treatment 

After  Treatment  * 

Parasite  Found 

Number 

Positive 

Percent 

Positive 

Number 

Positive 

Percent 

Positive 

HELMINTHS 
i  Ascaris  sp. 

1 

0.6% 

1 

0.6% 

I  Capillaria  sp. 

0 

0.0% 

1 

0.6% 

Strongyloides  sp. 

118 

69 . 8°/ 

4 

2.4% 

Trichostrongylus  sp. 

57 

33.7/o 

1 

0.6% 

Ancylostoma  sp. 

17 

10.  i% 

0 

0.0% 

Trichoris  sp. 

7 

4.1% 

5 

3 . 0% 

Unidentified 

0 

0.0% 

3 

1.8%  j 

PROTOZOANS 

Balantidium  coli 

60 

35.5% 

32 

19 . 0% 

Chilomastix  mesnili 

1 

0.6% 

3 

1.8% 

Entamoeba  coli 

109 

64 . 5% 

58 

34.5% 

Entamoeba  histolitice 

37 

21.9% 

37 

22.0% 

Endolimax  nana 

25 

14.8% 

21 

12.5% 

Giardia  lamblia 

0 

0 . 0% 

15 

8.9% 

Iodamoeba  butschlii 

53 

31.4% 

12 

7 . 1% 

| 

No  Parasites  or  Ova 

3 

i 

1.8% 

59 

35.1% 

*  Treatment  was  100  mg/kg  Thiabendazole  via  nasogastric  tube 


866 


from  India.  Fecal  specimens  are  being  taken  from  each  animal  on  the 
day  of  arrival  and  are  examined  by  the  flotation  method  for  ova  and 
parasites.  The  animals  are  then  treated  as  a  group  on  the  next  day. 
Fecal  specimens  are  taken  ten  days  after  treatment  and  agiln  examined 
for  ova  and  parasites.  Results  of  these  examinations  are  shown  In 
Table  1. 

The  data  presented  in  Table  1  represents  two  groups  of  85  animals 
each,  which  were  received  in  February  and  March  1973.  It  appears  from 
this  data  that  treatment  with  100  mg/kg  of  Thiabendazole  Is  quite 
effective  against  all  helminths  encountered  except  whipworms,  but  no 
firm  conclusions  may  be  drawn  at  this  time.  When  completed  in  Febru¬ 
ary  1974,  this  study  should  give  an  indication  of  the  internal 
parasites  to  be  expected  in  newly  arrived  young  rhesus  monkeys  from 
India,  as  well  as  an  indication  of  seasonal  variation.  It  should  also 
help  in  evaluating  the  parasite  treatment  regimens  being  used. 

1 2 .  Chemotherapy  of  Gnathostomiasis. 

The  effect  of  oral  or  parenteral  administration  of  drugs  on 
Gnathostoma  spinigerum  larvae  is  being  studied  on  a  continuing  basis. 
The  drugs  selected  for  the  screening  tests  have  been  used  effectively 
in  the  treatment  of  certain  helminthic  diseases  but  have  yet  to  be 
used  in  treating  gnathostome  infection. 

Experimental  white  mice  and/or  white  rats  were  orally  infected 
with  advanced  third  stage  larvae  of  G.  spinigerum.  Mice  were 
infected  with  5  larvae, aed  rats  witF  Zo.  Tne  drug  or  combination 
of  drugs  tested  was  administered  orally  or  by  intramuscular  injection, 
and  the  daily  dose  was  calculated  using  the  body  weight  of  the  test 
animal.  In  all  instances  the  control  animals  were  given  distilled 
wacer.  The  drugs  tested  were  Hetrazan  (Diethyl carbamazine  citrate) 
combined  with  Bithionol  (Bitin) ;  Fouadin  (Peiitasodium  antimony  1,1, 

1 -biscatechol-3,  5-disulfonate);  Flagyl  (1-B-hydroxyethyl-l ,  2-methyl- 
5-niti'oii'idazcle) ;  Dehydroemetine  (racemic  2-dehydroemetine 
dihydrochloride) ;  a  combination  of  Dehydroemetine  and  Flagyl;  and 
Metrifonate  (0,  0-dimethyl hydroxy-2,  2,  2-trichlorethyl-phosphonate) . 
Following  infection  and  the  chemotherapeutic  regimen,  the  test 
animals  were  autopsied,  the  parasites  counted,  and  the  results 
recorded . 

Hetrazan  combined  with  Bitin  (oral  administration):  Infected  mice 
wore  trea ted  with  15  daily  doses  of  Hetrazan  (lOmg/kg  body  weight) 
combined  w’f.h  Bitin  (50  mg/kg  body  weight).  The  results  of  this 
experiment  are  shown  in  Table  1.  No  reduction  in  the  number  of  larvae 
in  trea"  -d  mice  was  observed,  and  this  combination  of  drugs  is  judged 
ineffective. 


867 


Table  2 


Fouadin  Chemotherapy  on  Rats  or  Mice  Infected  with  Gnathostoma  spiniqerum 


| - 

Autopsy  findings 

Daily  dose  of  Foua din/rat 
or  mouse  *  *  ^ 

1  No.  rats 
;  or  mice 

1  treated 

1 

No.  rats  or  mice 
positive  with 
advanced  third 
stage  larvae  (%) 

No.  advanced 
third  stage 
larvae  found 
<*) 

Organs  infected 

Remarks 

(3.15  ma/ka  body  weiaht) 

• 

15 

12  rats 

12  rats  (100) 

85  (35) 

body  muscles 

Autopsies  17  days  after 
the  last  dose 

Control  -  15  doses 

3  rats 

3  rats  (100) 

20  (33) 

- 

•• 

.. 

(fexi  m.a/Kfl  frpdy  wgjaht) 

14 

33  mice 

33  mice  (100) 

112  (68) 

liver  and/or 
body  muscles 

Autopsies  14-16  days  after 
the  last  dose 

Control  -  14  doses 

15  mice 

15  mice  (100) 

4S  (60) 

" 

- 

.. 

(100  ma/ka  body  weiaht) 

14 

20  mice 

20  mice  (100) 

73  (73) 

M 

Autopsies  10-18  days  after 
the  last  dose 

20 

20  mice 

20  mice  (100) 

70  (70) 

M 

•• 

Autopsies  3-26  days  after 
the  last  dose 

Control  -  20  doses 

10  mice 

10  mice  (100) 

39  (78) 

M 

Autopsies  19  days  after  the 
last  dose 

(200  ma/ka  body  weiaht) 

14 

20  mice 

20  mice  (100) 

69  (69) 

•• 

Autopsies  17-19  days  after 
the  last  dose 

Control  -  14  doses 

10  mice 

10  mice  (100) 

35  (70) 

•• 

- 

.. 

20  i 

20  mice 

20  mice  (100) 

| 

70  (70) 

•• 

Autopsies  10-18  days  after 
the  last  dose 

Control  -  20  doses 

i 

10  mice 

1 0  mice  (100) 

! 

i 

*  -  ■ 

39  (7B) 

Autopsies  2-20  days  after 
the  last  dose 

1  Drug  was  dissolved  in  distilled  water. 

2  Control  was  distilled  water. 


869 


Table  3 

Flagyl  Chemotherapy  on  Mice  Infected  with  Gnathostoma  spiniqerir.i 


870 


Drug  was  dissolved  in  distilled  water. 
Control  was  distilled  water. 


871 


Drug  dissolved  in  distilled  water. 
Control  was  distilled  water. 


Fouadin  (intramuscular  injection) :  The  compound  contains  13.5  per 
cent  tri valent  antimony  (n  pyrogen-free  redistilled  water.  Both 
mice  and  rats  were  used  and  a  daily  dose  of  drug  administered  at 
levels  of  3.15,  6.3,  100,  and  200  mg/kg  body  weight.  The  drug  has 
been  used  in  treating  infection  with  Schi stoma  hematobium.  The 
results  of  this  experiment  are  shown  in  Table  2.  No  reduction  In 
the  number  of  larvae  in  treated  mice  was  observed  and  this  drug  is 
judged  ineffective. 

Flagyl  (oral  administration):  This  drug  has  been  used  with 
satisfactory  results  in  treating  intestinal  and  hepatic  amebiasis, 
trichomoniasis  and  some  other  protozoal  infections  in  man.  Recently 
this  drug  has  been  used  with  good  results  in  treating  dracuncul iasis 
in  man. 29, 30  in  this  experiment,  a  daily  dose  of  flagyl  was 
administered  to  gnathostome-infected  mice  at  levels  of  200,  400, 

800,  and  1600  mg/ kg  body  weight.  The  results  are  shown  in  Table  3. 

No  reduction  in  the  number  of  larvae  in  treated  mice  was  observed 
and  this  drug  is  judged  ineffective. 

Dehydroemetine  (oral  administration):  This  compound  is  chemically 
related  to  natural  emetine  and  obtained  by  total  synthesis.  The 
drug  has  been  used  with  good  results  in  intestinal  amebiasis  (all 
forms),  hepatic  amebiasis,  schistosomiasis  (£.  haematobium  or  S,. 
mansoni  or  mixed  infection)  and  distomiasis  due  to  Fasciola-  hepatica. 
In  this  study,  gnathostome-infected  mice  were  each  treated  with  15 
daily  doses  of  dehydroemetine  administered  at  levels  of  10  or  15  mg/ 
kg  body  weight.  The  results  are  shown  in  Table  4.  There  was  no 
reduction  in  the  number  of  larvae  in  treated  mice  and  this  drug  is 
judged  ineffective. 

Dehydroemetine  combined  with  Flagyl  (oral  administration):  Infected 
mice  were  treated  with  20  daily  doses  of  de hydroemetine  (10  mg/ kg 
body  weight)  combined  with  Flagyl  (200  mg/kg  body  weight).  The 
results  of  this  experiment  are  shown  in  Table  5.  No  reduction  in 
the  number  of  larvae  in  treated  mice  was  observed  and  this  drug  is 
judged  ineffective. 

Metrifonate  (oral  administration):  It  has  been  reported  that 
metrifonate  was  an  effective  drug  in  the  treatment  of  Schistosoma 
haematobium  infection  by  oral  administration.*^  This  drug  is  now 
being  studied  to  determine  its  effectiveness  at  2-week  intervals  for 
5  doses  in  G^.  spinigerum  infected  experimental  mice.  The  doses  are 
20,  40,  80,  and  120  mg/kg  body  weight.  Results  at  this  time  are 
incomplete. 

13.  Studies  of  New  Experimental  Intermediate  and  Paratenic  Hosts 
and  Modes  of  Transmission  of  Gnathostoma  spinigerum  and  G.  hispidum. 


873 


These  experiments  a*e  a  continuation  of  studies  to  locate  new 
experimental  host  animals  susceptible  to  Gnathostoma  spinigerum  and 
G.  hispidum  as  reported  previously. 9 

Young  as  well  as  adult  fresh  water  prawns  (Macrobrachium 
rosembergi ,  De  Mann)  were  obtained  from  the  Chao  Phraya  river, 
ponds  in  and  around  the  Bangkok  area;  and  from  the  experimental 
shrimp  farm  of  Department  of  Fisheries,  for  testing  as  possible 
intermediate  and/or  paratenic  hosts  of  G.  spinigerum.  One  hundred 
young  shrimp  and  approximately  20,000  G.  spinigerum  newly  hatched 
first  stage  larvae  were  placed  together  in  a  two  liter  glass  beaker 
containing  about  1.8  liters  of  fresh  water.  In  addition  100  young 
shrimp  were  placed  in  another  2  liter  glass  beaker  with  1000 
G.  spinigerum  fully  developed  larvae  (early  third  stage)  in  cyclops. 

To  test  the  possibility  of  fresh  water  shrimp  and  prawns  being 
a  paratenic  host,  advanced  third  stage  G.  spinigerum  larvae 
obtained  from  experimentally  infected  laboratory  white  mice  will 
be  used  to  attempt  infection.  Adult  shrimp  and  prawns  are  being 
kept  in  laboratory  aquaria  for  a  period  of  time  to  familarize  them 
with  the  laboratory  environment  and  food  before  commencing  the 
experiment.  In  order  to  determine  the  possible  presence  of  natural 
infection,  100  young  shrimp  and  5  adult  shrimp  and  prawns,  obtained 
from  the  same  source  as  the  experimental  crayfish,  were  autopsied 
for  the  presence  of  gnathostomes.  The  study  on  G.  hispidum  was  not 
done  during  this  reporting  period  because  of  time  limitation. 

The  experiments  are  still  in  progress.  The  result  of  autopsies 
to  date  to  determine  natural  infection  of  shrimp  and  prawns  with 
gnathostomes  is  negative. 


874 


Project  3A062110A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  "Tropics!  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 

Literature  Cited: 

References: 

1.  Brewer,  G./.,  and  Powell,  R.D.:  A  study  of  the  relationship 
between  the  content  of  adenosine  triphosphate  in  human  red  cells 
and  the  course  of  falciparum  malaria:  A  new  system  that  may  confer 
protection  against  malaria.  Proc.  U.S.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  54: 
741-745,1965. 

2.  Eaton,  J.W.,  and  Brewer,  G.J.:  Red  cell  ATP  and  malaria 
infection.  Nature  222:  389-390,  1969. 

3.  Brewer,  G.J.,  and  Powell,  R.D.:  The  adenosine  triphosphate 
content  of  glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase-deficient  and  normal 
erythrocytes,  including  studies  of  a  glucose-6 -phosphate  dehydro¬ 
genase-deficient  man  with  "elevated  erythrocytic  ATP."  J.  Lab. 
Clin.  Med.  .67:  726-741,  1966. 

4.  Brewer,  G.J.:  Genetic  and  population  studies  of  quantitative 
levels  of  adenosine  triphosphate  in  human  erythrocytes.  Biochem. 
Gen.  1:  25-34,  1967. 

5.  Iber,  P.K.,  and  Pavanand,  K.:  SEATO  Med.  Rsch.  Lab.  Annual 
Pr>-  Rpt.,  page  297,  1972. 

6.  Stanley,  P.E.,  and  Williams,  S.G.:  Use  of  the  liquid 
scintillation  spectrometer  for  determining  adenosine  triphosphate 
by  the  luciferase  enzyme.  Anal.  Biochem.  29.:  381-392,  1969. 

7.  Brewer,  G.J.:  Genetic  and  population  studies  of  human 
erythrocyte  adenosine  triphosphate  (ATP).  J.  Lab.  Clin.  Med.  66.: 
858-859,  1965. 


875 


L. 


8.  Catt,  K.  and  Trager,  G.:  Solid -phase  immunoassay  in 
antibody  coated  tubes.  Science  158:  1570,  1967. 

9.  The  Annual  Progress  Report.  The  SEATO  Medical  Research 
Laboratory  April  1971  -  March  1972. 

10.  World  Health  Organization:  Chemotherapy  of  malaria. 

Report  of  a  WHO  scientific  group.  Tech.  Rep.  Ser.  375:  55-5  7, 
1967. 

11.  Allison,  A.C.:  Protection  afforded  by  sickle-cell  trait 
against  subtertian  malarial  infection.  Brit.  Med.  J.  1.:  290-294, 
1954. 

12.  Motulsky,  A.G.:  Metabolic  polymorphisms  and  the  role  of 
infectious  diseases  in  human  evolution.  Human  Biol.  32:  28-62, 
1960. 

13.  Siniscalco,  M.L.,  et  al.:  Favism  and  thalassaemia  in 
Sardinia  and  their  relationship  to  malaria.  Nature  190:  1179— 

1180,  1961. 

14.  Allison,  A.C.  and  Clyde,  D.F.:  Malaria  in  African  children 
with  deficient  erythrocyte  glucose -6 -phosphate  dehydrogenase. 

Brit.  Med.  J.  1:  1346-1349,  1961. 

15.  Powell,  R.D.,  and  Brewer,  G.J.:  Glucose -6 -phosphate 
dehydrogenase  deficiency  and  falciparum  malaria.  Am.  J.  Trop. 
Med.  Hyg.  14:  358-362,  1965. 

16.  Beutler,  E.R.,  Dem,  R.J.,  and  Flanagan,  C.L.:  Effect  of 
sickle-cell  trait  on  resistance  to  malaria.  Brit.  Med.  J.  1:  1189— 
1191,  1955. 

17.  Kruatrachue,  M.,  etal.:  Erythrocyte  glucose-6 -phosphate 
dehydrogenase  and  malaria  in  Thailand.  Lancet  2_:  1183-1186, 

1962. 

18.  Kruatrachue,  M.,  et  al.:  Haemoglobin  E  and  malaria  in 
South-East  Thailand.  Ann.  Trop.  Med.  Parasit.  5J3:  468-473,  1961. 


876 


1 


19.  Diggs,  C.L.,  et  al.:  Penetration  of  human  fetal  erythrocytes 
bv  Plasmodium  falciparum  in  vitro.  J.  Parasit.  £2:  187-188,  1971. 

20.  Hill,  R.J.:  Elution  of  antibodies  from  immunoadsorbents: 

Effect  of  dioxane  in  promoting  release  of  antibody.  J.  Immunol. 
Methods  I:  231-245,  1972. 

21.  Basten,  A.,  Boyer,  M.H.,  and  Beeson,  P.B.:  Mechanism  of 
eosinophilia,  I.:  Factors  affecting  the  eosinophil  response  of  rats 
to  Trichinella  spiralis.  J.  Exp.  Med.  131:  1271-1287,  1970. 

22.  Danaraj,  T.J.,  da  Silva,  L.S.,  and  Schacher,  J.F.:  The 
serological  diagnosis  of  eosinophilic  lung  (Tropical  Eosinophilia) 
and  its  etiological  implications.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  and  flyg.  8: 
151-159,  1959. 

23.  Pacheco,  G.  and  Danaraj,  T.J.:  Indirect  hemagglutination  with 
extracts  of  various  helminths  in  eosinophilic  lung  (Tropical 
Eosinophilia).  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  and  Hyg.  .15:  355-358,  1966. 

24.  Sullivan,  T.J.:  Tropical  eosinophilia  in  the  Republic  of  South 
Vietnam.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  19.:  947-949,  1970. 

25.  Chandler,  A.C.  and  Pradatsundarasar,  A.:  Two  cases  of 
Raillietina  infection  in  infants  in  Thailand,  with  a  discussion  of 

the  taxonomy  of  the  species  of  Raillietina  (cest  da)  in  man,  rodents, 
and  monkeys.  J.  of  Parasit.  43:  1:  81-89,  1957. 

26.  Pradatsundarasar,  A.:  Nine  cases  of  Raillietina  infection 
in  Bangkok.  J.M.A.T.  43:  1,  1960. 

27.  Baughn,  R.E.,  and  Morales,  A.R.:  Parasitism  in  Thailand: 

An  evaluation  by  various  concentration  techniques  and  its 
importance  in  the  United  States.  Amer.  J.  Clin.  Path.  55:  2, 

1971. 

28.  Bhaibulaya,  M.,  Charoenlarb,  P.  and  Harinasuta,  C.:  Report 
of  cases  of  Echinostoma  malavanum  and  Hvpoderaeum  conoideum 
in  Thailand.  J.M.A.T.  47:  12,  1964. 


877 


1^1*1 'ili I'lf  MMiMiilH 


4 


29.  Davis,  A.  and  Bailey,  D.R.:  Metrifonate  in  urinary 
schistosomiasis.  Bull.  Wld.  Hlth.  Org.  4_1:  209-224,  1969. 

30.  Antani,  J.A. ,  Srinivas,  H.V.,  Krishnamurthy,  K.R.,  and 
Jahagirdar,  B.R.:  Metronidazole  in  dracunculiasis:  A  preliminary 
report.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  P9:  821-822,  1970. 

31.  Antani,  J.A.,  Srinivas,  H.V.,  Krishnamurthy,  K.R.,  and 
Borgaonkar,  A.N.:  Metronidazole  in  dracunculiasis:  Report  of 
further  trials .  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  21:  178-181.  1972. 

Publication: 

1.  Yuthsastr-Kosol,  V.  ,  Manning,  G.,  and  Diggs,  C.:  Fasciolopsis 
buski:  Serum  complement-fixing  activity  in  human  infection.  Exp. 
Para  sit.  33:  100-104,  1973. 


878 


Project  3A062110A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 
Investigators. 

Principal:  LTC  David  E.  Davidson,  Jr.,  VC;  Maj  Harry 

Rozmiarek,  VC;  Maj  Dennis  O.  Johnsen,  VC;  Maj 
Alexander  De  Paoli,  VC;  CPT  John  W.  Sagartz,  VC; 
Prayot  Tanticharoenyos,  DVM;  Markpol  Tingpalapong, 
DVM;  Rampung  Dissamarn,  DVM. 

Associate:  Maj  Walter  W.  Noll,  MC;  CPT  M.  Talmage  M'cMinn, 
MSC;  SSG  Elisandro  Rodriguez;  Kitti  Watanasirmkit, 

B.  Sc.;  Chumneun  Satayapantha;  Pravate  Lertprasert; 
Wichiyan  Paniom. 


The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  detect  and  investigate  spont 
neous  diseases  of  laboratory  animals.  This  knowledge  will  aid  i. 
defining  and  improving  the  health  of  laboratory  animals  maintained 
in  Thailand,  and  in  developing  animal  models  for  human  diseases. 

In  order  to  accomplish  the  objective,  a  program  of  continuous  sur¬ 
veillance  of  the  health  status  of  the  animal  colony  has  been 
developed.  Four  areas  are  emphasized  in  this  program,  (1)  the 
disease  screening  program  ccviducted  in  the  laboratory  animal 
breeding  colony,  (2)  the  recurring  clinical  and  laboratory  examina¬ 
tion  of  animals  housed  in  the  laboratory  including  those  procedures 
performed  during  the  quarantine  of  newly  purchased  animals,  (3) 
the  post-mortem  examination  of  each  animal  that  dies  in  the  colony, 
and  (4)  the  development  of  standards  for  operation  and  quality 
control.  When  indicated  by  the  findings,  experimental  studies  are 
initiated  to  explore  in  detail  the  problems  that  occur. 

There  was  little  evidence  of  spontaneous  disease  among  laborato¬ 
ry  rodents  during  this  report  period.  The  annual  production  of  rats, 
mice,  and  guinea  pigs  has  been  maintained  at  levels  comparable  to 
previous  years,  as  have  indicators  of  production  efficiency  such  as 
conception  rate  and  yield  per  female.  Production  was  lowest  during 
the  hot  season  as  in  previous  years.  The  number  of  rodents 

879 


HU'  ' 


”  \  I 


necropsied  and  the  distribution  of  gross  pathological  lesions 
according  to  organ  system  is  shown  in  Table  1.  The  most  frequently 
observed  gross  lesions  were  lobar  pneumonia,  regional  enteritis, 
and  cystic  ovaries.  Bacteria  isolated  from  the  lungs  or  feces  of 
mice,  hamsters,  and  guinea  pigs  as  part  of  the  disease  screening 
program  are  shown  in  Table  2.  The  colrform  group  was  most  frequent- 
J/  isolated,  followed  in  frequency  by  Pseudomonas  sp. 

A  number  of  spontaneous  deaths  occurred  among  primates  in  the 
laboratory  during  the  year.  The  cause  and  frequency  of  deaths  in 
rhesus  monkeys  during  the  initial  45  day  quarantine  period  after 
arrival  in  the  colony  are  summarized  in  Table  3.  Rhesus  monkeys 
arrive  directly  from  the  wild  in  India,  and  over  85  per  cent  of  them 
have  intestinal  parasites  upon  arrival.  These  animals  are  stressed 
by  capture,  transportation,  and  adjustment  to  a  different  environment, 
and  are  quite  susceptible  to  enteritis  which  is  often  complicated  by 
secondary  bacterial  infection.  This  bacterial  enteritis  accounts  for 
most  of  the  losses  due  to  intestinal  symptoms.  Most  of  the  losses 
due  to  pulmonary  disease  were  attributed  to  primary  measles  virus 
infection  with  secondary  bacterial  complications.  This  was 
determined  from  clinical  signs  and  confirmed  by  observation  of 
pathological  lesions  of  interstitial  and  giant  cell  pneumonia .  Virus 
isolation  has  not  been  attempted  on  these  animals.  There  were  no 
cases  of  tuberculosis  diagnosed  either  by  intra palpebral  inoculation 
with  KOT  or  by  post-mortem  examination. 

Nine  deaths  occurred  among  gibbons  during  this  report  period. 

Most  of  these  deaths  were  due  to  gastrointestinal  conditions  caused 
by  a  combination  of  parasitic  and  bacterial  infections,  and  by 
respiratory  problems.  Two  cases  of  granulocytic  leukemia  developed 
in  gibbons  during  the  year  and  are  reported  elsewhere. 

Table  1 

Summary  of  Rodent  Breeding  Colony  Pathologic  Findings  for  1972 


Species 

Number 

Examined 

Pulmonary 

Gastrointestinal 

Pathology 

Cenitourinary 

Pathology 

Guinea  Pig 

122 

17 

9 

9 

Mouse 

235 

10 

3 

0 

Hamster 

182 

8 

2 

1 

880 


Table  2 


Bacterial  Isolates  Identified  in  Laboratory  Rodents  1972 


Bacterial  Isolate 

Species  Examined 

Mouse  (234) 

Hamster  (177) 

Guinea  Pig  (119) 

Staphylococcus  aureus 

7 

(3%) 

;  6 

(3.4%) 

4 

(3 . 4%) 

Staphylococcus  epidermidis 

0 

12 

(6.8%) 

0 

Micrococcus  sp. 

2 

(0.85%) 

1 

(0.56%) 

2 

(1.7%) 

Eschenschia  coll 

55 

(23.5%) 

13 

(7.3%) 

20 

(16.8%) 

Paracolobactrum  coliforme 

6 

(2 . 6%) 

6 

(3 . 4%) 

0 

Paracolobactrum  intermedium 

2 

(0.85%) 

0 

2 

(1.7%) 

Paracolobactrum  aerogenoides 

18 

(7.7%) 

6 

(3.4%) 

22 

(18.5%) 

Intermedium  coliforme 

0 

2 

(1.1%) 

0 

Non-hemolytic  streptococci 

0 

2 

(1.1%) 

0 

Alpha -hemolytic  streptococci 

0 

3 

(1.7%) 

2 

(1.7%) 

Pseudomonas  aeruginosa 

0 

0 

6 

(5%) 

Pseudomonas  sp. 

lb 

(8.1%) 

4 

(2.2%) 

2 

(1.7%) 

Diphtheroids 

0 

0 

1 

(0.84%) 

Proteus  mirabilis 

18 

(7.7%) 

0 

0 

Proteus  morgann 

0 

i  0 

1  1 

(0.84%) 

Proteus  sp. 

8 

(3.4%) 

25 

(14.1%) 

0 

Bacillus  sp. 

2 

(0.8  5%) 

4 

(2.2%) 

1 

(0.84%) 

Herellea  sp. 

2 

(0.85%) 

0 

0 

Mima  polymorpha  var.oxidens 

1 

(0.42%) 

0 

0 

Mima  sp. 

0 

0 

3 

(2 . 5/a) 

Citrobacter  alkaligenes 

1 

(0.42%) 

0 

0 

Citrobacter  i  p . 

0 

0 

1 

(0.84%) 

Providencia  sp. 

3 

(1.3%) 

0 

4 

(3 . 4%) 

Shigella  boydii 

0 

0 

1 

(0.84%) 

No  Pathogens  Isolated 

102 

(4  3.6%) 

114 

(64.4%) 

61 

(5  1 . 3%) 

881 


Table  3 


Rhesus  Monkey  Losses  During  The  Initial 
45  Day  Quarantine  Period. 


Month 

Animals 

Received 

Number  ot 

Deaths 

intestinal 

Disease 

Pulmonary 

Disease 

1  obi  Uiiry 

85 

44 

(51.8  %) 

18 

26 

A  pi  il 

85 

b 

(7.1X) 

3 

3 

J U IK  ' 

85 

1 

(1 .  2%) 

1 

0 

/unjust 

85 

3 

(3 .  5%) 

3 

(■ 

0  ‘tuber 

85 

5 

(5 . 9%) 

3 

2 

December 

85 

12 

(14 . 1%) 

4 

8 

Total 

510 

71 

(13.9%) 

32 

39 

Table  4 

Summary  of  Gibbon  Necropsy  Findings 


Principle  Pathologic  Finding 

Number  of  Animals 

Pneumonia 

3 

Ga  stroenteritis 

3 

M  omngiocncephalitis 

1 

(Gysticercoid) 

Granulocytic  Leukemia 

2 

_ 1 

882 


T 


2 .  Studies  on  the  Growth,  Development  and  Reproduction  of  Gibbons 

in  Captivity. 

A  colony  of  55  gibbons  (Hylobates  lar)  has  been  maintained  at 
the  SEATO  Medical  Research  Laboratory  for  use  in  the  medical 
research  projects  of  the  laboratory.  An  active  breeding  program 
has  been  conducted  for  the  past  several  years,  and  16  young  have 
been  produced  in  the  laboratory.  Insofar  as  it  is  consistent  with 
the  other  research  objectives  of  the  laboratory,  observations  on 
various  aspects  of  the  growth  and  development  of  these  laboratory 
raised  animals  have  been  made  on  a  regular  basis.  Information  on 
the  growth,  development,  and  reproduction  of  gibbons  in  captivity 
may  be  useful  in  medical  research,  and  in  developing  methods  of 
breeding  and  rearing  gibbons  in  a  laboratory  environment. 

During  the  past  year,  5  gibbons  were  born  in  the  colony.  Three 
of  these  are  presently  alive  and  healthy.  One  was  stillborn,  and 
one  died  at  5  weeks  of  age  of  an  acute  bronchopneumonia.  The 
birth  information  for  these  5  animals  is  presented  in  Table  1 .  Since 
1967,  six  females  have  produced  all  of  the  16  young  raised  in  the 
laboratory.  It  is  of  interest  to  note  the  period  of  time  elapsing 
between  deliveries  of  successive  young.  This  information  is 
presented  in  Table  2.  The  shortest  intervals  between  delivery  of 
young  were  in  B-4  and  B-7.  These  females  each  had  their  third  baby 
only  9.5  months  after  the  previous  birth.  These  data  indicate  that 
frequent  parturition  is  possible  in  captive  female  gibbons,  but  that 
it  may  take  several  years  in  captivity  to  attain  a  birth  rate 
approaching  one  young  per  year.  Adaptation  to  life  in  captivity  and 
compatability  with  the  males  in  the  breeding  group  play  major  roles 
in  obtaining  frequent  pregnancies  in  the  female  gibbon. 

During  1972,  gibbon  PC-1,  the  first  gibbon  born  in  our  colony 
on  22  December  1967,  began  to  menstruate.  Eversion  of  the  vulva 
was  first  noted  on  12  July  1972,  and  daily  vaginal  swabs  were  taken 
from  that  time  until  the  first  menstrual  flow  was  noted  on  9  September 
1972.  Its  age  at  that  time  was  4  years,  7  months,  and  19  days 
and  body  weight  was  4,600  grams.  Subsequent  menstrual  bleeding 
was  observed  on  15  October,  11  November,  16  December,  19  January, 
10  February,  and  8  March  at  intervals  of  36,  27  ,  35,  34,  22,  and 
26  days  respectively.  On  the  day  that  vaginal  eversion  was  noted 
(12  July  1272),  the  only  decidual  teeth  remaining  were  the  upper 


883 


canines.  The  left  upper  canine  was  shed  on  16  August,  and  the 
right  was  loose.  The  right  upper  canine  was  shed  a  few  days  later. 

The  regular  program  of  daily  observation  and  vaginal  swabbing 
in  11  of  the  female  ginbons  in  the  colony  was  continued  during  1972, 
in  order  to  better  characterize  the  length  of  the  sexual  cycle  and  its 
variability.  The  results  of  these  observations  are  indicated  in 
Table  3.  The  length  of  the  cycle  was  usually  19-23  days,  but 
intervals  as  short  as  11  days  were  observed.  In  nearly  all  animals, 
periods  of  amenorrhea  two  or  three  months  in  duration  or  longer  were 
noted.  It  is  believed  that  these  longer  periods  between  successive 
menstruations  are  multiples  of  the  basic  cycle.  S-70  and  S-81  were 
quiescent  throughout  most  of  the  period . 

Table  1 

Gibbons  born  in  the  SMRL  Colony  during  1972-1973. 


Baby 

Date  of 

Parents 

Remarks 

Number 

Birth 

Male 

Female 

PC-12 

10  Mar  72 

B-8 

B-7 

Died  17  Apr  72 
of  Acute 
Pneumonia 

PC-13 

11  Aug  72 

S-58 

B-ll 

PC-14 

28  Oct  72 

B-12 

B-4 

PC -15 

22  Dec  72 

P-16 

B-7 

Stillborn 

PC-16 

1  Jan  73 

B-8 

B-59 

884 


Table  2 


Reproductive  Data  on  Breeding  Female 
Gibbons  in  the  SMRL  Colony 


Female 

Number 

Date  of  Birth  of  Young 

1st 

2nd 

3rd 

4th 

FI -4 

12  Dec  67 

11  Oct  70 
(34)  (b) 

26  Jul  71 
(9.5) 

28  Nov7i 
(16) 

H-G 

(a) 

Mar  69 

R-7 

12  Jun  68 

10  Mar  72 
(45) 

22  Dec  72 
(9.5) 

B-ll 

10  May  68 

16  Sept  70 
(28) 

15  Oct  71 
(13) 

llAug72 

(10) 

B-37 

4  May  71 

R-59 

Sep  69(a) 

12  Oct  71 
(25) 

1  Jan  73 
(14) 

(a)  These  births  occurred  under  wild  conditions  on  an  island  in 
the  gulf  of  Thailand.  The  exact  date  of  birth  is  unknown. 

(b)  Numbers  in  parenthesis  are  the  number  of  months  since  the 
previous  birth  for  this  female. 


885 


Interval  in  flays  between  sue  essivc  eye 


T,jI)1:>  3 


The  Duration  of  the  Sexual  Cycle  in  the  remale  Gibbon 


Gibbon  Identification  Number 

BldS 

B66S 

1385  * 

B88 

P2 

P5 

S2 

S20 

S90 

S81 

S92 

(.3 

22 

19 

22 

22 

23 

23 

144 

101 

20 

2  () 

22 

22 

20 

56 

21 

2  8 

207 

11 

2  0 

19 

18 

43 

21 

24 

37 

bl 

3  3 

30 

27 

22 

18 

48 

25 

30 

22 

lul 

14 

21 

35 

27 

38 

18 

29 

23 

21 

2i> 

22 

21 

4  5 

20 

22 

26 

22 

21 

29 

14  • 

21 

18 

56 

28 

31 

19 

70 

15 

20 

26 

19 

2  S 

21 

24 

21 

26 

21 

2  3 

20 

29 

21 

26 

2  3 

23 

16 

19 

2  0 

19 

4  6 

19 

22 

3  8 

14 

20 

44 

15 

25 

20 

1 

1 

23 

2  0 

1 

1 

21 

*  A1J  qibbons  in  the  study  arc  Hylobates  lar,  except  B-85  which  is 
Hylobates  lar  pileatus  . 


3.  Observations  on  the  Occurrence,  Etiology  and  Treatment  of 

Diarrheas  in  Captive  Gibbons 

The  objective  of  these  studies  was  to  determine  the  causes  of 
diarrheas  in  captive  gibbons  and  to  evaluate  methods  of  treatment. 

The  information  included  in  this  report  was  collected  over  a 
one  year  period  in  a  colony  of  55  gibbons  (Hylobates  lar,  Hylobates 
icr  plleatus ,  and  Hylobates  concolor)  maintained  at  the  SEATO 
Medical  Research  Laboratory.  Forty-one  of  these  gibbons  were 
maintained  in  individual  cages  within  a  screened  laboratory  build¬ 
ing.  Fourteen  were  kept  outdoors  in  9  large  breeding  cages  singly 
or  in  pairs.  The  gibbons  were  fed  commercial  primate  chow  daily, 
and  banana,  acacia,  and  oranges  were  fed  3  times  per  week. 
Chlorinated  drinking  water  was  provided  ad  libitum.  All  cages 
were  cleaned  daily  and  steamed  weekly. 

Fecal  specimens  were  collected  monthly  from  each  gibbon  for 
parasitological  and  bacteriological  examination.  In  addition,  fecal 
specimens  were  collected  from  gibbons  with  diarrhea  on  the  first 
day  of  illness,  and  following  treatment.  Symptomatic  treatment 
was  initiated  on  the  first  day  of  diarrhea,  and  the  therapy  was 
modified  in  accordance  with  the  etiology  after  the  results  of  the 
fecal  examination  were  known. 

Sixty-five  cases  of  diarrhea  were  observed  in  forty-eight  of 
the  gibbons  during  the  period  of  observation.  Thirteen  animals  had 
episodes  of  diarrhea  more  than  once.  The  65  cases  are  classified 
by  etiologic  category  and  month  of  oc  currence  in  Table  1.  Proto¬ 
zoans  were  observed  28  times,  accounting  for  43. 1  percent  of  the 
cases,  while  helminthiasis  was  observed  27  times,  or  in  41  percent 
of  the  cases.  Diarrhea  caused  by  a  bacterial  organism  (Shigella 
flexneri)  was  observed  in  only  one  case.  Under  the  "unknown" 
category  are  those  cases  in  which  no  sample  was  obtained  (4  cases) 
or  in  which  no  causative  organism  could  be  identified  (5  cases). 
Multiple  infection  with  both  a  protozoan  and  a  helminth  was  noted 
in  3  cases  occurring  in  August  and  in  January.  The  highest  inci¬ 
dence  of  diarrhea  was  noted  in  the  early  part  of  the  hot  dry  season 
in  February  and  March. 


887 


888 


A  further  classification  of  the  etiologic  agents  associated  with 
diarrhea  in  the  gibbon  is  presented  in  Table  2 .  Stronqyloldes  sp. 
was  the  most  frequently  identified  organism,  accounting  for  29.2 
percent  of  the  cases.  Balantidium  coll  was  the  second  most  com¬ 
mon  organism  isolated,  and  Entamoeba  coll  third. 

Table  2. 


Etiologic  Agents  Associated  with  Diarrhea  in  the  Gibbon 


Percent  of  the 

Etiologic  Agent 

Case 

Total 

HELMINTHIC 

27 

41.5 

Strongyloides  sp. 

19 

29.2 

Ancylostoma  sp. 

5 

7.7 

Trichuris  sp. 

3 

4.6 

PROTOZOAL 

28 

43.1 

Balantidium  coli 

14 

21.6 

Entamoeba  coli 

8 

12.3 

Giardia  lamblia 

3 

4.6 

Entamoeba  histolytica 

2 

3.1 

Chilomastix  mesnili 

1 

1.5 

BACTERIAL 

1 

1.5 

Shigella  flexneri 

1 

1.5 

UNKNOWN 

9 

13.9 

TOTAL 

65 

100.0 

The  treatments  used  in  the  management  of  diarrhea  in  the  gib¬ 
bon  and  their  effectiveness  are  summarized  in  Table  3.  Treatment 
failures  are  defined  as  failure  to  completely  eliminate  parasites  as 
determined  by  a  fecal  specimen  taken  at  the  end  of  the  course  of 
treatment.  In  these  cases  the  therapeutic  regimen  was  repeated. 
Reoccurrence  is  defined  as  reappearance  of  parasites  at  some  time 
during  the  year  following  apparently  successful  treatment. 
Reoccurrence  may  be  the  result  of  re-infection  or  of  recrudescence 
of  sub-patent  parasitism. 


889 


890 


The  frequent  occurrence  of  diarrheas  is  a  problem  in  the  manage¬ 
ment  of  gibbons  in  captivity.  Helminths  and  protozoan  parasites 
are  the  principle  etiologic  agents,  with  Stronqvloides  sp. ,  Balanti¬ 
dium  coli,  and  Entamoeba  coli  accounting  for  the  majority  of  cases. 
These  diarrheas  can  be  treated  successfully  in  most  cases  with 
appropriate  regimens  of  therapeutic  drugs,  but  recrudescence  and 
reinfection  are  a  significant  problem  requiring  regular  screening  of 
fecal  specimens. 

4 .  Leukemia  in  the  Gibbon 


The  objective  of  this  study  is  to  determine  the  incidence  of 
leukemia  in  the  gibbon  colony,  to  characterize  clinically  and 
pathologically  this  disease  in  the  gibbon,  and  to  evaluate  its 
transmissibility. 

Gibbons  in  the  SMRL  animal  colony  are  screened  periodically 
to  detect  developing  cases  of  leukemia.  Gibbons  in  which  leukemia 
has  been  detected  are  placed  under  close  observation  and  clinical, 
hematological,  and  pathological  methods  are  employed  to  character¬ 
ize  the  development  of  the  disease.  Necropsies  are  done  on  gibbons 
that  die  and  tissues  from  them  have  been  inoculated  into  gibbons  and 
other  laboratory  animals  to  determine  if  the  disease  is  transmissible. 


To  date,  five  cases  of  granulocytic  leukemia  have  occurred 
"spontaneously"  in  the  gibbon  colony  (S-74,S-76,S-86,  S-90,and 
S-93),  in  addition  to  the  four  cases  of  malignant  lymphoma  des¬ 
cribed  earlier^".  Cases  S-86  and  S-93  were  not  studied  in  detail. 

A  detailed  histological  examination  was  done  on  the  other  three 
cases,  and  bone  marrow  from  one,  S-74,  was  inoculated  into  2  baby 
gibbons,  2  stump-tailed  macaques,  mice,  hamsters,  and  guinea  pigs. 
Of  the  2  baby  gibbons  inoculated,  one  died  of  a  laboratory  accident 
and  the  other  (PC-7)  developed  leukemia  8  months  later.  No  disease 
appeared  in  any  of  the  other  animals. 


During  the  report  period  PC -7  was  sacrificed  and  bone  marrow 
was  inoculated  into  two  additional  baby  gibbons  (PC-6,  PC-C). 
Tissue  was  also  examined  for  the  presence  of  oncogenic  viruses. 
PC-8  subsequently  developed  leukemia  and  was  sacrificed.  Bone 
marrow  was  passed  to  another  gibbon  (PC-17)  and  tissue  was 
examined  for  oncogenic  virus.  The  remaining  case  of  "spontaneous" 
leukemia  (S-76)  was  also  sacrificed,  bone  marrow  was  passed  to  a 


891 


young  gibbon  (PC-10)  and  tissue  was  examined  for  virus.  At  this 
time,  PC-6,  PC-10  and  PC-17  remain  clinically  well. 

Virus  isolation  studies  were  done  by  Dr.  Thomas  Kawakami  at 
the  Oncology  Laboratory,  University  of  California,  Davis.  An  RNA 
C-type  virus  was  isolated  from  every  animal  studied  (S-76,  PC-7, 

PC -8) .  Sera  from  most  of  the  gibbons  in  the  colony  were  examined 
for  the  presence  of  antibody  against  this  virus  and  many  were  found 
to  be  positive,  indicating  that  the  virus  is  widespread  throughout 
the  colony. 

A  manuscript  describing  the  above  events  has  been  submitted 
for  publication. 

5 .  A  Report  of  an  Outbreak  of  Acute  Enteritis  in  Swine  with  Hepatic 

Lesions . 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  determine  the  etiology  of  an 
epizootic  of  acute  enteritis  in  swine  with  pre-existing  hepatic 
lesions.  This  was  a  collaborative  investigation  between  SMRL;  the 
Faculty  of  Veterinary  Medicine,  Kasetsart  University;  and  the  Tub 
Kwang  Animal  Husbandry  Section,  Kasetsart  University. 

The  Tub  Kwang  pig  farm  located  in  Saraburi  province  maintains 
approximately  80  adult  breeding  sows  and  50  young  adult  swine 
(40-50  Kg.).  The  animals  are  housed  in  covered  open  barns  with 
concrete  floors.  The  basic  diet  consists  of  a  locally  grown  grain 
mixture  with  added  vitamin,  mineral,  and  protein  supplements. 

Fresh  drinking  water  is  supplied  from  automatic  waterers.  In  early 
November  1972  a  large  number  of  pigs  became  sick.  Within  two 
weeks  65  animals  were  sick  and  21  died.  (Table  1).  Clinical  signs 
included  a  slightly  increased  temperature,  icterus,  loss  of  appetite, 
depression,  lameness,  and  erythematous  and  edematous  skin  lesions. 

A  complete  necropsy  was  performed  on  three  dead  and  four  sick 
animals,  and  tissues  were  taken  for  complete  histopathologic  exami¬ 
nation.  Specimens  of  heart  blood,  lung,  stool,  brain,  and  intestine 
were  cultured  for  both  aerobic  and  anaerobic  bacteria.  Virus 
isolation  was  attempted  in  tissue  culture  from  stool,  liver,  kidney, 
lung,  spleen,  heart,  and  brain.  Weanling  mice  were 


892 


inoculated  with  serum  and  with  suspensions  of  liver,  kidney, lung, 
heart,  spleen,  and  brain  and  observed  for  3  weeks.  Specimens  of 
drinking  water  and  food  were  submitted  for  bacterioiogic ,  mycologic, 
and  toxicologic  evaluation. 


Table  1 


Swine  Epizootic  at  Tub  Kwang 


Age 

Total 

Animals 

Sick 

Animals 

Morbidity 

Deaths 

Mortality 

<1  month 

BEFi 

0 

0% 

0% 

0% 

1-3  months 

fg 

40 

20% 

15 

38% 

3-6  months 

mm 

20 

40% 

3 

15% 

Adult  females 

H 

5 

6% 

3 

60% 

Total 

430 

65 

15% 

21 

32% 

Virology:  No  viruses  were  isolated  either  in  tissue  culture  or  by 
animal  inoculation. 

Gross  Pathology:  The  skin,  mucous  membranes  and  other  tissues 
were  markedly  icteric  on  all  animals  examined.  The  mesenteric 
lymph  nodes  were  enlarged  and  diffusely  hemorrhagic.  Lung 
lesions  were  observed  in  all  the  animals,  consisting  of  reddened 
and  consolidated  areas  with  sticky  exudate  present  in  the  bronchi. 
The  pericardial  sac  was  edematous  around  the  ventricular  area, and 
in  one  animal  10  ml  of  clear  fluid  was  present  in  the  pericardial 
sac.  Gastrointestinal  lesions  were  present  in  all  animals,  ard 
varied  from  one  animal  showing  only  redness  of  about  30  cm.  of  the 
serosal  surface  of  the  small  intestine  with  normal  stool,  to  another 
showing  gastritis  with  reddened  areas  of  gastric  mucosa  and  bloody 
mucus  filling  over  6  meters  of  the  small  intestine.  Generalized 
subcutaneous  and  intramuscular  hemorrhage  was  found,  but  is 
attributed  largely  to  supportive  therapy  with  subcutaneous  and 
intramuscular  injections  of  fluids.  The  livers  of  all  animals  were 
completely  yellow  and  fatty.  The  livers  were  normal  in  size  and 
shape,  but  of  a  slightly  fibrous  consistency  in  two  of  the  animals. 

Microscopic  Pathology:  Microscopic  pathologic  examination 
revealed  moderate  to  severe  ch^gic  diffuse  hepatitis,  diffuse  acute 


hemorrhagic  enteritis,  and  severe  acute  diffuse  hemorrhagic  lympha¬ 
denitis  in  all  animals  examined.  All  animals  showed  lung  lesions 
varying  from  acute  bronchiolitis  to  bronchopneumonia  and  chronic 
interstitial  pneumonia.  Two  animals  showed  :olitis,  and  one  animal 
showed  acute  splenitis  and  myositis. 

Bacteriology:  In  the  sick  animals  sacrificed  for  necropsy,  examina¬ 
tion  of  brain,  lung  and  stool  showed  no  pathogens  or  abnormal  flora. 
The  anaerobic  bacterium  Clostridium  perfringens  was  isolated  from 
fresh  heart  blood  of  three  of  the  four  animals.  In  the  three  dead 
animals  examined,  Pasteurella  multocida  was  isolated  from  several 
tissues.  No  pathogenic  bacteria  were  isolated  from  the  drinking 
water. 

Feed  Analysis:  No  pathogenic  bacteria  were  isolated  from  the  food, 
but  a  variety  of  fungal  organisms  were  identified,  including 
Rhizopus  sp. ,  Candida  sp. ,  Penicillium  sp.  ,  Mucor  sp.  ,  and 
Aspergillus  sp.  The  chemical  examination  revealed  the  presence  of 
chlorinated  hydrocarbon  compounds  in  each  item  of  animal  feed 
(Table  2)  and  in  samples  of  pig  tissues  taken  at  necropsy. 

Table  2 


Chemical  Analysis  of  Feed 


Feed 

Chemical  Detected 

Corn  Meal 

DDT 

0.5  ppm 

Soybean  Cake 

DDT 

0 . 2  ppm 

Fish  Meal 

Eldrin 

6.  25  ppm 

Meat  Scraps 

Eldrin 

6.43  ppm 

Ground  Feed 

DDT 

0.23  ppm 

The  hepatic  lesions  appear  to  have  developed  before  the  other 
lesions  observed.  These  liver  lesions  are  consistent  with  those 
observed  in  a  wide  variety  of  toxic  conditions,  and  could  have  been 
caused  by  chronic  exposure  to  chlorinated  hydrocarbons  both  in  the 
feed  and  by  frequent  applications  of  chlordane  spray  in  the  treatment 
of  sarcoptic  mange.  The  toxins  produced  by  Aspergillus  sp.  have 
also  been  reported  to  cause  chronic  liver  lesions  like  those  described. 


894 


The  acute  enteric  lesions  observed  can  be  attributed  to  bacte¬ 
rial  infection.  Clostridium  perfringens  has  been  repoited  to  cause 
an  infectious  necrotic  enteritis  in  baby  pigs,  either  as  a  primary 
entity  or  secondary  to  other  disease  conditions.  Pasteurella  multo- 
cida  rarely  causes  a  primary  disease  in  swine,  but  often  develops 
as  a  disease  secondary  to  other  conditions  which  cause  debilitation 
and  decreased  resistance.  It  occurs  as  a  chronic  or  sub-acute 
disease  of  the  lungs,  and/or  as  an  acute  septicemia,  but  it  can 
often  be  isolated  from  the  lungs  of  swine  that  show  no  disease  or 
tissue  alteration.  The  simultaneous  existence  of  pasteurellosis 
and  certain  other  infectious  diseases  is  not  uncommon.  In  one 
study,  Pasteurella  multocida  was  isolated  in  pure  culture  from  44?4 
of  314  swine  showing  some  lung  pathology  but  no  symptoms  of 
disease. 

Considering  the  age  of  the  pigs  in  this  outbreak,  the  gross  and 
microscopic  lesions,  and  the  response  to  treatment,  the  illness  and 
fatalities  were  probably  due  to  the  intestinal  bacteria.  It  appears 
that  the  over -all  problem  was  one  of  chronic  liver  toxicity  from 
chemical  and/or  biological  products  producing  debilitating  hepatic 
lesions  which  in  themselves  were  not  severe  enough  to  produce 
overt  disease,  but  were  contributory  in  producing  an  environment 
for  existing  opportunistic  organisms  to  establish.  Pa s1  eurella 
multocida  and  Clostridium  perfringens ,  present  in  the  food  and 
environment,  but  needing  a  stressed  animal  in  which  to  establish 
themselves,  produced  the  severe  acute  hemorrhagic  necrotizing 
enteritis  and  bronchopneumonia  which  resulted  in  death  for  many  of 
the  animals.  Suckling  pigs  under  one  month  of  age  were  refractory 
to  the  condition  described  here.  They  were  not  exposed  to  the  toxic 
products  in  the  feed,  and  they  were  receiving  substantial  amounts 
of  maternal  antibody  through  the  milk  to  provide  protection  against 
the  bacteria  involved. 

Immediately  after  the  outbreak,  animals  were  medicated  with 
oxytetracycline  or  penicillin-streptomycin,  and  the  food  supply 
was  changed.  There  have  been  no  further  cases  of  illness  or  death 
since  that  time.  Many  animals  which  appeared  clinically  normal 
were  examined  at  slaughter  and  were  found  to  have  yellow  livers 
similar  to  those  of  the  animals  described  here. 


895 


0-7 A  M 


Project  3A062 1 10A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINK 


Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 

Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Johnsen,  D.O.,  Wooding,  W.L.,  Tanticharoenyos ,  P.  , 
and  Bourgeois,  C.H.:  Malignant  lymphoma  in  the 
gibbon.  J.  Amer.  Vet.  Med.  Assoc.,  15b:  563,  1971. 

Publications: 

1.  Tanticharoenyos,  P.:  Preparing  macaque  monkeys  for 

use  as  research  animals.  Proceedings  of  the  Sympo¬ 
sium  on  Laboratory  Animals,  Tokyo.  International 
Committee  for  Laboratory  Animals,  1972. 

2.  Tanticharoenyos,  P.:  Evaluation  of  the  gibbon  (Pb'lo- 
bates  lar)  as  a  laboratory  primate  -  Use  of  the  gibbon. 
Proceedings  of  the  Symposium  on  Laboratory  animals, 
Tokyo.  International  Committee  for  Laboratory  Animal, 
1972. 

3.  Johnsen,  D.O.:  Dirofilaria  immitis.  Am.  J  Trop. 
Med.  Hyg.,  #5,  1972. 


896 


Project  3A062110A831  TROPICAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 
Investigators 

Principal:  Pien  Cheowanich,  M.D.;  LTC  Robert  Edelman,  MC; 

MAJ  Marvin  H.  Firestone,  MC;  CPT  John  S.  Jewell, 
MSC;  MAJ  George  Kojak,  MC;  Boonarb  Panpanya, 
PHN;  Professor  Phon  Sangsingkeo,  M.C.;  CPT 
Robert  J.  Schneider,  Ph.D.  ,MSC;  Professor  Chira 
Sitasuwan,  M.D.;  Arvuth  Srisukree,  M.D.;  Sukree 
Tumrongrachaniti,  RN;  Athasit  Vejjajiva ,  M.D.; 
Prathan  Vuthikul,  M.D.;  Chinda  Witayarut,  PHN 

Associate:  Vacharee  Jan-Aiem;  LTC  Richard  A.  Grossman,  MC; 

MAJWalterW.  Noll,  MC;  Serin  Punahitanont, 

Ph.D.;  SP5  Ronald  R.  Ranes;  CPT  Horst  Resdorf, 

MSC;  Khanitha  Rojanasthien;  Joseph  Rothburg,  Ph.D.; 
SFC  Charles  W.  Shaw;  Sucninda  Udomsakdi,  M.D. 


Use  Report  in c 


a  Sample  of  Thai  Students. 


The  objectives  of  this  study  are: 

a.  To  provide  prevalence  and  incidence  figures  on  drug  use 
by  Thai  students. 

b.  To  determine  the  general  characteristics  and  knowledge 
about  drugs  of  the  Thai  student  drug  user  and  non-user. 

c.  To  provide  background  data  for  later  work  designed  to  help 
infer  whether  there  is  a  relation  between  Thai  drug  use  and 
friendship  with  Americans. 

d.  To  better  understand  how  certain  Thai  women  view  their 
relations  with  Americans.  This  will  provide  additional  information 
to  help  interpret  other  research  studying  the  relation  between  drug 
use  of  these  two  specific  populations. 

The  present  paper  describes  research  which  is  designed  to  study 
the  use  of  drugs  by  Thais.  The  purpose  of  this  work  is  to  contri¬ 
bute  to  the  effort  to  prevent  heroin  and  other  drug  abuse  in  the 


897 


local  population,  in  order  to  disrupt  the  Thai  drug  use  which  operates 
to  provide  primary  support  to  drug  growing,  distribution,  and 
American  drug  use  in  Thailand.  It  is  the  intent  of  the  Department  of 
Army  that  drug  abuse  prevention  and  control  be  a  comprehensive 
community  effort  which  includes  education,  law  enforcement,  and 
community  action.  It  is  hoped  that  the  present  research  can  be 
utilized  by  the  local  community  to  help  make  decisions  concerning 
what  drug  education,  prevention,  and  treatment  programs  appear 
to  be  most  relevant. 

The  topic  of  study  described  in  this  paper  is  the  survey  of  drug 
use  by  the  Thai  student  or  partner. 

Drug  use  of  the  following  populations  will  be  surveyed: 

a.  One  school  system  will  be  selected  which  is  in  proximity 
to  a  large  American  base  and  presumably  in  a  community  which  has 
a  large  amount  of  contact  with  American  soldiers. 

b.  A  second  school  system  will  be  studied  in  a  large  city  in 
which  there  are  relatively  few  Americans.  Contact  with  Americans 
is  presumably  low. 

c.  The  third  population  to  be  studied  is  made  up  of  bar-girls 
and  entertainers  (partners)  from  a  small  town  in  proximity  to  two 
large  American  military  installations.  These  women  are  normally 
in  daily  contact  with  U.S.  servicemen. 

d.  The  fourth  population,  juvenile  delinquents  in  the  Bangkok 
area,  is  small  but  presumably  at  high  risk  for  drug  use.  These 
will  be  surveyed  at  a  local  juvenile  home. 

e.  The  last  population  to  be  studied  is  students  attending  an 
upper  middle  class  demonstration  school  run  by  Chulalongkorn 
University.  This  population  is  probably  more  like  that  which  attends 
the  International  School  of  Bangkok  (ISB)  on  socioeconomic  variables 
and  acceptance  of  western  values  than  other  school  populations  in 
Thailand . 

Stratified  random  sampling  will  be  used  to  select  high  school  stu¬ 
dents  in  Korat  and  Chiangmai.  This  will  be  based  on  grade,  school 
size,  type  of  school,  and  type  of  curriculum.  In  Korat  twenty 
schools  will  be  selected,  and  about  40  students  per  school  surveyed. 
In  Chiangmai,  about  15  schools  will  be  selected  with  50  students  per 
school  to  be  surveyed.  Every  student  age  13  or  older  attending  the 

898 


Chulalongkom  Demonstration  3choci.  will  be  surveyed  (about  400), 
and  every  juvenile  at  the  detention  home  will  be  surveyed  (about 
600).  The  partners  will  be  selected  from  300  women  who  report  to 
a  venereal  disease  health  center.  Each  consecutive  woman  who 
reports  on  a  given  interview  day  will  be  surveyed. 

The  project  wa5  begun  on  1  February  1973.  Preliminary  data 
necessary  for  school  sampling  have  been  collected  in  Chiangmai  and 
Korat.  Students  will  be  selected  and  assembled  to  fill  out  the 
questionnaire  as  soon  as  summer  vacation  ends.  Data  for  each 
population  will  be  tabulated  and  presented  as  frequency  and  per 
cent  counts.  This  will  be  done  for  all  subjects,  as  well  as 
separately  for  those  identified  as  "drug  users"  and  "non-users." 

The  definition  of  these  terms  will  await  data  collection. 

In  summary,  a  survey  of  drug  use  will  be  administered  to 
several  populations  in  Thailand.  This  will  provide  a  large  data 
base  to  estimate  the  total  amount  of  drug  involvement  by  students 
in  Thailand.  In  addition,  drug  use  by  local  partners  who  have 
specified  relations  with  Americans  will  be  studied.  This  will  allow 
speculations  as  to  possible  inter-relations  between  drug  use  of  the 
US  soldier  and  Thai  drug  use. 

2 .  A  Survey  of  Drug  Use  at  International  School,  Bangkok. 

Approximately  900  students  at  International  School,  Bangkok, 
were  surveyed  to  determine  the  extent  of  their  involvement  with 
drugs,  and  attitudes  and  aspirations  which  might  be  related  to 
drug  use.  Drug  use  reporting  by  this  population  is  more  extensive 
than  that  of  similar  populations  surveyed  at  school  in  America. 
Variables  relating  to  drug  use  parallel  those  previously  reported 
in  the  literature.  Results  of  this  work  will  be  presented  following 
approval  for  publication  of  the  manuscript. 

3 ,  Prediction  of  Drug  Use  in  Servicemen. 

For  a  description  of  the  objectives  of  this  study  see  the  Annual 
Report,  April  1971-March  1972. 

During  this  year  the  first  phase  of  the  project  was  completed. 
Two  hundred  and  ten  soldiers  were  interviewed.  Eacn  filled  out 
the  1200  item  questionnaire.  From  this  questionnaire  59  questions 
were  selected  which  were  answered  the  most  differently  by  the  drug 

899 


user  and  non-user.  Drug  user  in  terms  of  this  report  is  any  indivi¬ 
dual  who  has  used  a  drug  besides  marijuana  25  times  or  more,  or 
who  has  used  marijuana  daily  for  at  least  30  days  with  some 
experimentation  with  other  drugs.  All  other  individuals  were 
considered  "non-users." 

A  discriminant  analysis  based  on  the  response  patterns  of  the 
two  groups  indicates  that  with  a  post  hoc  classification  92%  of 
individuals  can  be  correctly  classified  as  drug  users  or  non-users. 
Of  the  88  drug  users  80  were  correctly  identified,  and  of  the  95 
non-users  87  were  correctly  classified. 

The  discriminant  weights  derived  from  this  analysis  will  now 
be  applied  to  scores  on  the  59  variables,  which  will  have  been 
obtained  from  naive  subjects.  The  naive  subjects  will  be  the 
first  450  individuals  entering  USARSUPTHAI  starting  in  the  Spring 
of  1973.  Classifications  will  be  made  (user  or  non-user)  and  after 
one  year  of  following  the  troops  through  personal  interview  and 
urinalysis  tests,  each  individuals'  actual  classification  will  be 
compared  with  his  predicted  classification.  This  will  allow  an 
empirical  decision  to  be  made  as  to  the  efficacy  of  this  procedure 
in  predicting  drug  use. 

The  first  phase  of  the  soldier  study  has  been  completed.  Fifty 
one  variables  which  separate  the  user  from  the  non-user  of  drugs 
have  been  isolated.  A  discriminant  analysis  based  on  these 
variables  correctly  classifies  92%  of  subjects  (post  hoc) .  These 
discriminant  weights  will  now  be  applied  to  a  new  naive  sample  of 
soldiers  and  the  mathematical  classification  will  be  compared  to 
the  clinical  classification. 

4.  Drug  Use  Reporting  by  a  Population  of  Thai  Partners  Working 
Near  U.S.  Military  Installations. 

Drug  use  and  addiction  may  be  costly  to  the  individual  and  his 
society.  These  costs  can  include  disruption  in  job  performance, 
poorer  health  and  involvement  with  other  crimes.  The  ready 
availability  of  most  "illicit”  drugs  and  the  high  purity,  easy 
availability,  and  low  cost  of  heroin  make  this  kind  of  behavior 
especially  dangerous  in  Thailand. 

The  number  of  Thai  drug  users  appears  to  be  increasing,  as  the 
total  number  of  people  who  come  to  the  hospitals  for  drug  treatment 

900 


today  is  many  times  larger  than  the  numbers  reporting  several  years 
ago.  The  total  number  of  heroin  addicts  in  Thailand  in  1972  was 
estimated  as  over  300,000;  there  were  only  60,000  cases  estimated 
in  1968.  It  is  noteworthy  that  this  number  is  over  0.8%  of  the  total 
Thai  population  (about  36  million). 

There  is,  however,  little  empirical  data  available  on  which  to 
base  decisions  concerning  relevant  education,  prevention,  and 
treatment  programs  for  drug  use  in  Thailand.  There  have  been  no 
surveys  conducted,  and  no  formal  research  to  study  the  prevalence 
and  incidence  of  this  problem.  Few  studies  of  the  drug  user  exist; 
these  have  not  been  conceptually  strong.  Most  data  available  in 
Thailand  today  is  based  on  clinical  impressions  from  individuals 
working  in  the  drug  abuse  area,  and  inferences  based  on  numbers 
of  individuals  seeking  treatment. 

Of  particular  interest  to  American  authorities  in  Thailand 
(military,  embassy,  etc.)  is  a  determination  of  the  extent  to  which 
Thai  drug  use  affects  incidence  of  American  drug  use.  Information 
bearing  on  this  point  could  be  utilized  to  suggest  decisions  con¬ 
cern)  ig  more  effective  ways  to  control  the  problem  of  drug  use 
among  Americans  in  Thailand.  Relevant  decisions  might  be  whether 
to  allow  Americans  to  live  off  of  a  military  installation,  whether 
to  allow  local  nationals  to  utilize  special  facilities  set  up  primarily 
for  Americans  in  Thailand,  the  extent  to  which  cross-cultural 
friendships  should  be  encouraged,  etc.  The  present  study  was 
designed  to  provide  preliminary  information  on  the  amount  of  drug 
use  reported  by  a  specific  Thai  population,  to  infer  how  behavior  of 
this  population  affects  American  drug  use  and  to  evaluate  the  feasi¬ 
bility  of  utilizing  the  interview  technique  to  study  drug  use  by  this 
population. 

Subjects:  Four  hundred  and  ninety-eight  Thai  women  were  inter¬ 

viewed.  (Age  range  16-48,  average  =  26,  S.D.  =9.15).  Average 
education  was  3.1  years,  S.D.  =  1.8.  These  women  were  primarily 
bar  girls  or  "hired-wives."  A  hired-wife  is  a  woman  paid  to  live 
with  a  man,  and  who  in  addition  to  being  a  sexual  partner  provides 
services  such  as  house  cleaning,  cooking,  laundry,  etc.  All 
women  included  had  reported  to  the  venereal  disease  Health  Center 
at  Kilo  Sip,  Thailand,  to  obtain  a  weekly  check-up.  An  additional 
20  women  refused  to  cooperate;  no  information  was  collected 
from  them. 


901 


>  .vtV'i? 


. .  . 


Apparatus:  t\  questionnaire  designed  to  assess  drug  use  by  the 

subject,  her  friends,  and  U.S,  servicemen  partners  was  constructed. 
This  was  administered  to  30  women  ar.d  modified.  A  second  revision 
was  administered  to  100  women  and  Modified  again  to  provide  the 
final  form  of  the  questionnaire.  Twenty-two  study  items  were 
included,  in  addition  to  five  "lead  in'  questions  and  five  decoy 
questions.  In  addition,  a  ten  item  questionnaire  dealing  only 
with  medical  support  and  physical  health  questions  was  included . 

Procedure:  All  women  were  interviewed  in  Thai  by  public  health 
nurses  from  the  South  East  Asia  Treaty  Organization  Medical 
Research  Laboratory.  (SMRL).  Three  nurses  conducted  all  the 
interviews,  with  two  nurses  working  on  a  given  interview  day.  The 
women  were  first  examined  by  tho  chief  nurse  of  the  Health  Center, 
and  following  this  she  explained  to  each  potential  subject  that  a 
health  survey  was  being  conducted.  The  chief  nurse  would  then 
introduce  the  subject  to  one  of  the  SMRL  nurses  conducting  inter¬ 
views.  Subjects  were  then  transferred  to  one  of  two  private  offices 
for  interview.  Approximately  five  minutes  were  devoted  to  explaining 
the  nature  of  the  study  and  establishing  rapport  with  the  subjects. 

It  was  emphasized  that  this  was  a  medical  survey  by  a  medical 
organization.  Each  prospective  subject  was  allowed  to  refuse  to 
answer  questions.  No  names  or  identification  numbers  were  asked. 
During  this  time  it  was  ascertained  that  the  women  had  not  been 
previously  interviewed.  The  ten  medical  questions  were  first  asked. 
Following  this  the  questionnaire  from  the  present  study  was  ad¬ 
ministered.  All  questions  were  orally  asked  of  each  respondent. 

Data  were  recorded  during  the  interview,  and  amplified  immediately 
after.  Data  were  collected  from  January  to  May  1972. 

Tables  1-4  present  results  based  on  the  497  subjects  included 
in  the  study;  the  numbers  in  parentheses  are  actual  frequencies. 

All  per  cent  values  are  rounded  to  the  nearest  whole  per  cent. 
Responses  to  "lead  in"  and  decoy  questions  are  not  presented.  At 
the  time  of  the  study  all  subjects  solicited  only  among  American 
servicemen  for  partners.  Individuals  were  considered  "drug  users" 
if  they  reported  daily  use  of  a  drug  for  at  least  the  previous  30 
days.  The  exception  to  this  is  alcohol,  the  use  of  which  had  to  be 
daily  for  the  previous  90  days  in  order  to  classify  a  subject  as  a 
drug  user. 

Table  1  presents  drug  use  characteristics  for  all  82  drug  users. 
Alcohol  and  marijuana  are  reported  most  frequently;  little 


902 


amphetamine  and  barbiturate  and  no  heroin  or  hallucinogen  use  is 
reported.  Most  drug  users  have  utilized  the  drug  more  than  8  months 
and  many  more  than  a  year.  Fifty  per  cent  of  the  subjects  reported  . 
their  first  use  was  primarily  motivated  by  the  suggestion  of  a  Thai 
friend,  and  an  additional  11%  reported  an  American  friend  first 
suggested  the  drug  use. 

Table  2  presents  data  concerning  alleged  drug  use  by  other  Thai 
individuals  living  and  working  in  proximity  to  the  respondents.  We 
see  that  the  respondents  vdew  many  individuals  as  using  some  drug, 
most  commonly  marijuana  or  marijuana  and  barbiturates.  Very  little 
heroin,  alcohol  or  amphetamine  is  reported  used.  In  addition, 
about  1/3  of  all  subjects  indicate  over  half  of  their  friends  are 
drug  users. 

To  determine  the  degree  of  involvement  with  Americans  respond¬ 
ents  were  asked  if  they  had  a  steady  American  boyfriend.  Steady 
was  defined  as  existing  when  the  women  lived  with  only  one  partner 
or  restricted  herself  to  going  out  with  one  particular  American  male. 
Seventy  per  cent  indicated  they  had  a  steady  boyfriend.  Of  these 
70%,  46%  indicated  that  financial  or  other  tangible  advantages 
were  their  main  reasons  for  maintaining  their  relationship.  An 
additional  32%  (175)  indicated  that  financial  advantages  in  addition 
to  some  emotional  involvement  were  reasons  to  maintain  the 
relationship,  10%  (57)  indicated  that  the  sole  reason  for  maintaining 
their  relation  was  emotional  involvement  regardless  of  money,  and 
12%  (67)  indicated  that  neither  emotional  involvement  nor  financial 
benefits  were  the  most  important  reasons  to  maintain  their 
relationship. 

Table  3  presents  the  reported  drug  use  of  the  individuals  with 
whom  these  Thai  women  maintain  these  relationships.  A  large 
percentage  of  "previous"  boyfriends  were  reported  to  have  used 
drugs.  Marijuana  is  the  drug  most  frequently  reported  used.  Among 
present  boyfriends  a  much  smaller  percentage  allegedly  use  drugs. 
Again,  marijuana  is  the  drug  most  frequently  reported  used. 

Ninety-eight  per  cent  of  all  women  said  they  do  not  like 
American  boyfriends  who  use  drugs.  Teble  4  presents  some  of  the 
attitudes  and  influences  which  relate  to  drug  use  by  the  respond¬ 
ents'  boyfriends  and  to  the  respondents  themselves.  Two  per  cent 
indicated  that  they  encouraged  their  American  boyfriends  to  use 
drugs.  Fifty-two  per  cent  indicated  that  they  tried  to  stop  their 

903 


American  boyfriends  from  using  drugs.  Few  Americans  are  perceived 
as  following  the  suggestions  of  these  Thai  women.  It  is  interesting 
to  note  that  48%  of  the  women  report  that  their  boyfriends  have 
encouraged  drug  use  but  at  least  70%  refused  to  follow  these 
suggestions. 

Those  individuals  who  indicated  that  they  do  try  to  stop  their 
American  boyfriends  from  using  drugs  indicated  using  the  following 
methods:  "ask  him  to  stop"  93%  (241),  "refuse  sex"  5%  (12), 
"refuse  to  buy  drugs  for  him"  1%  (l),  "keep  drugs  away  from  him" 

1%  (l).  Four  individuals  did  not  answer.  The  drugs  of  which  the 
American  is  reported  to  encourage  use  are  marijuana  (87%),  mari¬ 
juana  and  some  other  drug  (8%),  alcohol,  heroin,  or  barbiturate 
(5%) . 

Fifteen  per  cent  (82)  of  the  women  in  this  study  reported 
current  use  of  some  drug.  Again,  current  use  was  daily  use  for 
the  previous  30  days.  Half  of  the  women  reported  alcohol  as  the 
drug  being  used  and  about  1/4  reported  using  marijuana  (see  Table 
1).  Barbiturates  were  reported  used  by  another  10%  of  subjects. 

It  is  apparent  that  this  represents  relatively  long-term  behavior. 
Sixty  per  cent  of  subjects  indicated  using  the  drug  at  least  a  year 
and  only  10%  for  three  months  or  les.-  .  There  was  no  current 
multiple  drug  use  reported. 

Thai  friends  were  listed  as  the  most  common  source  suggesting 
first  use  of  the  drug,  but  11%  of  the  women  indicated  that  an 
American  friend  was  the  agent  first  suggesting  drug  use.  As  will 
be  seen  later  this  drug  was  probably  marijuana. 

Self  report  of  drug  use  is  considerably  lower  than  that  re¬ 
portedly  alleged  to  others  (see  Table  2).  Almost  60%  of  the  women 
indicated  there  were  many  drug  users  in  the  area.  The  definition 
of  "many"  was  left  up  to  the  respondents.  Marijuana  and  barbi¬ 
turate  use  account  for  90%  of  the  drugs  reported  used  by  "other" 
people,  with  some  heroin  use.  Surprisingly,  alcohol  is  reported 
used  by  only  1%  of  respondents.  Thus,  results  in  Table  1 
appear  inconsistent  with  those  of  Table  2.  It  is  possible  that 
although  many  individuals  report  daily  alcohol  use,  they  are  not 
intoxicated  and  therefore  are  not  viewed  as  "drug  users"  despite 
the  definition  furnished  to  the  respondents. 


904 


It  is  apparent  that  the  women  are  aware  of  the  use  of  drugs,  as 
30%  report  over  half  of  their  friends  use  some  drug  daily.  One  might 
argue  that  drug  use  by  a  few  people  could  be  a  "high  visibility" 
phenomenon  and  the  low  self  use  but  high  "other  people"  use 
reported  is  possibly  explained  by  this  (l.e. ,  many  people  view  the 
same  few  drug  users) .  The  authors  feel  that  this  is  better  ex¬ 
plained  as  a  deliberate  attempt  by  individuals  to  conceal  illegal 
behavior.  During  the  time  of  this  study  there  were  several  rumors 
predicting  police  action  to  suppress  drug  use.  In  addition,  heroin 
was  reported  used  by  "others"  but  not  by  the  individual  respond¬ 
ents.  Several  women,  although  obviously  intoxicated  on  a 
sedative-like  drug  during  the  interview,  denied  drug  us' .  When 
faced  with  this  fact,  they  admitted  to  barbiturate  use.  Informal 
observation  of  this  population  by  the  authors  also  suggests  that 
many  more  women  used  sedative-like  drugs  than  the  number 
reported  here.  Other  indirect  evidence  to  corroborate  this  (such 
as  deaths,  hospital  admissions  for  overdose,  etc.),  are  lacking. 

A  surprising  70%  of  the  women  indicated  having  a  steady 
American  boyfriend.  This  is  unusual  in  that  there  should  then  be 
little  reason  to  seek  weekly  V.D.  checks.  This  could  be  ex¬ 
plained  as:  a)  exaggeration,  as  having  a  steady  boyfriend  carries 
more  status,  b)  a  matter  of  convenience,  as  some  of  the  local 
night  clubs  required  a  current  V.D.  check  for  entrance,  or  c)  since 
not  all  women  who  reported  having  a  steady  boyfriend  actually  lived 
with  him,  this  may  reflect  mistrust  on  the  part  of  the  American  who 
requires  the  respondent  to  be  checked. 

From  Table  3  it  is  apparent  that  many  boyfriends  use  drugs, 
according  to  respondent  report.  Marijuana  accounts  for  over  60% 
of  this  drug  use.  Relatively  few  Americans  are  reported  to  use 
some  drug  without  also  using  marijuana.  This  is  consistent  with 
many  other  studies  of  drug  use  which  report  most  drug  users  have 
used  marijuana. 

Perhaps  the  most  interesting  aspect  of  Table  3  is  the  low  drug 
use  reported  for  current  boyfriends  vs  previous  boyfriends.  This 
could  be  due  to  making  comparisons  between  cumulative  past 
experience  and  current  point  incidence,  or  it  might  be  an  attempt 
to  hide  illegal  behavior  of  the  present  boyfriend.  It  is  certainly 
to  the  women's  best  advantage  not  to  disclose  this  information. 

About  1/3  of  this  American  drug  taking  is  alleged  to  occur  daily. 


905 


The  Questions  presented  in  Table  4  were  included  to  offer  in¬ 
formation  on  possible  influences  from  one  population  on  drug  use 
of  the  other.  Few  Thai  women  report  encouraging  drug  use  by 
Americans;  most  report  discouraging  drug  use;  and  most  women 
view  these  efforts  as  fruitless.  Since  replacement  of  a  girl  friend 
is  a  simple  matter,  it  should  be  expected  that  about  the  only  method 
utilized  to  influence  American  drug  use  was  to  ask  him  to  stop 
using  drugs.  As  indicated  in  Table  4,  few  women  refused  sex  or 
refused  to  buy  drugs  for  the  boyfriend.  Table  4  also  indicates 
that  48%  of  women  report  that  their  American  boyfriend  has  en¬ 
couraged  drug  use.  This  is  probably  consistent  with  the  earlier 
statement  that  in  11%  of  cases  an  American  introduced  drug  use. 
Although  71%  of  the  prostitutes  indicate  they  do  not  follow  the 
suggestion,  29%  sometimes  do.  Eighty-seven  per  cent  of  the  time 
the  drug  use  encouraged  concerns  marijuana.  This  is  consistent 
with  informal  observations  of  soldiers  and  their  Thai  girl  friends. 
This  may  indicate  that  there  is  some  influence  by  one  population 
on  drug  use  of  the  other.  The  results  presented  here,  if  valid, 
would  seem  to  indicate  the  effect  is  primarily  to  increase  mari¬ 
juana  use  by  the  Thai  women. 

The  authors  are  uncertain  as  to  how  to  interpret  these  results. 
As  is  apparent  from  the  earlier  discussion  (e.g. ,  comparison  of 
Tables  1  and  2,  and  information  within  Table  3),  there  is  evidence 
that  the  women  are  not  reporting  their  own  drug  use  honestly.  The 
examining  nurses  also  noted  a  consistent  posture  of  boredom  or 
lack  of  interest  in  the  latter  port  many  of  the  interviews.  This 
suggests  that  a  different  research  strategy  should  be  employed  to 
collect  valid  drug  use  data  from  this  population.  This  could  be: 
a)  an  anonymous,  self-administered  questionnaire  (probably 
impractical),  b)  case  study  of  a  relatively  small  number  of  women 
(to  establish  better  rapport,  and  to  include  more  personal  obser¬ 
vation)  or  c)  limiting  questions  to  recent  behavior  (but  not  present) 
or  to  "what  are  others  doing?". 

It  is  apparent,  however,  that  these  women  represent  a  popu¬ 
lation  which  is  "high  risk"  for  drug  use.  This  is  based  both  on 
self  report  (which  is  probably  too  low)  and  inference  based  on  what 
"other  people"  allegedly  use.  It  seems  that  this  population  is  one 
which  could  benefit  from  government  efforts  to  prevent  drug  use. 

But  since  prostitution  is  illegal,  as  well  as  drug  use,  any  outreach 
program  directed  at  this  population  would  face  many  problems. 


906 


908 


TABLE  4 


910 


5 .  Perceived  Distance  from  Father  and  Its  Relation  to  Drug  Use  In 
a  Soldier  Population 

This  study  is  being  conducted  to  determine  if  reported  distant 
relations  with  one'st  father  is  associated  with  use  of  drugs,  or  if 
it  is  associated  with  general  psychiatric  problems  including  use 
of  drugs. 

Recent  research  conducted  at  the  U.S.  Army  Hospital,  Bangkok, 
has  indicated  that  soldiers  who  are  treated  for  drug  use  problems 
seem  to  have  a  markedly  different  perception  of  their  relations  with 
their  parents  (especially  their  father)  than  soldiers  who  have  not 
been  involved  with  drugs.  Approximately  50  questions  dealing  with 
soldiers'  relations  to  their  parents  had  been  asked  of  drug  users 
and  non-users  in  a  recent  study.  As  Kojak  predicted,  responses  to 
these  questions  indicated  that  the  user  of  drugs  is  more  distant  in 
his  relations  to  his  father  than  is  the  non-user.  No  such  dif¬ 
ferences  were  discovered  which  related  to  closeness  to  their 
mothers.  In  psychiatric  terms,  this  would  probably  be  described  as 
ambiguity  in  the  individual's  relations  to  his  father  or  authority. 

In  the  present  study  the  questions  described  above  (father 
distance  scale)  are  being  administered  to  four  populations.  These 
populations  are  made  up  of:  1)  drug  users,  2)  suspected  drug 
users  ("experimenters"),  3)  psychiatric  patients  who  do  not  use 
drugs,  and  4)  non-users  of  drugs.  It  is  anticipated  that  the  drug 
user  would  be  most  different  from  the  non-user,  and  would  be  rela¬ 
tively  similar  to  the  suspected  drug  user  or  "experimental"  user. 

In  addition,  the  authors  also  feel  that  the  person  with  behav¬ 
ioral  or  psychiatric  disorders  not  involving  drugs  is  likely  to  be 
similar  to  the  user  of  drugs  on  a  variety  of  measure  including 
relations  with  his  father.  Thus,  drug  use  is  viewed  as  but  one  of 
several  deviant  behaviors  which  may  arise  at  least  in  part  from 
some  of  the  same  etiologic  factors.  The  etiologic  factor  in  this 
case  is  an  abnormal  development  of  relations  with  parents,  speci¬ 
fically  the  father. 

The  purpose  of  this  study  is  to  further  aid  in  the  understanding 
of  the  drug  user  and  the  psychodynamics  of  drug  use.  It  is  ex¬ 
pected  that  this  will  contribute  to  the  most  efficacious  medical 
decision  as  to  the  treatment  approach  to  be  utilized  for  these 

m 


patients.  Specifically,  how  much  time  should  be  devoted  to  coping 
with  the  patient's  apparent  conflicts  in  his  relations  to  his  father 
or  authority.  It  is  also  felt  that  the  father  distance  scale  might  be 
used  to  identify  or  "triage”  patients  who  might  be  high  risk  for  drug 
use.  Thus,  those  who  more  closely  resemble  the  drug  dependent 
individual  might  be  more  closely  followed,  with  extra  urinalyses 
and  psychiatric  supervision.  But,  individuals  who  more  closely 
represent  non-users  would  be  less  a  matter  of  current  concern  to 
the  psychiatric  facility. 

Subjects:  A  total  of  100  subjects  (through  age  26  and  rank  E-6) 
divided  into  four  equal  groups  will  be  utilized.  The  groups  are  as 
follows: 

a  Drug  Users:  These  are  individuals  who  have  used  any  drug 
besides  marijuana  or  alcohol  at  least  30  times  in  Lne  last  45  days, 
or  who  had  been  admitted  to  the  hospital  for  the  second  time  due  to 
the  use  of  some  drug  besides  alcohol  or  marijuana  at  any  level  of 
use. 


b.  Drug  Risk:  These  are  individuals  who  have  received  a 
positive  urinalysis  result  but  deny  using  any  drug,  or  individuals 
who  admit  to  drug  use  but  whose  total  involvement  excluding  mari¬ 
juana  is  25  times  or  less.  Alcohol  will  not  be  included.  For  these 
individuals  there  is  no  known  continued  and  repeated  involvement 
with  drugs.  Additional  urine  from  these  individuals  is  normally 
tested  for  presence  of  drugs. 

c.  Psychiatric  Non-Users:  These  are  individuals  who  report 
to  the  Department  of  Psychiatry  for  any  psychiatric  problem,  but 
who  have  no  involvement  with  any  drug  besides  occasional  mari¬ 
juana  (15  times  or  less  total)  or  alcohol  use. 

d.  Positive  Controls:  These  are  individuals  who  have  a  pos¬ 
itive  urine  but  who,  according  to  documentation  in  their  medical 
records,  were  taking  the  drug  for  which  the  positive  occurred  on 
medical  advice.  These  are  individuals  who  are  normally  consi¬ 
dered  to  be  completely  free  of  any  drug  involvement  and  are  not 
tested  further. 

Procedure:  Each  individual  who  receives  a  positive  urine  must 
report  lo  tne  U.S.  Army  Hospital,  Bangkok,  as  an  out-patient  for 
consultation  with  a  physician  to  determine  whether  he  has  been 
involved  with  drugs.  Every  consecutive  individual  who  so  reports 


912 


will  be  included  in  the  study  until  the  requisite  number  of  subjects 
per  group  has  been  reached.  A  nurse  will  give  each  potential 
subject  the  questionnaire  form  to  be  filled  out  while  he  waits  to  see 
a  physician.  The  form  is  self-explanatory,  no  special  instructions 
are  needed  to  complete  it,  and  about  five  minutes  are  required  for 
completion.  The  patient  will  turn  the  form  in  to  the  doctor  who  will 
check  to  see  that  the  social  security  number  has  been  included. 
Forms  will  be  collected  on  a  daily  basis  from  the  five  physicians 
who  work  in  the  out-patient  clinic. 

A  total  score  will  be  determined  for  each  subject.  Answers 
will  be  scored  so  that  a  score  of  0  would  obtain  from  a  person  who 
answers  all  questions  like  a  non-user,  and  a  score  of  17  would 
obtain  from  a  person  who  answers  every  question  like  a  drug  user. 

A  one-factor  analysis  of  variance  will  be  used  to  determine  if  over¬ 
all  differences  between  group  means  exist.  Individual  T  tests  will 
be  utilized  to  determine  the  exact  location  of  these  differences. 

Findings  will  be  interpreted  to  suggest  maximum  clinical  utility 
as  discussed  above.  Data  collection  has  begun  and  it  is  anticipated 
that  all  data  will  have  been  collected  by  15  June  1973. 

6.  A  Follow-up  Study  of  Japanese  Encephalitis  in  Northern  Thailand. 

Examination  of  the  medical  literature  indicates  that  there  are 
many  studies  of  Japanese  encephalitis  describing  the  critical 
symptoms  present  in  the  first  60  days  after  disease  onset.  There 
are,  however,  few  studies  which  present  data  on  convalescence 
beyond  this  acute  stage.  These  latter  studies  present  information 
collected  from  1-15  years  after  onset  of  Japanese  encephalitis  (JE). 

The  only  detailed  long  term  study  of  JE  was  done  by  Goto,  who 
eventually  followed  43  cases  for  15  years.  His  work  is,  however, 
of  limited  utility  to  other  physicians.  This  is  because  most  of  his 
reports  have  been  only  in  Japanese,  and  since  one  cannot  derive 
from  his  work  what  definitions  were  utilized  for  memory  loss, 
mental  impairment,  disease  severity,  etc.,  the  physician  cannot 
utilize  this  information  to  aid  in  decision  making  and  counselling 
processes . 

None  of  these  studies  has  adequately  examined  one  of  the  most 
important  effects  of  JE,  that  of  intellectual  impairment.  Information 


913 


in  this  area  has  usually  ueen  limited  to  a  general  statement  indi¬ 
cating  lower  intellectual  performance;  none  has  quantified  data 
either  during  the  acute  phase  or  during  convalescence. 

In  addition,  no  study  (with  the  exception  of  that  by  Goto) 
which  has  continued  beyond  the  acute  stage  has  presented  evidence 
for  anything  but  very  gross  neuropathology,  Intellectual  deficit, 
or  mental  status  abnormalities. 

The  importance  of  age  as  a  determinant  of  severity  of  onset 
and  degree  of  recovery  has  generally  not  been  considered.  Age  is 
important  because  younger  individuals  appear  to  be  at  higher  risk 
for  sequelae  than  older  people.  Thus,  one  is  more  likely  to  find 
severe  sequelae  in  patients  below  about  age  10  to  15. 

We  feel  that  one  of  the  most  important  contributions  of  research 
in  this  area  is  to  provide  the  physician  with  information  which  will 
help  him  determine  the  probable  outcome  or  prognosis  of  this 
disease.  This  would  allow  him  increased  efficiency  in  deciding 
who,  for  example,  should  receive  occupational  therapy,  physical 
therapy,  more  intensive  follow-up,  etc.,  in  order  to  ensure  most 
complete  recovery;  and  to  provide  information  for  the  most  accu¬ 
rate  counselling  for  family  and  friends  of  the  patient.  Thus,  the 
physician  could  more  adequately  describe  the  probability  of  a 
given  symptom  being  present,  for  example,  one  year  after  onset  of 
the  disease. 

The  following  studies  have  responded  to  these  points. 
Dickerson,  et  al,  did  a  complete  study  of  U.S.  soldiers  who  con¬ 
tracted  JE  in  1952  in  Korea.  He  attends  to  the  problem  of  prog¬ 
nostication  and  indicates  that  a  long  fever  or  presence  of  a 
positive  Babinski  sign  indicated  a  serious  outcome.  These 
symptoms  predicted  either  death  or  neurological  residuals  at  10 
weeks.  No  further  follow-up  was  obtained.  Goto  indicates  that 
individuals  who  acutely  present  with  hyperkinesis  have  a  more 
favorable  prognosis  than  those  presenting  with  hypokinesis. 

Pieper  and  Kurland  report  that  acute  convulsions  and  neuronal 
involvement  correlate  with  sequelae  ten  years  later.  No  specific 
figures  are  given. 

The  present  study  was  designed  to  more  adequately  measure 
intellectual  performance  and  provide  greater  detail  on  some  of  the 
possible  correlates  of  the  severity  in  JE.  Thus,  we  will  closely 


914 


consider  possible  age  differences,  sex  differences,  and  quantifi¬ 
cation  of  intellectual  impairment.  These  will  be  presented  in  a 
manner  consistent  with  maximal  prognostic  value. 

Subjects:  One  hundred  and  ninety-six  individuals  (125  male  and 
71  female)  were  initially  included.  Population  characteristics 
(stability,  education  level,  occupation,  etc.),  are  described  in 
the  previous  annual  report.  All  were  residents  of  the  Chiangmai 
Valley  in  northern  Thailand  who  presented  to  one  of  the  local 
hospitals  with  symptoms  indicative  of  possible  JE  infection.  Only 
those  119  individuals  (77  male,  42  female,  average  age  11.1, 

S.D.  =  7.7),  whose  diagnosis  could  be  definitely  established 
serologically  as  Japanese  encephalitis  and  who  agreed  to  cooperate 
were  retained  for  study.  Eleven  of  the  196  subjects  were  elimi¬ 
nated  as  they  lived  too  far  away  for  follow-up,  3  additional 
patients  refused  to  cooperate,  and  8  were  definitely  diagnosed  as 
non-JE.  Fifty-five  subjects  were  eliminated  because  they  were 
serologically  negative  for  JE,  or  because  they  died  (n  =  37)  and 
no  serological  diagnosis  could  be  made. 

Apparatus:  Standard  forms  were  constructed  to  record  state  of 
convalescence.  These  forms  were:  a)  Mental  Status  -  to  measure 
psychiatric  aspects  of  subjects1  convalescence;  b)  Neurological  - 
to  measure  present  neuropathology;  c)  Physical  Examination  -  to 
describe  physical  condition  as  well  as  certain  neurological  con¬ 
ditions;  d)  Home  and  School  -  to  record  feedback  from  the  family, 
teacher,  or  employer  on  a  variety  of  neuropsychiatric  symptoms, 
and  provide  direct  observation  of  the  subject  in  these  environ¬ 
ments;  e)  EEG  -  to  record  electroencephalogram  findings. 

In  addition,  hospital  records  were  scrutinized  to  obtain  addi¬ 
tional  oi  missing  data.  Objective  psychometric  tests  were  also 
utilized.  Those  selected  were:  a)  three  sub-tests  from  the  WAIS 
or  WISC  (digit  span,  digit  symbol,  and  block  design),  and  b)  the 
Memory  Test  (to  measure  short-term  memory).  This  latter  test 
was  developed  in  Thailand  and  re  luires  the  subject  to  recall  the 
location  of  "X"  marks  on  various  complicated  geometrical  designs. 

Procedure:  Each  patient  went  through  an  identical  sequence  of 
examinations.  All  record  keeping  was  done  on  the  forms  described 
above.  Any  patient  who  reported  to  the  out-patient  clinic  of  one 
of  the  five  participating  hospitals  between  10  May  and  30 
October  1970,  and  whose  clinical  picture  resembled  that  of  JE  was 


915 


included  in  the  study.  These  patients  were  referred  to  one  of  the 
six  participating  physicians  fora  phvslool  examination,  blood 
drawing,  and  in  some  cases  drawin  -  cerebrospinal  fluid  (CSF).  As 
soon  as  the  patient's  health  allowed,  he  was  transported  to  the  one 
hospital  where  neurological,  mental  status,  and  psychometric 
examinations  were  conducted.  One  of  two  physicians  conducted 
all  neurological  examinations,  one  psychiatrist  conducted  all 
mental  status  examinations,  and  one  of  four  psychologists  con¬ 
ducted  psychometric  examinations  (only  patients  above  seven 
years  of  age  were  so  tested).  EEG  examinations  were  also  con¬ 
ducted.  Those  patients  in  which  JE  could  not  be  confirmed  were 
excluded  from  the  data  analysis. 

At  discharge  patients  were  given  appointments  to  return  to  the 
hospital.  These  return  visits  were  scheduled  at  1,  2,  4,  6,  9, 
and  12  months  following  discharge.  Each  visit  required  one  full 
day  of  examination.  This  schedule  was  followed  as  closely  as 
practicable.  On  each  return  visit  blood  was  drawn  and  the  patient 
received  the  same  examinations  described  above. 

On  the  same  follow-up  schedule,  one  of  two  SMRL  public 
health  nurses  visited  patients'  homes  and  schools  or  places  of  work. 
On  each  of  these  visits  the  Home  and  School  form  was  completed. 
This  was  based  on  information  asked  of  family  members,  teachers 
or  employers,  and  from  personal  examination  of  the  patient. 
Questions  dealt  primarily  with  social  adjustment  but  included 
observation  of  neuropathological  signs  and  symptoms. 

All  comparisons  presented  in  this  paper  are  cased  on  the 
following  eleven  clinical  variables;  these  were  evaluated  each 
time  a  subject  was  examined: 

1)  Level  of  Consciousness:  recorded  as  normal  as  long  as  the 
patient  was  alert  or  dull.  2)  Emotional  Behavior:  this  is  a  15- 
item  scale  made  up  of  items  such  as  irritability,  aggressiveness, 
restlessness,  paranoia,  incontinence,  and  depression.  For  each 
item  scored  as  "normal"  the  subject  received  a  score  of  1.  Total 
normal  items  for  each  subject  were  presented  as  a  per  cent  of 
the  total  symptoms  on  which  information  was  available  to  score  on 
that  subject.  Thus,  a  score  of  30%  indicates  that  the  subject  was 
normal  on  50%  of  those  items  on  which  information  was  available; 
the  total  number  of  items  scored  was  not  always  15.  3)  Memory 


916 


and  Intellect:  this  is  a  6-item  scale  based  primarily  on  how  super¬ 
visors  rated  work  and  school  performance.  4)  Convulsions:  these 
were  scored  as  either  present  or  absent.  5)  Motor  Paralysis:  this 
was  scored  normal  cfr  abnormal.  Any  paralysis,  weakness,  los', 
of  muscle  strength,  gait  abnormality,  etc.,  was  considered 
abnormal.  6)  Involuntary  Movements  or  Tremor:  subjects  were 
scored  as  normal  or  abnormal.  Abnormal  was  considered  to  be  the 
presence  of  any  involuntary  movement  or  tremor.  7)  Ataxia: 
subjects  were  scored  as  normal  or  abnormal.  Any  ataxia  was  con¬ 
sidered  to  be  abnormal.  8)  Tone:  subjects  were  scored  as  normal 
or  abnormal.  Any  rigidity,  spasticity,  or  flaccidity  was  considered 
abnormal.  9)  EEG:  subjects  were  scored  as  normal  or  abnormal. 

10)  Digit  Span,  Digit  Symbol,  and  Block  Design:  scores  on  each 
were  converted  to  a  percentile  score  based  on  American  norms  from 
the  WAIS  or  WISC.  11)  Memory  Test:  scores  were  recorded  as 
normal  or  abnormal  based  on  Thai  norms. 

Observations  from  the  seven  follow-ups  are  presented  for  four 
time  zones.  The  first  zone  consisted  of  the  first  30  days  after 
disease  onset,  the  next  two  time  zones  consisted  of  100  days  each 
anu  the  last  time  zone  consisted  of  all  convalescence  after  230 
days.  Any  symptom  which  was  abnormal  at  any  tine  in  a  time  zone 
was  recorded  as  abnormal.  Some  subjects  may  have  had  two  or 
three  observations  made  during  a  time  zone.  For  psychometric 
testing  the  average  score  was  selected  if  more  than  one  observation 
was  made.  Few  subjects  were  completely  omitted  for  an  entire  time 
zone.  Most  symptom  scores  were  recorded  during  each  follow-up 
by  more  than  one  observer.  If  either  reported  abnormality  for  a 
symptom,  "abnormal"  was  scored. 

The  results  based  on  nine  clinical  variables  are  presented  for 
younger  (age  0-10)  and  older  (age  11  and  older)  subjects  for  each 
of  the  four  time  zones  in  Table  1.  Average  days  before  hospitali¬ 
zation  for  younger  patients  was  3.3,  and  for  older  patients  it  was 

4.0. 


Examination  of  Table  1  indicates  that  on  almost  every  symptom 
there  is  improvement  for  each  age  group  between  time  zone  I  and 
time  zone  IV.  In  addition,  we  see  a  consistent  pattern  of  greater 
improvement  for  older  subjects  and  a  higher  level  of  functioning 
during  the  acute  phase.  The  only  exceptions  to  this  are  for  ataxia; 
younger  subjects  apparently  had  less  ataxia  during  the  acute 
phase.  On  memory  and  intellect  there  is  an  apparent  decrement 

917 


in  performance  for  both  groups  following  the  first  time  zone. 

Psychometric  test  scores  are  presented  in  Tables  2.  It  is 
apparent  again  that  there  is  a  consistent  trend  towards  improvement 
from  the  first  through  fourth  time  zone.  It  should  be  noted  that 
scores  for  the  first  threr  tests  are  based  on  American  norms  and  are 
percentile  rankings.  The  average  percentile  ranking  should  be  50 
for  a  normal  population.  The  4th  test  is  based  on  Thai  norms  and 
the  average  per  cent  normal  for  all  subjects  in  each  time  zone  is 
presented.  The  first  three  tests  indicate  that  by  Zone  IV,  subjects 
were  responding  relatively  close  to  expected  American  norms  (50%), 
but  on  the  Memory  Test  only  44%  fall  within  the  normal  range  based 
on  Thai  norms . 

Table  3  presents  the  percentage  of  subjects  who  were  normal 
and  abnormal  in  Zone  IV  as  a  function  of  their  status  in  Zone  T. 
Reference  to  this  table  indicates  that  those  subjects  who  were 
normal  during  Zone  I  were  more  likely  to  be  normal  during  Zone  IV 
than  subjects  abnormal  during  Zone  I. 

Table  4  presents  the  percentage  of  individuals  having  various 
numbers  of  abnormal  symptoms  during  Zone  I  and  IV.  Inspection 
of  this  table  indicates  that  no  individual  was  completely  normal 
during  Zone  I.  And  about  23%  of  individuals  ,  both  younger  and 
older,  were  completely  normal  at  Zone  IV.  Older  subjects  again 
appear  to  have  fewer  symptoms,  both  at  Zone  I  and  Zone  IV. 

Table  5  presents  results  of  CSF  examination.  Inspection  of 
this  table  indicates  that  there  are  no  differences  between  younger 
and  older  or  living  and  dying  subjects  on  cell  count  or  protein 
mg%.  As  all  differences  were  well  within  one  standard  error  of 
each  other  no  formal  statistical  tests  were  conducted. 

The  analysis  scheme  utilized  was  selected  to  allow  the  most 
efficient  presentation  of  large  amounts  of  data.  In  a  longitudinal 
study  such  as  this,  it  is  inevitable  that  some  observations  will 
be  omitted.  To  help  compensate  for  this,  the  period  of  convales¬ 
cence  was  divided  into  the  four  time  zones  described  earlier. 

This  usually  provided  two  follow-up  visits  per  time  zone,  and 
greatly  reduced  the  number  of  subjects  on  whom  no  observations 
were  made  for  an  entire  time  zone.  It  should  be  noted  that  ob¬ 
servations  could  have  occurred  at  any  time  during  a  given  zone. 

The  use  of  "per  cent  normal"  for  the  multiple  item  "symptoms" 
(emotional  behavior,  and  memory  and  intellect)  also  helped 


918 


eliminate  missing  data  due  to  inapplicability  of  this  for  preschool 
populations.  The  symptoms  were  scored  only  on  the  basis  of  the 
home  visit  for  these  younger  patients. 

The  symptoms  presented  (with  the  exception  of  EEG  and 
psychometric  testing)  were  all  recorded  by  at  least  two  observers 
during  the  hospital  or  home  visits.  If  any  observer  recorded  an 
abnormality,  the  symptom  in  question  was  recorded  abnormal. 

This  is  to  ensure  that  no  abnormality  was  omitted.  No  attempt 
was  made  to  assess  inter-rater  reliability. 

The  Japanese  investigators  first  suggested  age  effects, 
reporting  the  same  incidence  of  infection  in  younger  and  older 
subjects  (older  were  16  years  of  age),  but  more  severe  sequelae 
in  the  younger  patients.  Hullingshorst,  et  al.,  found  that  63%  of 
his  Korean  patients  were  2  to  12  years  o’d.  Pieper  and  Kurland 
report  relatively  higher  incidence  of  sequelae  in  children  age  0-9 
than  in  older  subjects.  Present  results  indicate  that  the  older 
patient  will  have,  on  the  average,  a  less  severe  onset  and  is 
likely  to  have  a  more  complete  recovery,  'ihese  results  are 
presented  in  Table  1.  Levei  of  consciousness  was  analyzed  as  an 
acute  symptom  only;  no  subject-evidenced  disturbance  in  this 
area  lasted  longer  than  30  days. 

The  sym  ptom  which  samples  the  greatest  variety  of  behavior  is 
"emotional  behavior."  The  items  selected  for  inclusion  in  this 
scale  were  chosen  from  several  of  our  forms  and  cover  mental  status 
and  social  adjustment.  We  see  that  even  after  230  days  individuals 
are,  on  the  average,  normal  on  less  than  75%  of  the  areas  included 
in  this  symptom  complex. 

The  "memory  and  intellect"  symptom  complex  was  made  up  of 
six  items  which  consisted  mostly  of  work  and  school  performance. 
Again,  we  see  that  by  the  fourth  time  period  individuals  average 
less  than  75%  normal  for  the  areas  measured.  The  large  Zone  I 
values  here  are  probably  an  artifact,  as  those  patients  who  were 
too  sick  to  go  to  school  or  work  during  Zone  I  were  not  measured. 
The  remaining  subjects  (the  most  healthy)  remained.  By  Zone  II 
when  the  most  severely  ill  patients  could  be  included  for  measure¬ 
ment,  the  averages  for  the  groups  become  much  lower. 

It  is  apparent  that  most  of  the  symptoms  indicating  neuronal 
damage  do  not  show  a  great  amount  of  abnormality.  One  striking 


919 


finding  was  the  large  percentage  of  abnormal  EEG  responses  recorded 
even  after  230  days.  This  is  especially  true  for  the  younger  patients, 
for  whom  only  35%  normal  EEG's  were  reported.  This  might  indicate 
a  great  deal  of  residual  brain  damage  which  is  not  directly  related 
to  the  other  symptoms  measured,  or  brain  damage  which  has  been 
com  pensated . 

Scores  on  the  psychometric  tests  (See  Table  2)  generally  do 
reflect  a  decrement  in  memory  and  visual-motor  performance. 

American  norms  were  utilized  to  score  the  digit  span,  digit  symbol 
and  block  design.  From  these  norms  we  calculated  a  percentile 
ranking.  We  see  that  on  the  digit  span  this  value  has  been  exceeded 
but  on  the  digit  symbol  and  block  design  it  has  not  quite  been 
reached.  On  both  the  digit  symbol  and  block  design  scores  appear 
to  be  still  rising.  These  tests  should  all  be  sensitive  to  memory 
loss,  and  the  latter  two  (digit  symbol  and  block  design)  sensitive 
to  difficulties  with  visual  motor  coordination.  On  the  basis  of  these 
tests,  we  conclude  that  average  memory  loss  is  not  great.  It  is 
possible  that  these  scores  are  all  biased  in  an  unknown  direction 
due  to  the  utilization  of  American  norms;  no  Thai  norms  exist. 

Thai  norms  for  each  age  have  been  established  for  the  Memory  Test. 
We  see  that  by  Zone  III  Memory  Test  scores  have  levelled  off  at  only 
about  44%  normal.  Thus,  56%  are  below  normal.  This  is  a  quite 
different  result  from  the  other  three  tests,  and  is  perhaps  more  con¬ 
sistent  with  the  findings  presented  in  Tables  1  aid.  2.  We  conclude 
that  memory  loss  is  a  reliable  effect  of  JE.  This  has  been  con¬ 
sistently  reported  in  the  literature,  but  has  never  been  quantitatively 
measured . 

It  is  apparent  that  a  consistent  pattern  of  greater  disease  severity 
for  younger  patients  has  emerged.  This  cannot  be  ascribed  to  time 
of  hospitalization  (younger  patients  were  hospitalized  earlier,  which 
is  consistent  with  a  more  severe  disease  onset)  or  differences  in 
supportive  care  (18  younger  patients  and  only  5  older  patients 
received  physical  therapy).  One  might  speculate  that  these  dif¬ 
ferences  might  reflect  different  virulence  of  the  infecting  agent, 
due  to  older  individuals  having  developed  partial  immunity  after 
prior  exposure. 

Table  3  allows  determination  of  the  probability  that  a  particular 
symptom  will  be  abnormal  after  approximately  3/4  of  a  year  of 
convalescence.  We  can  see  that  most  people  who  have  a  symptom 


920 


abnormal  during  Zone  I  recover  by  Zone  IV.  Relatively  few  cases 
exist  in  which  a  symptom  was  recorded  as  normal  during  Zone  I  but 
abnormal  during  Zone  IV,  and  these  few  probably  represent  Indi¬ 
viduals  who  were  too  ill  to  be  adequately  evaluated  during  Zone  I. 
For  example,  du^j  to  the  generalized  weakness  that  accompanies  JE, 
motor  paralysis  might  easily  be  overlooked  until  the  patient's 
strength  returned.  This  table  can  be  utilized  to  help  predict 
patients'  later  convalescent  status,  based  on  the  acute  (Zone  I) 
level  of  functioning. 

Table  4  provides  a  general  impression  of  the  overall  severity 
of  the  disease.  It  is  based  on  a  count  of  symptoms  in  Table  1 
which  were  abnormal  (excluding  emotional  behavior  and  memory  and 
intellect)  and  including  the  Memory  Test.  Every  subject  had  some 
abnormality  during  the  first  time  zone;  most  subjects  had  between 
three  and  five  symptoms  abnormal.  By  the  fourth  time  zone  23%  of 
younger  and  older  subjects  are  normal,  and  there  has  been  a  shift 
to  having  fewer  abnormal  symptoms  for  the  remaining  subjects. 
Again,  it  appears  that  older  subjects  have  fewer  numbers  of  ab¬ 
normal  symptoms  than  younger  subjects.  Goto  reported  that  about 
75%  of  his  subjects  still  had  sequelae  after  three  years  (both 
young  and  old) .  Simpson  and  Meiklejohn  report  about  30%  of  their 
patients  had  some  neurological  sequelae  one  year  after  infection. 
However,  •hey  were  able  to  follow  only  1/3  of  their  original 
sample.  The  degree  of  behavioral  impairment  that  these  sequelae 
portend  cannot  be  determined  from  these  data. 

Table  5  presents  cell  count  and  protein  mg%  found  in  CSF. 
There  is  no  difference  in  mean  values  for  either  measure  between 
the  two  age  groups.  In  addition,  there  is  no  difference  between 
those  patients  who  are  living  and  those  who  later  died.  The 
deaths  were  those  35  individuals  who  died  too  early  to  establish 
serologically  the  presence  of  JE  virus. 

We  have  spent  little  time  discussing  those  35  patients  who 
died.  We  presume  they  were  JE  and  this  would  give  a  death  rate 
of  about  24%.  This  is  consistent  with  the  Japanese  literature,  but 
about  double  that  reported  by  Dickerson,  et  al,  based  on  American 
troops  in  Korea.  More  recently,  Ketel  and  Ognibene  reported 
only  one  death  out  of  57  infections  among  Americans  in  Vietnam. 
This  difference  can  probably  be  ascribed  to  the  level  of  supportive 
nursing  care  available  during  the  acute  illness. 


921 


TABLE  1 


Percent  of  Subjects  Normal  by  Symptom  for  «ach  Time  Zone 


Symptom 

Age  Group 

Time  Zone 

|  I 

II 

III 

IV 

0-30 

days 

31-130 

days 

131-230 

days 

231  days 
or  longer 

Level  of 

Older 

37% 

- 

- 

- 

Consciousness 

Younger 

25 

- 

- 

Emotional 

Older 

60 

72% 

74% 

75% 

Behavior 

Younger 

60 

68 

69 

71 

Memory  and 

Older 

83 

66 

73 

74 

Intellect 

Younger 

81 

63 

68 

62 

Convulsions 

Older 

49 

98 

100 

96 

Younger 

13 

94 

100 

92 

Motor 

Older 

78 

92 

96 

94 

Paralysis 

Younger 

56 

75 

79 

75 

Tremor 

Older 

45 

45 

70 

80 

Younger 

41 

58 

74 

80 

Ataxia 

Older 

59 

76 

93 

96 

Younger 

67 

81 

79 

84 

Tone 

Older 

41 

80 

98 

96 

Younger 

39 

69 

82 

78 

E.E.G. 

Older 

42 

47 

65 

71 

Younger 

18 

1 _ 

7 

21 

35 

922 


> 


CV 

LO 


CO 

CO 


LO 


CO 


Includes  those  45  subjects  age  eight  and  older 
Percentile  ranking  using  U.S.  norms. 

Percent  normal  using  Thai  norms. 


TABLE  3 

Percent  Subjects  Normal  and  Abnormal  for  each  Symptom  In  Time  Zone  I  &  IV * 


Zone  IV 

Symptoms 

Age 

Zone  I 

N% 

ABN% 

Younger 

N  (9) 

100.0 

0 

Convulsion 

ABN  (55) 

69.  1 

7.3 

Older 

N  (28) 

82.1 

0 

ABN  (27) 

85.2 

7.4 

Younger 

N  (24) 

75 

8.3 

Involuntary 

ABN  (32) 

65.6 

18.8 

Movement 

Older 

N  (22) 

81.8 

9.1 

ABN  (26) 

69.2 

23.1 

Younger 

N  (25) 

80 

8 

Muscle 

ABN  (34) 

52.9 

26.5 

Tone 

Older 

N  (21) 

85.7 

0 

ABN  (29) 

86.2 

6.9 

Younger 

N 

- 

- 

Memory 

ABN  (8) 

87.5 

12.5 

Test 

Older 

N 

- 

- 

ABN  (19) 

26.3 

68.4 

Younger 

N  (30) 

76.7 

10 

Motor 

ABN  (26) 

53.9 

23.1 

Paralysis 

Older 

N  (41) 

87.8 

0 

ABN  (9) 

77.8 

22.2 

Younger 

N  (27) 

85.2 

3.7 

Ataxia 

ABN  (14) 

78.6 

14.3 

Older 

N  (28) 

92.9 

0 

J 

ABN  (18) 

77.8 

5.6 

1 

Younger 

N  (8) 

37.5 

50 

E.  E.G. 

ABN  (35) 

37.  1 

48.6 

Older 

N  (14) 

85.7 

7. 1 

ABN  (18) 

66.7 

22.2 

1  Percent  values  do  not  usually  equal  100  as  Individuals  on  wnom 
data  were  not  available  are  not  scored  normal  or  abnormal. 
Numbers  in  parenthesis  indicate  number  of  subjects  in  each 
normal  or  abnormal  group. 


924 


TABLE  4 


NOTE  -  Includes  54  younger  and  51  older  cases 

6  deaths  are  excluded,  and  12  additional  on  which  convalescent 
follow-up  was  not  possible. 


In 'conclusion,  it  is  apparent  that  while  many  deaths  occurred, 
survivors  recovered  relatively  well.  Few  had  residuals  after  nine 
months  which  were  severe  enough  to  interfere  with  their  behavioral 
adjustment.  The  present  study  should  allow  accurate  prognostica¬ 
tion  of  sequelae  in  future  outbreaks  of  this  disease  in  South  East 
Asia.  The  consistent  age  differences  cannot  be  adequately  ex¬ 
plained  at  this  time. 

7.  Isolation  and  Identification  of  Methaqualone  in  Urine 

Methaqualone  (Mandrax,  Parest,  Quaalude,  Sopor,  Tuazole) 
abuse  is  a  serious  public  health  problem  in  the  United  States  and 
abroad.  Information  that  this  drug  was  being  abused  by  American 
teenaged  children  in  Bangkok  stimulated  an  attempt  to  develop  a 
method  for  detection  of  this  drug  or  its  metabolites  in  urine.  An 
accurate  test  suitable  for  rapid  testing  of  large  numbers  of  urine 
samples  for  the  presence  of  methaqualone  or  its  metabolites  was 
required . 

A  thin  layer  chromatography  (TLC)  screening  method  was 
developed  which  readily  detects  methaqualone  metabolites  in 
urine.  Urine  must  be  subjected  to  hydrolysis  before  the  metabo¬ 
lites  can  be  extracted^ .  Positive  identification  of  these  metabo¬ 
lites  can  then  be  made  by  gas-liquid  chromatography  (GLC). 

Screening  procedure  with  GLC  confirmation:  Urine  (15  ml)  is  placed 
in  a  capped  glass  tube  with  concentrated  HCL  (5  ml)  and  auto¬ 
claved  (110°C,  15  min,  15  psi).  The  hydrolyzed  urine  is  transferred 
to  cylindrical  extraction  tubes  and  adjusted  to  pH  8.5  with  KOH 
(*%S  4  ml,  6N),  then  chloroform-methanol  (9:1,  25  ml)  is  added. 

After  agitation  the  aqueous  layer  is  removed,  the  organic  layer  is 
dried  (anhydrous  sodium  sulfate,  3  gms),  filtered,  and  evaporated 
to  dryness.  The  residue  is  spotted  on  TLC  plates  (Merck,  Silica 
gel  G).  Separation  is  accomplished  using  ethylacetate-methanol- 
ammonium  hydroxide  (85:10:5)  and  the  metabclites  are  located  with 
acidified  iodoplatinate  reagent  (0.5  g  chloroplatinic  acid,  9.0  g 
potassium  iodide  and  200  ml  water;  add  equal  volume  2  N  HCL 
before  use) . 

The  metabolites  (Rf  0.80,  0.75  and  0.70)  from  positive 
samples  can  be  scraped  from  the  TLC  plate  and  extracted  from  the 
silica  gel  with  methanol  (3  ml).  After  centrifugation,  the  methanol 
is  carefully  transferred  to  narrow  bottom  centrifuge  tubes  and 


927 


evaporated  to  dryness.  The  residue  is  reconstituted  in  20  jil 
methanol  and  examined  by  GLC.  The  Instrument  used  is  a  Varian 
2700  Gas  Chromatograph  with  hydrogen  flame  ionization  detector 
using  a  6  ft  glass  coil-shaped  column  containing  3%  OV-1  on  Gas- 
Chrom  Q  (100-120  mesh).  The  column  temperature  is  235°C  using 
Nitrogen  (25  ml/min)  as  the  carrier  gas.  The  retention  times  and 
Rf  values  of  the  three  major  metabolites  are  contained  in  Table  1. 

Direct  extraction  of  urine  for  GLC:  Urine  (15  ml)  is  hydrolyzed  as 
before  and  extracted  at  pH  9.0  (sat.  KOH)  with  chloroform-methanol 
(9 : i ,  25  ml).  The  organic  layer  is  separated  and  extracted  with 
H2SO4  (3  ml,  0.5  N).  To  the  separated  aqueous  layer  saturated 
KOH  is  added  until  pH  9.0  is  reached,  then  chloroform-methanol 
(9:1,  3  ml)  is  added.  The  organic  layer  is  separated  and  evapo¬ 
rated  in  narrow  bottom  tubes  under  nitrogen.  The  residue  is 
reconstituted  in  20 pi  methanol  and  examined  by  GLC.  All  three 
of  the  major  metabolites  can  be  observed  with  a  single  injection. 

These  procedures  have  been  used  on  650  urine  samples  from 
teenaged  children  in  Bangkok.  Of  these,  2.5%  were  found  to 
contain  methaqualone  metabolites. 

Scrutiny  of  urine  samples  from  the  military  drug  urinalysis  pro¬ 
gram  which  are  positive  for  morphine  showed  that  about  0.8%  also 
contained  methaqualone  metabolites. 

A  study  is  now  underway  to  determine  the  prevalence  of 
methaqualone  abuse  in  U.S.  military  personnel  in  Thailand  by 
randomly  sampling  and  testing  urine  samples  received  through  the 
drug  urinalysis  program. 

Table  1.  TLC  and  GLC  Mobility  of  Methaqualone  Metabolites 


t - r 

I 


Rf  (A) 

Rf  (B) 

GLC*  1 

Methaqualone 

0.70 

_ | 

Code  in 

0.52 

- 

1.0  j 

Metabolite  1 

0.50 

1.0  | 

Metabolite  2 

0.55 

1.32  ! 

Metabolite  3 

0.58 

1.43 

1  _  -i 

A.  Ethylacetate 

-  methanol  -  NH4OH  (85-10-5) 

B.  Ether  * 

Retention  time, 

relative  to  codeine 

928 


Project  3A062 11 0A831  TROPICAL  MKDICINK 
Task  00,  Tropical  Medicine 

Work  Unit  002  Tropical  and  subtropical  military  medical  research 

% 

Literature  Cited . 


References: 

1.  Bumett,  D.,  Goudie,  J.H.,  and  Sherriff,  J.M.:  Detection  of 
methaqualone  and  its  metabolites  in  urine.,  J.  Clin.  Path.  22: 
602-604,  1969. 


T 


929 


»».  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OROAMIIATION  y  'j'"' 

MAM.*  Walter  Heed  Army  Inst  of  Research 

ADOREASi* 


RESEARCH  AMO  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I.  *AH  PRIV  SUIPRY 

72  0?  01 


4.  KINO  or  iV  MM  AAV 

H,  Term. 


»•  MO./COOCtE*  FMOONAM  BLIMCNT 


A,  PRIMARY 


k.  CONTAliUTIMO 


'■atxxmxx* 


62110A 


cdog  jam 


».  SUMMARY  ACT V 

U 


L  ROAM 

u 


AICURITY^ 


PPAOJCCT  NUMBER 


3A06gUOA83l" 


i  .«.*»€<  wcmioir 

DA  OB  61*65 


f  AIOAAOIHO” 

NA 


i.  batb  or 

72  08  01 


I*  OMfM  tMATVN 

NL 


TAM  A  MBA  NUMBBR 


-OIL 


DD-DKhB(A*)i3* 


APIC1TIC  DATA* 
CONTRACTOR  ACCtM 

Dm  Dm 


i.  CIVIL  or  SUM 
k  VOBI  UNIT 


•ON*  UNIT  NUMHN 


JJiL 


TITLE  fit  |— I fitf  c 

(U)  Virus  Diseases  of  Man  and  Animals 

(I.  ACICNTtriC  AMO  TCCMNoIoOICAL  ARIAI*  — 

002600  Biology;  003500  Clinical  Medicine;  010100  Microbiology 

II  IVAAf  BJLTft - 

69  07 


W.  cOntract/orant 

a  oates/e  elective* 

A.  MUMEERi* 

A  TYPE: 


u  (ATiMATib  “Iti6n 

72  08 


NA 


ckpiration 


k AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


Washington,  DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

*****  Buescher,  COL  E ,  L. 

TILAPNONA:  20 2  -576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

7ir 


TTTUnSTn 

DA 


IA.  RESOURCES  IITIMATB 


riACAL 

VCAA 


ii  PERFORMANCE  mcTnoo 

C.  In-House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS  A  TUNOA  <T" 


BIIEKBIUI - 

72 

6.5  

O 

CM 

currvBV 

§1 

_ 

22 

A0  PERFORMING  OROANIIATION 

"*“■*  US  Array  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
.oDNtui*  Bangkok,  Thailand 

PRINCIPAL  INVf  ATIOATOR  7Pumf*A  MAM  H  V  t.  AmMmK  /miHwMmv 

•MM.*  Top,  LTC  F.  H.  Jr. 

TILI.HOMI:  98U-U523 

AOCIAL  ACCURITV  ACCOUNT  NUMRCR: 

ASSOCIATE  IN VflSTIOATORS 

«»■«.  Ede  lman  ,  LTC  R . 

•.•.,  Scott MAJ  R.  M. 


- - «-<U)  Infectious  Diseases;  (U)  Epidemiology;  (U)  Virus 

Ecology;  (u)  Arbovirus;  (U)  Japanese  Encephalitis:  (U)Rabies  Virus:  (U.  lenat.it is 


DA 


II.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE  *  *4.  APPROACH,  ti-  PROGRESS  (FvrmlaA  ImIWAmI  Af  MmtlUH  Ar  p *•««#*  IuIHmM  with  f«na tlty  ClA4i  iMttttm  C«P*J 

23*  (U)  To  define  the  ecology  of  viruses  of  military  importance  in  Southeast  Asia  thus 
providing  a  rational  basis  for  decisions  which  involve  association  with  or  control  of 
that  or  a  similar  virus  ecosystem. 

2h.  (u)  Component  parts  of  the  natural  viral  ecosystem  (e.  g.  vectors,  hosts,  reser¬ 
voirs)  and  variables  which  affect  these  component  parts  (e.  g,  rainfall,  topography, 
immunity)  are  identified  and  quantified  through  the  disciplines  of  clinical  medicine, 
medical  entomology,  epidemiology,  veterinary  medicine,  and  virology. 

25.  (U)  This  work  unit  has  been  consolidated  with  work  unit  002,  Tropical  and  Subtropic¬ 
al  Military  Medical  Research,  Project  3A062110A831 ,  Tropical  Medicine.  Progress  is 
reported  therein. 


t^contrActot^^a^ori^n^^^^  JOSSSL 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD”.*:J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OP  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  1498A.  1  NOV  OS 
AND  1  40A-  1  1  MAR  68  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARC  OBSOLETE 

930 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  INK.  accimmnF 

DA  0B  6k 66 

t  DATE  OP  SUMMARY* 

72  08  01 

REPORT  OONTROi  ITER04 
DD-DR*M(AR)*3i 

k  BATE  MIV  SUVPV 

72  07  01 

4  RIND  OR  lUMMANV 

H.  Term. 

4  SUMMARY  ACT Vs 

U 

4  BORR  SECURITY* 

u 

1  RISAAOINR* 

NA 

14  DMB*N  WSTR<N 

NL 

•4  SPECIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACC  KM 

(Z)  vis  Ono 

S.  LCVCL  OP  SUM 

A.  BOM  MET 

IB.  NO  /CONIi' 

prooram  element 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASR  AREA  NUMEER 

WORN  UNIT  NUMKR 

*  PRIMARY 

62110A 

3A0&110A83J 

00 

QU5 

k.  CONTRIBUTING 

coos  iH»(r) 

(U)  Bacterial  and  mycotic  diseases  of  man  and  animals 

iT •cicmtipic  Amo  tkcnnoloqical  arcai* 


iTsCIENTIrIc  MO  TKCNNOLOOICAL  ARtAS* 

Biology;  003500  Clinical 


w, 


1»  IT  A I 

jO 


fll 

MNTMCT 


IT.  CORTRACT/SRANT 

A  OATKI/IFFCCtl  VI: 
k  NUNBCR:* 

c  TYPE: 

*  KINO  or  ARARO: 


Medicine ; 

55ITItS5Ta7#“ 


1 4.  It  TIMA  Tib  TWIlITO? 

£M 


4  AMOUNT 
f.  COM.  AMT. 


,  RCIPOMIIRLC  000  OROANI  1 ATION 


MAMCt*  Walter  Heed  Army  Inst  of  Research 
*******  Washington,  DC  20012 


RltPONIISLK  INDIVIDUAL 

««■«<  Buescher,  E.  L.  COL 
T.LCHONI;  202-576-3551 


It  OKNCNAL  UIC 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


JUm. 


*•■  MtOUNCCI  KITIMATI 


FlIC  AL 
V«AR 


t«  HTOiimTOo 

C.  In-Hg^aa 


A  PRORC4SI0NAL  man  ym 


PEtCIBIUI - 

72 

1.3 

1*6 

euRiiiv 

;  73 

0.1 

3 

k  RUh  OS  (I*  AiwwNj 


KCNFORMINO  ORGANIZATION 

NANI  ■*  US  Army  Medical  Component 7 ^EATff 


aooucmi" 


Bangkok,  Thailand 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VtITIOATOR  <r* ml»h  UAH  it  V  ».  A  m«mUc  Inilltultmm) 

nam«;*  McMinn ,  CPT  M,  T. 

TtLERMONi;  9  8U  — U  523 
SOCIAL  iKCURITV  ACCOUNT  NUMIKN 


AUOCIAT*  I  N  VKITIO  A  TONI 

namii  Benenson ,  MAJ  M.  W, 

NAM*; 


DA 


' ftt) Bacterial  Diseases  ; ( U )Mycoti c  Di s eases  ;Tu)~Southeas t  Asia; 

(U)Diarrhea;(  U)Gonorrhea;  (U)Vibrio  parahaemolvticus ;  (U)  Complement 


!*.  TCCHNICAL  OSJf CTIVf.*  24  APPROACH,  24  PROORCU  fPWwl* A  tn+rt+Ml  H  wN f.  till  •/  wi*  ftcurll?  CImfINcfIIm  CmM.J 

23.  (U)  To  identify  bacterial  and  mycotic  diseases  of  military  importance  in  Southeast 
Asia  and  to  provide  information  to  aid  in  the  diagnosis,  treatment,  and  control  of  the 
diseases . 

2h.  (U)  Diseases  occurrence  is  certified  by  clinical  and  laboratory  methods.  Where 
relevant,  long  term  surveillance  of  a  population  for  occurrence  of  particular  bac¬ 
terial  or  mycotic  diseases  is  instituted.  Variables  affecting  transmission  and 
virulence  are  studied  in  vivo  and  in  vitro. 

2^.  (U)  This  work  unit  has  been  consolidated  with  work  unit  002,  Tropical  and  Sub¬ 
tropical  Military  Medical  Research,  Project  3A062110A851 ,  Tropical  Medicine.  Progress 
is  reported  therein. 


U 


Mjjlljl  to  contrAClorm  upon  orijki0tor*»  approval 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,”-;J498 


PREVIOUS  COITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DD  FORMS  140BA 
AND  I4»S‘I.  I  MAR  6  S  (FOR  ARMY  USC>  ARE  OBSOLETE 

931 


nov  ee 


] 


I  TITLE  fPr*«MN  ml*  |»«u rt*r  CI—HUslI* n  MfJ* 

(U)  parasitic  Infections  of  Man  and  Animals 

- - 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  A.I.CV  ACCIUICM. 

DA  0B  7)1(67 

1  DAT!  0.  WWIMV* 

72  08  01 

Mpour  cob  not  inraot 

DD-DHkE(AR)6S6 

L  .AT K  ..IV  IUI.MV 

1?  07  01 

«.  BIND  Bf  lUMMARY 

11.  Term. 

»  IUMUABV  ICTY*  f  BORK  1C  CUBIT  Y* 

u  u 

T.  BE  BB  A  DINE* 

NA 

IB  DNS'S  INIYB'N 

NL 

»k  IPICIPIC  DATA* 

CONYBACTOB  ACCEII 

0  Tit  □  MO 

t  LEVEL  OP  BUM 

A.  COCK  UMtT 

10  NO  /COOf  1* 

prookam  element 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

4.  PRIMARY 

tel  10  A 

3A0&110A831 

00 

046  ! 

0.  CONTRIBUTING 

CD0G  lUTFI 

tt  iTABf  gm - 

09  fi'i 

1 A  tlTIMAT  E  D  COMP  LI  T  ION  0  AT  C 

'{?  08 

IE  PUN0IN0  AOCNCV 

DA  | 

i«.  Performance  method 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTBACT/OBANT 

A  OATtl/E  PPBCTt  VE;  ^A  EMPl RA  TION 

A  HUMBER* 

C.  TYPE:  d  AMOUNT; 

A  KIND  OP  AWABO;  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

II  BEIOUBCCI  ESTIMATE 

A  PRO  PE  II  ION  A  L  MAN  VBI 

t  PUNOE  (t*  PmimN) 

PIIC  AL 

YEAN 

WBEefOTNi 

7? 

1.6 

110 

PUMIHT - 

73 

0.1 

10 

It  BEEPONIIBLC  OOO  OROANIIATION 

1  — 

10.  PINPOAMIMO  OBOANItATION  |  | 

l«.  ICIBNYIPIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  A NC At* 

002600  Biology;  00  3*300  Clinical  Medicine;  010100  Microbiology 


tI*  Walter  Heed  Army  Inst  of  Research 
Washington,  DO  20012 


REIPONII  BLC  INC  VI  OUAL 

nahl  Buescher,  CoL  K.  b. 
t«lwhon«,  202-576-3551 


i  gincral  uir 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


nan*:*  US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
**u*  Bangkok,  Thailand 


PRINCIPAL  I  NVt  IT  1C  A  TON  fPwnlaA  St  AM  II  US.  (ntlltvtinn) 

****  Dtutz ,  idAJ  r>.  H. 

TELEPHONE 


SOCIAL  ItCURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER; 
AIIOC I  ATE  INVISTICATONS 
NAME: 

NAME: 


DA 


( U) Host -Parasite ""Relationships  ;  ( U)Gnathostomiasis  ; 

(:j)Immun  diagnosis:  (  U  j  Immunucnemiatry :  ( U )  Ant  imalarial  Drugs;  ( U)  Dirof  ilarias  is 


:>.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  1*.  APPROACH,  21.  PROORCU  fPu fftltt  In*  Ay  fumh*  fnciN  Nil  •#  HC  h  wi*  security  Ct**»W<*U*n  CwN.j 

23.  (’J)  To  define  the  ecology  and  basic  biology  of  parasites  of  military  importance  in 
Southeast  Asia  providing  estimates  of  the  risk  and  consequences  of  infections  with 
these  parasites  and  describing  effective  control  measures. 


2h.  (J)  Prevalence  estimates  for  a  given  parasite  are  made  in  populations  of  interest 
by  serological  techniques  and/or  by  isolation  and  identification  of  the  organism  in 
clinical  specimens.  The  disciplines  of  clinical  medicine,  veterinary  medicine, 
medical  entomology,  epidemiology,  and  parasitology  are  utilized  to  identify  life 
cycles  and  the  variable s  which  influence  transmission,  clinical  course  and  chemo¬ 
therapy.  The  disciplines  of  immunology  and  immunochemistry  are  utilized  to  clarify 
host-parasite  relationships  particularly  concerning  the  immune  response. 


25.  (U)  This  work  unit  nas  been  consolidated  with  work  unit  OOP,  Tropical  and  Sub¬ 
tropical  Military  Medical  Research,  Project  3A062110A831 ,  Tropical  Medicine.  Progress 
is  reported  tnerein. 


I  vmlllbl e  to  conlr*  ctorm 


DD,2“J498 


grt|jnilof*j  mi 


mss 


(Pll  Redacted] 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DD  FORMS  I  40B  A 
And  MBS  1.  1  MAR  6  S  IFOR  ARMY  USE!  ARE  OBSOLETE 

932 


NOV  SB 


.  Mil  .MV  tUH’m 

'U  07  01 

«.  KINO  OP  iunnarv 

H.  Term. 

1.  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

u 

S.  BORK  SECURITY* 

u 

».  M.MAWN0* 

HA 

IB  0* 

tm  INSTR*N 

ML 

It  SPECIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCIII 

D  vii  Dno 

a.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  BOM  UNIT 

to  NO/COOESt* 

proqram  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBCR 

A.  PRIMARY 

fa  no  a 

3A06211A831 

00 

o);? 

fc.  CONTRIBUTING 

cjcmoMutw 

cdog  Tnrrr ) 

\i  iTAM im - 

no  07 

14  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  DATE 

72  08 

tt  FUNDINO  AOENCY 

DA  | 

is  performance  heVhod 

C.  In-House 

IT.  CONTRACT/ORANT 

A  DATES/I  ELECTIVE:  [JA  EXPIRATION: 

bv  NUMBER  * 

C  TYPE:  d  AMOUNT: 

A.  KINO  OF  AWARD:  f.CUM.  AMT. 

IS  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE. 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

A  FUNDS  (7ft  A*w#an*J 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

PNEHOIUS 

72 

3.1 

160 

Towwnn — 

73 

0.3 

15 

It  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORGANIZATION  j 

NAME  I*  Walter  Heed  Army  Inst 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


^•Rc^cenKST 

DA  OB  6466 


rzzrzrxzzr 

1?  06  01 


MPowr  cotrnoL  mM, 
DD’nHhE(AR)i36 


I.  TITLE  fPr*«»*  ■>!»  f •Hfity  ClMFlflMlIan  C#A*j* 

(U)  Metabolic  Diseases  of  Man  and  Animals 

It.  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  MU? 

V)j500  Clinical  Medicine;  010100  Microbiology;  012900  Physiology 


AODRESS:* 


of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAMt  buescner,  CjL  K.  L. 
TELEPHONE;  202- 57*>»  3  9  5  1 


1.  OENERAL  USE 

Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


to.  PERFORMING  ORGANISATION 


L 


»e;*  US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEATO 
Bangkok,  Thailand 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  (pnmtph  tMAN  If  V  J.  A«*Pm.Ic  fnatltv tin) 

*****  Davidson ,  LTC  D.  K . 

TELEPHONE;  984-1*570 
SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER  I 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

NAME;  Rozmiarek,  MAJ  H. 

name;  Sagartz,  CPF  J.  W.  DA 


II  Ktvs^RMi'pr.e.rf.  eac«  */#.  i.ouriir  c*rf-)  ( *j }  Ve  i  e  r  I  nary  Me  1  ic: !  ne  ;  ( U)— (Ribbon ;  (  U)"Leukemia ; 

(’J)  Swine;  ( U) I nsec tici ce;  (  U)Clostridium;  (U)Pasteurella;  (U)Diarrhea;  (U)Reproduction 


J.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE/  24  APPROACH.  21  PROGRESS  (’fumlaJi  InArlAt*!  p+t  JXftnUflarf  Sr  nwNf  pr*  t»4»  I  pat  mi  mmch  with  f  cut  tty  Cl—iltemttm  Cm4m  ) 

23.  (II)  To  identify  and  characterize  metabolic  diseases  of  man  and  animals  in  Southeast 
Asia  that  may  complicate  or  mimic  infectious  diseases  of  military  importance. 

24.  (U)  The  contribution,  either  wholly  or  in  part,  of  metabolic  disturbances  resulting 
from  malnutrition,  concurrent  infectious  disease,  or  toxic  agents,  is  evaluated  in 
both  field  and  laboratory  studies.  Clinical,  biochemical,  pathological,  serological, 
and  epidemiological  methods  are  employed  in  this  evaluation.  Animal  models  are  sought 
which  iuplicate  features  of  these  disease  processes  by  virtue  of  unique  physiological 
characteristics  or  susceptibility  to  spontaneous  or  induced  diseases. 

25.  (U)  This  work  unit  has  been  consolidated  with  work  unit  002,  Tropical  and  Sub¬ 
tropical  Military  Medical  Research,  Project  3A062110A831 ,  Tropical  Medicine. 

Progress  is  reported  therein. 


A^aUabtm  to  contractor*  upon  originator**  tff/owl 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD.sr.1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DO  FORMS  I4S8A,  1  NOV  68 
AND  1498-1  1  MAR  68  (FOR  ARMY  USEI  ARE  OBSOLETE. 

933 


I.  TITLE  fPmi*  C «M»r 

(U)  Rickettsial  Diseases  of  Man  and  Animals 


research  and  technology  work  unit  summary 

1  >NKI  ACCIWOM* 

DA  0B  61*69 

l  B.TI  or  HMU)* 

72  08  01 

MR* RT  co#moA  tnraot 
DD-DKhB(AR)tJi 

.  MTI  .MV  IIH..V 

72  07  01 

4.  FIND  OP  SUMMARY 

H.  Term. 

1.  IUMMANY  KTY* 

u 

A  WORK  SECURITY* 

u 

r  resnauno” 

NA 

|A  Mn  MITITN 

NL 

Sk  IPSCIPIC  OATA  • 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Dm  □  mo 

•  LEVEL  OP  SUM 

A.  WORK  WET 

IB.  NO. /CODE  Si* 

program  element 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMMEH 

WORK  UNIT  NUMWER 

&  PRIMARY 

62110A 

3A062110Afi3l 

O 

O 

O 

-E~ 

OC 

k  CONTRIBUTING 

•OMKSMKNH 

CD0G  114(f) 

tt.  RBSPOMUMLC  DOO  OHO  AN  I ZATION  j 

«**«.*  Walter  Reed  Army  Inst  of  Research 


IA  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TSCMNOLOOiCA 


002600  Biology:  003500  Clinical  Medicine:  010100  Microbiology 

mu  n«  —  *"  *  ■■■  ■  tt:  1  im — _ n...*-.  1  - 


II.  START  OATC 

6?  91 


IT.  CONTRACT/SRANT 

a  OATM^mcTivtt 
A.  NUMMRi* 

A  TYPE* 


ir»>.aX7iraN»LlTl6N  bA' 

72  08 


NA 


NOr 


A  AMOUNT; 

t.  CUM.  AMT. 


IS.  RESOURCES  CITINATC 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

PNlelDIN* 

72 

TOmnrtf - 

73 

ADOREM:" 


Washington,  DC  20012 


REIPONIIOLl  INDIVIDUAL 

MMI*  Buescher ,  COL  E.  1  . 

T1LEPHONE:  2Q2-S76-35  ;i 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


^t-  PUM&N0  AOCNCV 

DA 


It.  PlRPORMANCC  MITHOD 

C.  In-House 


A  PRO  FISSION  A L  MAN  VM  k  FUNOS  fl*  AmmmA) 


0.1 


0.1 


10.  PCWFONMINO  ONOAN^n^lQr^^"^^^^™^"*""""^"1 

nam«t*  US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
AooNttt;*  Bangkok,  Thailand 

PMIMCIPAL  INVKSTIGATOR  (Fumtm A  SIAN  I*  U  t.  iuNttlc  Inmlltutlmn) 

MMit*  Winter,  LTC  P.  E. 

TELEPHONE:  88U-1+523 

IOCIAL  IICUN1TT  ACCOUNT  NUNSKR:  E  ,  f  >  k2^j 

ASSOCIATE  IN VCITIOATONI 
NAMCl 
N  AMI; 


Rickettsial  Diseases;  (U)  Scrub  Typhus;  (U)  Murine 
Typhus;  (U)  Lento  thro  mb  id  i  urn  arenicola  . 


DA 


TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE  .*  IA  APPROACH.  II.  PROGRESS  fFuml«*  In*  visual  pmragt  «pAa  l4mi\IIUm4  hy  mmkmt  llll  ml  tmch  ml*  fcutlty  Ctftticmllmn  Cm**) 

23.  (U)  To  define  *he  3logy  of  rickettsial  diseases  of  military  importance  in 
Thailand. 

2k.  (U)  Disease  occurrence  in  Thailand  is  ietermined  by  case  detection  and  laboratory 
methods.  The  disciplines  of  clinical  medicine,  medical  entomology,  epidemiology,  and 
rickettsiology  are  used  to  identify  the  various  components  of  the  ecosystem 
(e.  g.  vectors,  hosts,  reservoirs). 

25.  (U)  This  work  unit  has  been  consolidated  with  work  unit  002,  Tropical  and  Sub¬ 
tropical  Military  Medical  Research,  Project  3A062110A831,  Tropical  Medicine. 

Progress  is  reported  therein. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD/m°.;“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE-  DD  FORMS  U9«A.  I  NOV  05 
AND  USS-1.  I  MAR  01  (FOR  ARMY  USEI  ARC  OBSOLETE 


934 


\ 


MAM**  Walter  Heed  Array  Inst  of  Research 
a dom is;*  Washington,  DC  20012 


RCftPONftIRLE  INDIVIDUAL 

Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 

TiL«>HONt,  202-576-35‘31 


II.  TITLE  *IM  f CIhNIImiIw  C**T 

(U)  Psychiatry  and  Behavioral  Studies 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHN0L0CT  V0RK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  IHKI 

DA  0B  61*70 

72  08  01 

REPORT  COWfBOi  EfMOt 
Dl>DR*B(AR)tJi 

ft.  OATS  PREV  ftUlPRV 

72  07  01 

4.  KINO  OF  SUMMARY 

H .  \Term . 

ft.  SUMMARY  SC  TV* 

u 

ft.  WORK  SECURITY* 

u 

1.  RSSRAOIMO* 

NA 

IP  OMB*M  MSTR'N 

NL 

•4  IMCIFIC  0  4TA* 

CONTRACTOR  i  CCEM 

in  Yil  □  MO 

S.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  BOSK  UNIT 

IB.  NO. /COOES  *  PROORAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

B.  PRIMARY 

62110A 

3A062110a63J 

00 

109 

fe.  CONTRIBUTING 

l^scsms.  1 

ICDOG  UMf) 

II.  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TCCNNOLOOICAL  AREA!* 

013^00  Psychology;  003500  Clinical  Medicine 

TTTFm  BATE - 

69  07 


l»  CONTRACT/ OMAN T 

A  OATES/E  FFECTI  Vt 
A.  NUMBER:* 

«.  TYPE: 

«,  KINO  OK  AWARO: 


T«?  llTINATEDCOMPLiTION  OAT* 

CONI’ 


NA 


A  AMOUNT: 
f .  C  UM .  AMT. 


IS.  RESPONSIBLE  DOO  ORGANIZATION 


I 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 


IS  FUNDI  NO  AOINCV 

DA  | 


IS  RESOURCE*  ESTIMATE 


SISCAL 

YEAR 


IS.  PERFORMANCE  MITMOO 

C.  In-House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS  k  FUNDS  (fn  «M«S) 


HKIBIUI  ’ 

72 

1.5 

110 

CURRENT 

73 

0.1 

10 

SO.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 


nam*:*  us  Army  Medical  Component,  SEAT0 
Bangkok,  Thailand 

PRINCIPAL  INVEST  IGA  TOR  fPwml**  MAW  H  V  S.  AW*N p/e  JimINwIImJ 

name*  Schneider,  CPT  R,  J. 

TELEPHONE  984-^5^1+ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOATORS 

NAME!  Noll,  MAJ  W.  W. 

ham :  Jewell.  CPT  J.  S. 


DA 


IL mms TF^naann^sn; BSrjyj  Psychiatry;  (U)  Human  Behavior;  (U)  Neurological 

Diseases  i  ('J)  Human  Volunteer;  (U)  Drug  Abuse 


l|.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  >4  APPROACH.  Ji.  PROGRESS  (PufnlaA  im*rt4uat  maRN.  r till  *1  mach  ml*  $acurlty  Claaaiticatlm  CM*  ) 

23.  (U)  To  study  variables  in  the  host  environment  that  may  adversely  affect  the 
performance  of  duty,  principally  through  alterations  in  human  behavior, and  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  biochemical  tests  to  determine  the  presence  of  certain  drugs  in  urine. 

2k.  (U)  American  and  Thai  professionals  in  the  mental  health  area,  working  with 
trained  technicians  utilizing  systematic  observation  of  human  behavior,  observe  the 
impact  of  such  agents  as  Japanese  encephalitis  and  indiscriminent  drug  usage  upon 
the  immediate  and  long-term  performance  of  individuals  in  natural  or  alien  environments 

25.  (U)  This  work  unit  has  been  consolidated  with  work  unit  002,  Tropical  and  Sub¬ 
tropical  Military  Medical  Research,  Project  3A062110A831 ,  Tropical  Medicine. 

Progress  is  reported  therein. 


to  contractor*  yg 


od,:v:j498 


i^r^tnator^agro*^^ 


[Pll  Redacted] 


previous  editions  of  this  form  are  obsolete  dd  forms  >a»ea  i  nov  bb 

And  1  401  1  I  MAR  6*  IFOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE  ^ 

935 


PROJECT  3A062110A821 
COMBAT  SURGERY 


Task  00 

Combat  Surgery 


II  c 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

I.  ASENCV  ACCESSION* 

da  0A  6466 

S.  SATE  IP  SUMMARY* 

73  07  01 

rrport  cow  mot  trmmL 

DD-DK*E(AR)i3t 

9  DATS  FNIV  IUM»NY 

72  07  01 

4.  EIND  or  SUMMARY 

D  Change 

4  SUMMARY  SCTV* 

u 

4  MONK  SECURITY* 

u 

T.  NCSA AMNE* 

NA 

Ift  OMf  N  HUTWR 

NL 

•fc  SPECIFIC  OAT  A* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Brai  O  MO 

S.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  WORE  UNIT 

10  HO. /CODES:* 

RROORAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

621 10A 

3A062110A821 

00 

120 

b.  CONTMEUTIHO 

C.  COHTRIEUTINO 

CDOG  114(E) 

II.  TITLE  rPwMb  *1*  SMMrtfr  c InNSMIm  C#M»j 

i* 

(U)  Wound  healing 

II.  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  ANEAI* 


GOUT 


19.  START  OATS 

54  09 


1»  CONTAACT/ORANT 

ft  0*TU/IM«CTIWIi 


EXPIRATION: 


4  AHOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


M  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

ft  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRS 

k  FUNDS  (pi  RmmmN) 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

73 

|  3.0 

150 

CWMMBMT 

74 

3.0 

150 

• 

It.  RESPONIIPLE  OOO  ORGANIZATION 


mam«,*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Aooncu;*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAMES  Buescher,  COL  \  L. 
TELEPHONE!  202  576  -  3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


(U)  Combat  Injury 


\k  FUNDING  AEtNCV 

DA 


IE.  penfonmance  heThoo 

C  In-House 


M.  PENFONMINO  OASANIIATION 


T 


NAMEt*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Surgery 
AooMM.*Washington>  D#  c<  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IN VCt Yl EATON  IF >mW*A  MAN  If  t/  l.  lilMlt  tntlltmttmm) 

name:*  Spees,  COL  E.  K. 

telephone:  202  576  -  3250 _ 

SOCIAL  SECUNITY  ACCOUNT  NUMESN: 

AttOCIATE  INVEtTIOATORt 

«anei  Burleson,  MAJ  R.  L. 
name:  Deshon,  MAJ  G.  E.,  Jr.  DA 


Immune  Mechanisms;  (U)  Rejections;  (U)  Abscess; 


II.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  14  APPROACH,  *4  FROORCIA  (Fumlmh  InAHA-i  Ff  n«Nf.  H»i*N  Nil  *f  »H*  MMTffr  C«H  ) 

23  (U)  Better  understanding  of  the  immune  mechanisms  involved  in  allografts  and  foreign 
body  rejection;  tissue  matching  and  cell  cytotoxicity  measurements  to  predict  allograft 
success;  antigen  modification;  detection  of  abscesses  scintigraphically ;  defining  the 
pathophysiology  of  tissue  infection;  delineation  of  steroid  and  uremic  effects  on  leuko¬ 
cyte  function. 

24  (U)  The  parameters  of  sensitization,  rejection,  tissue  matching  and  antigen  modifi¬ 
cation  are  being  investigated  through  evaluation  of  vein  allografts,  one  way  mixed 
lymphocyte  culture,  chromium  release  cytotoxicity  assays  and  antigen  modification  with 
liver  extracts.  Abscess  scintiscanning  is  being  evaluated.  131  I  labeled  staph  in  pha¬ 
gocytic  and  bacterial  kill  assays  is  being  utilized  to  study  the  dynamics  of  leukocyte 
function  in  infected  tissue,  the  effects  of  steroids  and  uremia  on  leukocyte  function. 

25  (U)  72  07  -  73  06.  (a)  The  pathology  of  vein  graft  rejection  in  regards  to  host 

endothelization  has  been  defined,  (b)  One  way  MLC  and  51  Cr  release  cytotoxicity 
assays  are  showing  predictive  value  in  the  transplant  program,  (c)  Prevention  of  sensi¬ 
tizing  ability  of  intact  spleen  cells  by  hepatic  extract  pretreatment  confirmed  by 
mouse  .kin  grafts.  (MAJ  Deshon  received  Hoff  Medal  for  this  work.)  (d)  Scintigraphic 
detection  of  abscesses  accomplished  with  labeled  leukocytes,  (e)  The  production  of  an 
antiphagocytic  substance  by  leukocytes  in  rabbit  studies  indicates  a  role  in  the  per¬ 
petuation  of  tissue  infection.  The  study  is  continuing,  (f)  Rabbit  and  dog  studies 
indicate  no  effect  of  high  dose  steroid  therapy  on  the  phagocytic  or  intracellular  kill 
capability  of  peripheral  blood  phagocytes,  (g)  Studies  indicate  dialysis  corrects 
narked  phagocytic  functional  impairment. 

?or  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report, 
Jul  72-30  Jun  73.  ‘ 


DD,:°.VJ498 


PREVIOUS  COITIONS  OP  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DO  FORMS  1  4111  1  NOV  ES 

AND  14SS-1.  I  MAR  AS  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


[Pll  Redacted] 


936 


Project  3A062110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 
Work  Unit  120  Wound  healing 
Investigators. 

Principal:  COL  Everett  K.  Spees,  MC 

Associate:  MAJ  Richard  L.  Burleson,  MC;  MAJ  George  E.  Deshon,  Jr.,  MC 


Better  understanding  of  the  immune  mechanisms  involved  in  the  rejection 
of  allografts  and  foreign  bodies;  tissue  matching  and  cell  cytotoxicity 
predictive  measurements  to  predict  allograft  success;  prevention  of  sen¬ 
sitization  by  antigen  modification;  detection  of  abscesses  scintigraph- 
ically;  defining  the  pathophysiology  of  tissue  infection;  delineation 
of  the  effect  of  steroids  on  leukocyte  function;  delineation  of  the 
effect  of  uremia  on  leukocyte  function. 

The  parameters  of  sensitization,  rejection,  tissue  matching  and  antigen 
modification  are  being  investigated  through  evaluation  of  vein  allografts, 
one  way  mixed  lymphocyte  culture,  chromium  release  cytotoxicity  assays 
and  antigen  modification  with  liver  extracts.  Abscess  scintiscanning 
is  being  evaluated  with  ^7ga  labeled  autologous  leukocytes  and  intra¬ 
venous  o?Ga  citrate.  Quantitative  phagocytic  and  bacterial  kill  assays 
employing  ^-^I-labeled  staph  are  being  utilized  to  study  the  dynamics 
of  leukocyte  function  in  infected  tissue,  the  effects  of  steroid  on 
leukocyte  function,  and  the  effect  of  uremia  on  leukocyte  function. 

The  pathology  of  vein  graft  rejection  in  regards  to  host  endothelializa- 
tion  has  been  defined.  Utilization  of  the  one  way  MLC  and  51cr  release 
cytotoxicity  assays  are  showing  predictive  value  in  the  clinical  renal 
transplant  program.  Sensitization  by  acellular  splenic  antigen  and  liv¬ 
ing  spleen  cells  has  been  abrogated  by  liver  extracts  as  monitored  in  a 
mouse  skin  graft  system  (work  by  MAJ  Deshon  received  the  Hoff  award). 
Scintigraphic  detection  of  abscesses  with  ^Ga  labeled  autologous  leuko¬ 
cytes  has  been  accomplished  and  the  technique  is  now  being  evaluated  in 
human  patients.  Phagocytic  studies  in  rabbits  indicate  the  production 
of  an  antiphagocytic  substance  by  leukocytes  that  may  play  a  role  in 
the  perpetuation  of  tissue  infection  -  confirmation  and  purification 
studies  are  in  progress.  Chronic  studies  in  rabbits  and  dogs  indicate 
no  effect  of  high  dose  steroid  therapy  on  the  phagocytic  or  intracellu¬ 
lar  kill  capability  of  peripheral  blood  phagocytes  -  final  studies  are 
in  progress.  Preliminary  studies  in  humans  indicate  a  marked  leukocyte 
phagocytic  functional  impairment  in  uremia  corrected  by  dialysis. 


Fellow,  Research  Training  Fellowship  Program,  WRAIR,  1972-1973 


937 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

bTunmarvTcty^ 

u 


L  OATI  RRIV  BUM*RY 

72  07  01 


4  KINO  OR  SUMMARY 

D  Change 


10  NO. /CO Dll:*  RROORAM  ELEMENT 


k  CONTRIBUTING 


C.  CONTRIOUTINO 


62116a 


cdqg  H4(n 


4.  work  Ileum  TV* 

u 


PROJECT  NUMBER 


3A062110A821 


i.  title  rpr«c«4*  »i*i  <*««%  ciMtiNwii«  cto)* 

ILD _ Responses  to  trauma 

It.  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TtCHNOLOOIC  AL  A  REAR* 


I  AOCNCY  ACCESSION* 

DA  QA  6467 

RCORAOINO* 

NA 


I  OATC  OF  SUMMARY* 

73  07  01 


A  OMB*  N  INRTA'N 

NL 


OO 


nmPOKT  coat  Tirol  irwaoL 

DD-DRhB<AR)6J6 


•k  RRECIEIC  OATA^ 

CONTRACTOR  ACC  CM 

Q  YU  Dm 


S.  LEVEL  OR  BUM 

A.  BOIK  UNIT 


WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


121 


008800  Life  Support  016200  Stress  Physiology 

il  lTAif  Kif*  Hi  liTiUAt/n  rmiii  iTihy  niTV 


TTTrnrnjxri 

63  09 


IT  CONTRACT/ORANT 
A  DA  TEI/C  RRBCTI VE: 
k  NUMBER* 

C  TYRE; 

«l  KINO  OR  AWARD: 


U.'lBTIMAf  EO  COMPLETION  OATE 

C0NT 


EKRIRATIOM: 


4  AMOUNT: 
f>  CUM.  AMT. 


RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OROANiZATION 


lt!*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
aoorem:*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

name.  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
TELEPHONE:  202  576  -  3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


1R-  RUNOINO  AOCNCY 


DA 


1«.  RCROURCCl  ERTIMATE 


RtBCAL 

YEAR 


14  pcrr6nmanc^c~mcThod 

C  In-House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRI  k  RUNDE  fin  AmmmR) 


BHtlOTTI - 

73 

4.5 

125 

ruwwtvf - 

74 

4.5 

125 

SO  PERRORMINO  OROANIZATION 


name.-*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Researcl 
^Division  of  Surgery 
adorem:  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRIMCIPAL  INVEST  I  G  A  T OR  /RumVsA  MAR  II  V  I.  AhNyIc 

name*  Swan,  LTC  K.  G. 

TELEPHONE  202  576  -  3791 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER: 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

NAME:  Reynolds,  LTC  D.  G. 
name:  Ritchie,  LTC  W.  P. 


DA 


u  ..«* c. (u)  stress  Ulcer;  (U)  Shock;  (U)  Ulcerogenesis ; 

(U)  Ion  Transport;  (U)  Splanchnic  Hemodynamics: 


Z>.  technical  OBJECTIVE.*  14.  APPROACH.  It.  PROCMSS  (Pumlsfr  (sANAlil  »r  "> pr»t.Bi  <«•(  #1  *#<A  wi»  facurflr  CImrIAcrUmr  C*P*> 

23  (U)  Elucidate  the  pathogenesis  of  irreversible  shock.  Study  the  pathophysiology  of 
stress  ulcer,  a  complication  that  causes  massive  gastrointestinal  bleeding  in  3%  of 
severely  wounded  with  a  407o  mortality. 

24  (U)  Study  mesenteric  hemodynamics  in  endotoxin  shock  with  emphasis  on  species  varia¬ 
tion,  Search  for  a  better  model  for  stress  ulcer.  Study  ion  transport  across  the 
gastric  mucosa  and  the  effects  of  metabolic  inhibitors  and  hemorrhage  on  gastric  mucosal 
permeability, 

25  (U)  72  07  -  73  06.  A  lethal  dose  of  endotoxin  given  intravenously  caused  profound 

hypotension  in  baboons  but  no  change  in  mesenteric,  hepatic,  or  renal  arterial  blood 
flow.  The  canine  response  differs  in  that  each  of  these  vascular  beds  become  ischemic 
in  response  to  equivalent  treatment.  The  silicone  rubber  injection  technique  has  been 
used  to  define  a  specific  intestinal  vascular  lesion  in  the  dog  but  is  absent  in  the 
monkey.  The  data  suggest  that  the  splanchnic  viscera  are  not  primary  sites  of  patho¬ 
logy  during  shock  in  monkeys  and  presumably  man.  In  vivo  and  in  vitro  studies  on 
mammalian  stomach  electrical  and  pH  gradients  demonstrated  the  gastric  mucosal  barrier 
(GMB)  to  be  impaired  by  inhibition  of  ATP  synthesis,  anaerobic  glycolysis  and  hemor¬ 
rhage.  Bile  salts  and  acetylsalicylic  acid  damage  the  Q4B  by  altering  membrane  elec¬ 
trical  characteristics.  These  effects  may  be  related  to  the  pathogenesis  of  gastric 
stress  ulcers.  Restraint  stressed  rats  that  were  provided  5.0  gm  %  of  glucose  to 
drink  developed  fewer  stress  erosions  than  did  control  rats.  Glucose  did  not  protect 
at  lower  concentrations. 

fe^nical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report, 

1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 

to  contractor*  upon  originator' «  appro  vJ _ _ _ _ _ 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD 

MAR 


J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  149SA  I  NOV  6ft 
AND  1  49ft-  1  .  1  MAH  Q ft  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


938 


Project  3A062110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 


Task  00  Combat  Surgery 

Work  Unit  121  Responses  to  trauma 

Investigators. 

Principal:  LTC  Kenneth  G.  Swan,  MC 

Associate:  MAJ  Creighton  E  Wright,  MC;  LTC  Robert  W.  Hobson,  MC; 

LTC  David  G.  Reynolds,  MSC;  LTC  John  F.  Mullane,  MC; 

James  T.  Sayre;  MAJ  Peter  F.  Casterline;  SP6  Ernest 
C.  Alix;  MAJ  Michael  D.  Sulkin,  MC;  MAJ  Alfred  S.  Gervin, 

1.  Peripheral  Arterial  Flow  and  Venous  Occlusion. 

a.  Background:  Arteriovenous  trauma  m  the  lower  extremity  has 
usually  been  managed  by  arterial  reconstruction  and  venous  ligation 
of  the  injured  concomitant  vein.  Clinical  series  from  Vietnam  have 
documented  the  occurrence  of  gangrene  due  to  acute  venous  insuffi¬ 
ciency.  The  hemodynamics  of  acute  venous  occlusion  have  not  been 
clearly  defined.  The  present  studies  were  designed  to  evaluate  the 
hemodynamic  responses  to  acute  and  chronic  venous  occlusion  in  the 
hindlimb  and  in  addition  were  designed  to  evaluate  means  whereby 
adverse  hemodynamic  sequela  might  be  elevated. 

2 .  Autoregulatory  Escape  in  Hepatic  Circulation  of  Subhuman  Primates. 

Adrenergic  mechanisms  of  the  splanchnic  viscera  have  been  evaluated  in 
different  vascular  beds  in  several  species  of  animals.  The  presence 
and  absence  of  3  adrenergic  receptors  in  the  liver  of  the  primate  and 
the  primate  responses  to  catecholamine  infusions  has  not  previously 
been  documented.  The  presence  of  autoregulation  differs  in  the  dog 
and  cat  models  previously  examined.  Pharmacologic  manipulation  of 
the  splanchnic  visceral  blood  flow  with  particular  reference  to  the 
control  of  hemorrhage  is  based  upon  the  responses  of  vascular  beds  to 
constant  infusion  of  pharmacological  agents.  The  effort  is  to 
examine  the  presence  of  a  and  6  adrenergic  receptors  and  also  the 
presence  of  autoregulatory  escape  in  the  hepatic  circulation  of  the 
subhuman  primate,  the  anubis  baboon. 

3.  Pathophysiology  of  Intraarterial  Injection  of  Drugs. 

The  inadvertent  intraarterial  injection  of  drugs  of  abuse  including 
amphetamines,  barbiturates,  analgesics,  and  narcotics  has  on 
occasion  be^  followed  by  significant  peripheral  vascular  insuffi¬ 
ciency  with  subsequent  gangrene.  The  etiologic  mechanism  for  this 
syndrome  has  previously  been  postulated  to  be  acute  vasospasm  induced 
by  the  drugs.  This  hypothesis  was  examined  in  the  canine  hindlimb 


with  the  finding  that  dextroamphetamine  and  me th amphetamine  are 
significant  vasoconstrictors  however  Darvon,  thiopental,  secobarbital 
sodium,  pentobarbital  sodium,  morphine,  methadone,  and  heroin  are 
vasodilators  when  injected  intraarterially.  Additional  mechanisms 
for  the  etiology  of  the  vascular  insufficiency  syndrome  must  be 
found. 

4.  Peripheral  Arterial  Flow  in  Venous  Occlusion  Before  and  After  a 
Lumbar  Sympathectomy  in  the  Baboon. 

The  ligation  of  injured  veins  in  the  situation  of  combined  arterial 
and  venous  injuries  has  been  the  common  management.  Recent  clinical 
series  have  demonstrated  significant  complications  from  the  ligation 
of  extremity  veins.  Previous  work  In  this  laboratory  on  the  canine 
model  has  demonstrated  the  hemodynanu.^  sequela  which  follow  femoral 
venous  ligation.  Since  the  primate  model  is  presumably  similar  to 
man  with  particular  regard  to  the  collateral  venous  circulation,  the 
problem  of  femoral  venous  ligation  has  been  investigated  in  the 
baboon.  Femoral  venous  ligation  reduces  femoral  arterial  flow  while 
increasing  femoral  venous  pressure  and  peripheral  resistance  in  the 
hindlimb.  The  addition  of  lumbar  sympathectomy  and  presumably  lumbar 
sympathetic  blockade  significantly  improves  the  arterial  flow  with  no 
significant  deleterious  effects  on  peripheral  venous  pressure.  The 
recommendation  is  that,  in  the  clinical  situation  when  major 
peripheral  venous  ligation  is  unavoidable,  lumbar  sympathectomy  should 
be  considered  as  a  useful  adjuvant  technique. 

5.  Study  of  Factors  Present  After  Trauma. 

Experiments  completed  this  year  have  been  designed  to  study  factors 
present  after  trauma  that  might  increase  susceptibility  to  1)  stress 
ulcer  formation  or  2)  pulmonary  infection. 

The  effects  of  starvation,  graded  glucose  ingestion,  gastric  congestion 
and  oxygen  toxicity  on  stress  ulcer  formation  have  been  studied. 

Seven  hours  of  wire  mesh  restraint  was  used  as  a  stress  model  for  the 
rat.  Rats  were  starved  for  4  days  or  given  1.0,  2.5  or  5.0%  glucose 
as  a  drinking  solution.  The  latter  concentration  of  glucose  prevented 
the  increased  incidence  of  gastric  stress  lesions  with  starvation. 

This  was  not  related  to  changes  in  gastric  acid  production,  oxygen 
consumption  or  gastric  absorption  of  ingested  glucose.  A  critical 
degree  of  caloric  intake  appeared  to  be  necessary  to  protect  the 
stomach  from  stress. 

When  rats  were  studied  2,  4  and  7  days  after  portal  vein  constriction, 
there  was  an  increased  incidence  of  stress  induced  gastric  lesions. 

At  14  days  when  the  portal  pressure  had  returned  to  normal,  the  rat's 
stomach  was  no  longer  susceptible  to  stress.  Vagotomy  protected  the 
congested  stomach  from  the  effects  of  stress. 


940 


Rats  that  breathed  100%  oxygen  for  *':8  hours  bad  an  increased  incidence 
of  stress  induced  gastric  lesions.  These  rats  did  not  gain  as  much 
weight  as  controls  and  had  a  lower  mean  arterial  pressure.  After  48 
hours  of  100%  Oj®  arterial  pH  and  pCCL  were  normal  but  arterial  pC^ 
was  280  mm  Hg  instead  of  400  mm  Hg.  Portal  pressure  remained  normal 
despite  the  pulmonary  edema  with  100%  O2  and  gastric  congestion  was 
not  of  etiological  significance. 

The  effects  of  acute  blood  loss,  dehydration,  heart  failure, 
aspiration  of  blood  and  stress  on  intrapulmonary  antibacterial  defenses 
of  the  rat  have  been  studied.  Bacteriological  portions  of  the  study 
were  performed  at  Channing  Laboratory,  Boston  and  the  physiological 
and  biochemical  portions  were  performed  at  WRAIR.  The  effect  of  these 
five  variables  on  intrapulmonary  bacterial  inactivation,  alveolar 
bubble  stability  ratio,  arterial  pH,  pCC^  and  pC^,  numbers  of  viable 
macrophages  recovered  by  bronchial  lavage  in  vitro,  oxygen  consumption 
of  alveolar  macrophages  and  acid  phosphate  6  glucuronidase  and 
leucine  aminopeptidase  content  of  the  macrophages  were  studied. 
Intrapulmonary  bacterial  inactivation  was  depressed  in  all  five  models. 
This  was  accompanied  by  decreased  alveolar  surface  activity  in  all 
five  studies.  Major  pulmonary  morphological  changes  were  present  with 
aspiration  of  blood  and  heart  failure.  Hypoxia  was  present  for  only 
a  few  hours  after  blood  loss.  The  viability,  oxygen  consumption  and 
enzyme  content  of  macrophages  recovered  by  bronchial  lavage  were 
similar  to  controls  in  all  five  groups. 

Recommendations  for  further  study  would  include  the  effect  of  intra¬ 
venous  nutrition  on  stress  ulcer  formation  and  changes  in  the 
immunobiology  of  the  alveolar  macrophage  in  the  various  trauma 
related  conditions. 

6.  Two  projects  have  been  pursued:  (a)  Ex  vivo  perfusion  of  the 
canine  stomach  and  (b)  fibrinolytic  activity  in  the  pseudo- 
intima  of  Dacron  aortic  grafts. 

In  developing  a  system  of  ex  vivo  perfusion  of  the  stomach  several 
problems  have  been  encountered  of  which  one  has  to  date  defied 
solution.  This  involves  the  development  of  edema  of  the  mucosa. 

Work  is  continuing  to  solve  this  problem. 

The  study  of  appearance  of  fibrinolytic  activator  in  healing  Dacron 
grafts  has  been  most  rewarding.  A  method  of  accurately  measuring 
fibrinolytic  activator  has  been  developed  for  our  laboratory. 

Several  innovations  in  technique  have  been  devised  and  a  methods 
manuscript  is  in  progress.  Appearance  of  fibrinolytic  activator  has 
been  shown  to  be  present  at  least  as  early  as  one  day  after  graft 
insertion  and  correlates  well  with  the  appearance  of  pseudo-intima. 
Completion  of  work  on  this  data  should  be  available  by  the  end  of 
August  for  preparation  of  a  manuscript. 

941 


Several  other  projects  involving  fibrinolytic  activator  in  intlma  of 
rejecting  vessels,  pericardium,  and  vessels  exposed  to  infused  intra¬ 
venous  fluids  and  other  medications  are  underway. 


942 


Project  3A062110A821  COMBAT  SURGERY 
Task  00  Combat  Surgery 
Work  Unit  121  Responses  to  trauma 
Literature  Cited. 


References : 


1.  Barcia,  P.  J.,  Nelson,  T.  G.,  Whelan,  T.  J.:  The  importance 
of  venous  occlusion  in  arterial  repair  failure.  An  experimental 
study.  Ann.  Surg.  175:223,  1972. 

2.  Cohen,  A.,  Baldwin,  J.  N.,  Grant,  R.  N.:  Problems  in  the  man¬ 
agement  of  battlefield  vascular  injuires.  Am.  J.  Surg.  118:526,  1969. 

3.  Rich,  N.  M.,  Hughes,  C.  W.,  Baugh,  J.  H.:  Management  of 
venous  injuries.  Ann.  Surg.  171:724,  1970. 

4.  Sullivan,  W.  G.,  Thornton,  F.  H.,  Baker,  L.  H.,  et  al:  Early 
influence  of  popliteal  vein  repair  in  the  treatment  of  popliteal 
vessels  injuries.  Am.  J.  Surg.  122 : 528,  1971. 

5.  Ross,  G.:  Escape  of  mesenteric  vessels  from  adrenergic  and 
nonadrenergic  vasoconstriction.  Am.  J.  Physiol.  221:1217-1222,  1971. 

6.  Swan.  K.  G.,  Reynolds,  D.  G.:  Effects  of  intraarterial 
catecholamine  infusions  on  blood  flow  in  the  canine  gut.  Gastroent. 
61:863-871,  1971. 

7.  Greenway,  C.  V.:  Comparison  of  the  effects  of  hepatic  nerve 
stimulation  on  arterial  flow,  distribution  of  arterial  and  portal 
flows,  and  blood  content  in  the  livers  of  anesthetized  cats  and  dogs. 

J.  Physiol.  (Lond.)  227:487-502,  1972. 

8.  Gaspar,  M.  R.,  Hare,  R.  R. :  Gangrene  due  to  intraarterial 
injection  of  drugs  by  drug  addicts.  Surgery.  ^_2_; 573—577 ,  1972. 

9.  Lindell,  T.  D.,  Porter,  J.  M.,  Langston,  C.:  The  intraarte¬ 
rial  injections  of  oral  medications.  N.  Eng.  J.  Med.  287 :1132 ,  1972. 

10.  Maxwell,  T.  M.,  Olcott,  C. ,  Blaisdell,  F.  W.:  Vascular 
complications  of  drug  abuse.  Arch.  Surg.  105:875-882,  1972. 

11.  Pearlman,  H.  S.,  Wollowick,  B.  S.,  Alvarez,  E.  V.:  Intra¬ 
arterial  injection  of  propoxyphene  into  brachial  artery.  J.  A.  M.  A. 
214:2055-2057,  1970. 


943 


Publications : 


1.  Wright,  C.  B.,  .wan,  K.  G.:  The  effects  of  venous  ligation 
on  femoral  arterial  blood  flow.  Circulation  XLVI  Supplemental. 

11:237,  1972. 

2.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Swan,  K.  G.:  The  hemodynamics  of  venous 
occlusion  in  the  canine  hindlimb.  Surgery.  7_3:141,  1973. 

3.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Swan,  K.  G.:  The  hemodynamics  of  venous 
repair  in  the  canine  hindlimb.  J.  Thorac.  &  Cardiovas.  Surg.  65^ 

195,  1973. 

4.  Wright,  C.  B.,  Swan,  K.  G.,  Reynolds,  D.  G.,  Nelson,  T.  G.: 
Venous  occlusion  in  the  canine  hindlimb,  hemodynamic  etfects  of 
adrenergic  stimualtion  and  blockade.  Surgery.  75:507,  1973. 

5.  Sayre,  A.  T.,  Wright,  C.  B.:  Effects  of  femoral  venous 
occlusion  on  canine  femoral  arterial  blood  flow  before  and  after 
sympathectomy.  Clin.  Res.  2JL: 447,  1973. 

6.  Popovic,  N.  A.,  Mullane,  J.  F.:  Effect  of  biliary  obstruction 
in  the  rat  on  pulmonary  ultrastructure.  Am.  J.  Path.  68:97 ,  1972. 

7.  Popovic,  N.  A.,  Mullane,  J.  F.,  Vick,  J.  A.,  Kobrine,  A.  I.: 
Effects  of  phencyclidine  hydrochloride  on  selected  cardiorespiratory 
parameters  on  Macaca  mulatta.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  33:1649 ,  1972. 

8.  Popovic,  N.  A.,  Mullane,  J.  F.,  Yhap,  E.  0.:  Effect  of 
acepromazine  on  selected  parameters  of  cardiorespiratory  function  in 
the  dog.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  32:1819,  1972. 

9.  Mullane,  J.  F.,  Popovic,  N.  A.,  Solis,  R*  T.,  Yhap,  E.  0.: 
Effect  of  experimental  biliary  obstruction  on  respiratory  function. 

J.  Surg.  Res.  12:197,  1972. 

10.  Pyant,  R.  L.,  Jr.,  Mullane,  J.  F.:  Starvation,  glucose 
ingestion  and  stress  ulcer  formation  in  the  rat.  Clin.  Res.  20: 

872,  1972. 

11.  Mullane,  J.  F.,  LaForce,  F.  M.,  O'Connell,  D.  M.,  Huber, 

G.  L.:  Acute  blood  loss  and  pulmonary  host  defense  mechanisms  in 
the  rat.  J.  Surg.  Res.  14^:228,  1973. 

12.  Kobrine,  A.  I.,  Kempe,  L.  G.,  Mullane,  J.  F.:  Natriuresis 
in  the  Rhesus  monkey  following  intracranial  hypertension.  Ann.  Surg. 
177:370,  1973. 


944 


13.  Phelps,  T.  0.,  Mullane,  J.  F.:  Gastric  congestion  and  stress 
ulcer  formation.  Gastroenterology.  64:190,  1973. 

14.  Mullane,  J.  F.,  Wilfong,  R.  G.,  Phelps,  T.  0.,  O'Connell, 

D.  M. ,  Huber,  G.  L.:  Dehydration  and  pulmonary  host  defense  mechanisms. 
Clin.  Res.  21:610,  1973. 

15.  Mullane,  J.  F.,  LaForce,  F.  M.,  Wilfong,  R.  G.,  O'Connell, 

D.  M.,  Huber,  G.  L.;  Intraalveolar  blood  and  pulmonary  antibacterial 
defense.  Am.  Rev.  Resp.  Dis.  107 :  June  1973. 


945 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

i.  timer  ueuuotr 

DA  0A  6468 

72  08  01 

juroet  coArniof.  trmaoL 
DD-DRhS(AR)t3i 

S.  DATE  RHEV  SUVAY 

72  07  Cl 

«.  KINO  OP  IUNNARY 

H.  Terminati 

*.  IUMNARV  SC  TV* 

Dn  U 

S.  WORK  ItCURtTV* 

u 

NA 

IN  DUm  lNSTB*N 

NL 

•fc  IRICIPIC  DATA- 

CONTRACTOR  ACCCM 

QyII  □  NO 

S.  LEVEL  OP  SUM 

A.  VOEE  UNIT 

IS.  NO  /COOES:* 

RROORAM ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  ARIA  NUMBER 

A.  RRMIARV 

62 110 A 

3A062110A821 

00 

122 

S.  CONTRIBUTING 

C.  CONTRIBUTING 

CD0G  114(f) 

Anesthesia  and  pulmonary  complications  of  combat  injury 

, - 


II  ICIENTIPIC  AMO  TKCMMOL.OOit.AL  ARIA  I* 


002400  Bioengineering  012900  Physiology 

rrT™m -  - “ -  .1.  Sa 


n  ItaIT  sni 

58  05 


II  CONTRACT  OMAN  T 

A  DATfl/imCTlVI; 
LV  HUMBER* 
c  TYRE: 

A  KINO  Or  ABARD: 


14  HVlttArib  CONRLlfl&R 

72  08 


rrr 


008800  Life  Support 


NA 


I  XRIRATION 


4  AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


If.  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OAOANI  t  ATION 


M.  RSRPORMNO  ORSANIIATION 


mark:*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
aooacu:*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

RANK:  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 

202  576  -  3551 


II.  GENERAL  uic 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


1  PUNOlNO  AOtNCV 

DA 


If  RlfOURCCI  CfTIHATC 

FIIHWIII 


riaCAc 

VKAR 


72 

'cumimT 

73 


I*.  TtAP^RMANCS  hcthod 

C.  In-House 


k  P  UN  OS  (Ri  AmmmR) 

4 

100 

5 

125 

man«:*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Surgery 
tooxiu.* Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


'RINCIRAL  IMVCSTIOATOR  SEAR  tl  U .«.  AM  Maw  It  imiIMMmV 

man*:*  Mu  1  lane,  LTC  J.  F. 

TELEPHONE  202  576  -  2007 


SOCIAL 

AlfOCIAT 

MAMtt 

MAMC: 


DA 


Intrapullnotlary  Antibacterial  Defense  Mechanisms;  (U) 
Acute  Blood  Loss;  (U)  Dehydration;  (ID  Heart  Failure;  (ID  Aspiration  of  Rlond;  qr)  Hypoxia 


II  TECHNICAL  ORJECTt  vE.*  U  ARRROACM,  II.  RROOREM  (Fufnlttt  fnMWEMf  IRmON.E  At  »*— Rf»*a#»  !•»»  ml  mmm*  rntm  *.MrUr  ClmmmlMmmUmm  Cm4m.) 

23  (U)  The  effects  of  acute  blood  loss,  dehydration,  heart  failure,  aspiration  of  bloo4 
and  stress  on  intrapulmonary  antibacterial  defenses  of  the  rat  have  been  measured  to 
evaluate  the  effects  of  trauma  on  the  susceptibility  of  the  injured  patient  to  pul¬ 
monary  infection. 

24  (U)  Intrapulmonary  bacterial  inactivation  and  alveolar  surfactant  activity  were 
depressed  in  each  group.  Extensive  morphologic  alterations  in  the  lungs  followed  ex¬ 
perimental  aspiration  of  blood  and  experimental  heart  failure  in  rats.  Hypoxia  was 
associated  with  acute  blood  loss  for  only  a  few  hours  following  experimental  hemorrhage, 
The  viability,  oxygen  consumption,  and  enzyme  content  of  macrophages  recovered  by 
bronchial  lavage  were  similar  to  controls  in  all  five  groups. 

25  (U)  Termination  of  this  work  unit  is  due  to  combination  with  another. work  unit, 

3A062110A821  00  121. 


*A  vmllmbtm  to  contrmclor 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,:«VJ498 


PREVIOUS  EOITIONS  OR  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  1  4Sf  A , 
AND  149S-1  I  MAR  AS  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


946 


PROJECT  3A062110A822 
MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 

Task  00 

Military  Internal  Medicine 


T 


T 


ocqocwmhk  |CDOG  ll4jf) 

(U)  Metabolic  Response  to  Disease  and  Injury 

<1  SCIENTIFIC  *N0  TEC HWOl OQIC A L  ARIAS9 

012900  PIIYSIOIOGV  003500  CLINICAL  MEDICINE 


63  08 


IT  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A  OATES/IEFICTIVt  NA 

b.  NUMBER  * 

C  TYPE 

1  KINO  OT  ARARD 


I  OAT*  PRE 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

—  II  CUR*  TV* 

U 


72  07  01 


A  RIND  OP  SUMMARY 


D.  Change 


10  NO  LODES  * 


b.  CON  TRIBUTING 


PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

621 IQS - 


U 


T  ri  grading* 

NA 


PROJECT  NUMKR 

3M6211CM22 


DA  OA  6469 


73  07  01 


It  OMn  INSTR'I 

NL 


00 


REPORT  CONTROL  ETNRUL 

DD r>RhE(AF<)tJ6 


i  IRIC1PIC  DATA* 

r  TRACTOR  ACCKII 

VII  □  MO 


•  CIVIL  OP  SUM 

K  VORK  unit 


WORK  UNIT  NUMKR 


120 


002300  BIOCHEMISTRY 


)  IT  ART  DATE 


14.  It  TIM  AT CDCONPL  E  TION*  DATE 

OONT 


4  AMOUNT 
f,  COM.  AMT. 


it  RESPONSIBLE  doo  or 


IB  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

b.  FUNDS  fl"  Nnu.aaSN, 

FISCAL 

TEAR 

rrtctotni 

73 

20 

365 

'tuuiuv - 

74 

20 

365 

«0  PERFORMING  OROAt*'  1*1 

i_ i 

name  •  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
„,M.  Washington/  DC  20012 


RE  IRON  %l  It.  (  NOIVIOUAL 

NAME.  Buescher,  CDL,  E.  L. 
ti  l  ..  pmonc  ■  202-576-3551 


GENERAL  USE 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


l»  P  UN  DING  AOENCV 


DA 


1*  PCRPORMANCE  MEYnOO 

C.  In-House 


li  N  fVBOROS  <r»€»4*  gACH  •  !»*  I***!*  CUflHcmtim*  C*4*J 

(U)  Metabolic;  (U)  Stress;  (U)  Endocrine;  (U)  Hormone 


n AMI**  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicine 
aooriu* Washington,  DC  20012 

RRIMCIRAL  INVESTIGATOR  rRu«U*A  mam  II  V  I.  AUlMtlt  IHtUNimy 

NAME*  Earll,  COL,  J.  M. 

TELEPHONE  202-576-3529^^^^^^ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  NUMBER 

A ttOCI ATE  INVESTIGATORS 

name:  Wartof sky ,  LTC,  L. 

name  Jchaaf,  M.D. ,  M.  DA 


21  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  >A  APPROACH,  tt  PBOGREtt  fpw.  ii«A  inMI.INUal  RataR/apA*  IBanflMaN  t»  i'irHi  ptaraBa  •!  Ml*  vltfl  l.curHr  ClMaffttallan  CM*  } 

23.  (U)  Investigation  into  basic  mechanisms  of  diseases  of  military  importance  and  the 
metabolic  response  of  patients  during  stress  of  disease  and  injury  to  provide  rational 
approach  to  therapy. 

24.  (U)  Metabolic  balance  studies  with  precise  collection  of  biologic  samples  from 
patients  under  rigidly  controlled  diet,  drugs,  and  activity.  Development  of  techniques 
to  measure  alterations  in  homeostasis  produced  by  disease  or  drugs.  Provide  clinical 
support  and  teaching  for  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06.  Investigations  of  alterations  in  endocrine  hormones  and  their 

relationships  to  changes  in  body  rretabolism  which  occur  during  trauma,  stress,  immobil¬ 
ization,  and  infection  were  conducted.  Thyroid  gland  function  is  suppressed  during 
acute  malaria  infection.  Thyroid  stimulating  hormone  and  prolactin  were  transiently 
decreased  during  the  first  to  third  day  of  the  infection.  Prolactin,  a  hormone  which 
increases  with  many  stresses,  did  not  increase,  and  responses  of  both  hormones  to  in¬ 
travenous  thyrotropic  stimulating  hormone  releasing  factor  was  normal  during  malaria 
infection.  Urinary  cyclic  three  prime  five  prime  adenosine  monophosphate  is  suppressed 
3y  calcium  infusion  in  both  idiopathic  hypercalciuria  and  aaencmatous  hyperparathyroid¬ 
ism,  confirming  the  non- autonomous  nature  of  the  latter.  Thirteen  acromegalic  patients 
^ere  treated  via  transsphenoidal  microsurgery  with  excellent  response.  Selective 
venous  catheterization  and  measurement  of  parathyroid  hormone  has  proved  to  be  useful 
in  localizing  adencmas  and  predicting  hyperplasia  in  fifteen  patients.  For  technical 
reports  see  Walter  Reed  Amy  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  July  72  - 
30  June  73. 


DD,'e."“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  14BIA  I  NOV  6  B 
AND  1491-1  1  MAR  «•  (FOR  ARMY  USE 


SEl  ARE  OBIOLE TC 

947 


[Pll  Redacted] 


Project  3A062110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  120,  Metabolic  response  to  disease  and  injury 
Investigators : 

Principal:  00L  Jerry  M.  Ear  11,  MC 

Associates:  M.v-cus  Schaaf,  M.D.;  LTC  Lecnard  Wartofsky,  MC; 

MAJ  Riciiard  C.  Dimond,  MC;  MAJ  Gordon  L.  Noel,  MC; 

MAJ  Jack  >i.  Mcnchik ,  MC;  Joseph  Bruton,  Ph.  D. 

Description 

This  work  unit  is  concerned  with  investigations  into  oasic  mechanisms 
of  diseases  of  military  importance  and  the  metabolic  responses  occur- 
ing  during  stress  of  disease  and  injury  to  provide  rational  approaches 
to  therapy.  Metabolic  balance  studies  are  utilized  with  precise 
collections  of  biologic  samples  from  patients  during  rigid  control  of 
diet,  drugs,  and  activity.  In  addition,  support  is  afforded  Walter 
Reed  Army  Medical  Center  in  training  house  staff,  four  endocrine 
fellows,  diagnosis  and  treatment  of  endocrine  patients,  and  technical 
laboratory  support  to  oti ler  departments.  The  unit  maintains  the  capa¬ 
bility  of  mounting  field  studies. 

Progress 

1.  Thyroid  Metabolism. 

Studies  in  four  humans  infected  with  malaria  have  revealed  that  stimula¬ 
tion  of  thyroid  stimulating  hormone  (TSH)  with  repetitive  doses  of 
thyrotropin  releasing  factor  (TRF)  exhausts  the  pituitary  TSH  response. 
TSH  levels  responded  to  TRH  stimulation  during  malar  . a  infection.  Pro¬ 
lactin,  which  seems  to  respond  even  better  to  TRF  than  TSH,  continues 
to  respond  with  repeated  injections.  Prolactin  which  responds  to  mental 
stress  and  exhaustive  exercise,  fails  to  respond  to  the  fever  and  stress 
associated  with  malaria. 

The  release  of  thyroid  stimulating  hormones  (TSH)  and  prolactin  by  bolus 
injections  of  large  doses  of  TRH  has  been  widely  studied.  Considerable 
doubt  remains  as  to  whether  TRH  is  more  effective  in  releasing  prolactin 
than  TSH,  what  the  smallest  effective  dose  of  TRH  is  in  releasing  the 
two  hormones,  and  whether  the  pituitary  responds  to  TRH  in  an  "all-or- 
none"  fashion.  To  answer  these  questions  we  have  given  small  doses  of 
TRH  in  constant  infusions  via  Harvard  pump  to  tei  normal  volunteers, 
five  males  and  five  females.  Blood  was  drawn  at  15  minute  intervals  for 
450  minutes  while  TRH  was  given  at  the  following  rates:  25  ng/min. 


948 


75  ng/min,  250  ng/min  each  for  120  minutes,  and  750  ng/min  for  90  min¬ 
utes,  after  which  a  500  mog  bolus  of  TRH  was  administered.  In  both 
males  and  females  TSH  infusion  at  250  ng/min  (HPr  p  <  0.005,  TSH  p  < 
0.025) .  TSH  and  HPr  values  plateaued  during  the  final  60  minutes  at 
this  infusion  rate,  but  rose  again  during  the  first  30  to  60  minutes 
of  the  next  infusion  rate  (750  ng/min)  and  then  plateaued  once  more. 
After  the  500  meg  bolus  of  TRH,  TSH  and  HPr  rose  further  in  all  in¬ 
dividuals.  Prolactin  values  were  significantly  higher  in  fanales  than 
in  males  at  all  times;  TSH  levels  were  significantly  higher  in  females 
during  the  250  and  750  ng/min  infusions  and  after  the  TRH  bolus. 

By  employing  a  technique  of  constant  TRH  infusion,  we  have  demonstrated 
(1)  the  threshold  dose  of  TRH  is  greater  than  75  ng/min  and  less  than 
or  equal  to  250  ng/min  for  both  TSH  and  HPr;  (2)  TSH  and  HPr  responses 
are  parallel  at  each  infusion  rate;  (3)  although  the  smallest  effective 
dose  of  TRH  i  s  the  same  in  males  and  females ,  females  have  a  greater 
increase  of  both  TSH  and  HPr;  (4)  at  these  very  small  doses  there  is 
a  clear  dose-response  relationship  of  both  TSH  and  iiPr  to  TRH. 

Che  hundred  and  seventy-five  studies  of  TSH  response  to  TRH  have  been 
completed  and  TRH  is  definitely  a  useful  agent  for  the  assessment  of 
disorders  of  the  hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid  axis.  TRH  significantly 
stimulated  growth  hormone  in  25%  of  12  acromegalic  patients. 

The  thyrochron,  a  self-contained  direct  digital  readout  Achilles  reflex 
time,  has  proved  to  be  highly  accurate  and  easy  to  operate.  Mild  exer¬ 
cise  such  as  walking,  speeds  the  reflex  (52  +  22  msec)  and  cold  slews 
it  (101  +  38  msec)  so  that  these  conditions  must  be  considered  and  con¬ 
trolled  to  improve  the  usefulness  of  the  Achilles  reflex  time. 

2.  Calcium  Metabolism. 

Seventeen  patients  with  primary  hyperparathyroidism  have  undergone  se¬ 
lective  venous  catheterization.  Fifteen  of  these  patients  have  never 
previously  had  surgery.  Parathyroid  adenoma  was  correctly  predicted  and 
lateralized  in  1 2  of  these  15  patients  who  have  never  previously  had 
surgery.  The  remaining  three  patients  had  hyperplasia  correctly  pre¬ 
dicted  pre-operatively.  Two  patients  who  had  previous  surgery  have  had 
selective  venous  catheterization.  In  one  patient  hyperplasia  was  pre¬ 
dicted  and  an  adenoma  was  found.  The  other  patient  is  awaiting  surgery. 
It  is  concluded  that  selective  venous  catheterization  has  proven  to  be 
a  valuable  means  of  lateralizing  parathyroid  adenoma  and  in  pre- 
operatively  predicting  hyperplasia  or  adenoma  in  patients  who  have  never 
previously  had  surgery.  We  presently  do  not  have  enough  data  on  patients 
who  have  had  previous  surgery. 


949 


These  plasma  samples  were  obtained  from  normal  individuals  and  endo¬ 
crine  patients.  Results  from  each  of  these  procedures  were  inter- 
ocmpared.  The  fluorcmetric  procedure  and  the  competitive  protein¬ 
binding  assay  compared  favorably  with  results  obtained  from  the 
more  elaborate  and  difficult  double-isotope  derivative  method.  The 
Porter-Silber  method  showed  a  lack  of  specificity. 

4.  Polypeptide  Homme  Metabolism. 

Application  of  modem  technology  to  an  old  surgical  approach  has  led 
to  a  treatment  of  acromegaly  that  promises  improved  therapy  with  eradi¬ 
cation  of  the  tumor  and  preservation  of  normal  pituitary  function. 

Using  a  dissecting  microscope  and  a  transsphenoidal  approach  to  the 
sella  turcica,  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  normal  pituitary  from 
tumor  under  direct  vision  and  in  most  cases  preserve  the  normal  gland. 

We  have  treated  13  active  acromegalics.  TV/o  patients  had  hypopitu¬ 
itarism  before  treatment  which  was  not  improved  by  surgery;  two 
patients  with  normal  pituitary'  function  pre-operatively  pituitary 
evaluation  but  are  doing  well  off  replacement  medication.  The  other 
six  patients  have  normal  anterior  pituitary  function.  Transient 
diabetes  insipidus  was  noted  in  the  immediate  post-operative  period 
in  almost  all  patients.  One  patient  requires  vasopressin  in  oil  two 
months  after  surgery.  Che  patient  developed  transient  aphasia  and 
hemiparesis  six  days  after  surgery,  and  one  was  blinded  in  one  eye 
from  an  orbital  fracture.  This  complication  should  not  recur  due  to 
changes  in  techniques.  Pre-operative  basal  growth  hormone  (GH)  levels 
ranged  from  9  to  98  ng/ml.  Follow-up  GH  data  ranging  from  two  weeks 
to  one  year  is  available  in  10  patients.  Basal  CH  was  undetectable 
in  five  patients,  <  3  ng/ml  in  one;  <  6  ng/ml  in  two,  <  10  ng/ml  in 
one,  and  in  one  patient  with  prior  unsuccessful  yttrium  implants  the 
GH  dropped  from  98  to  39  ng/ml.  Twelve  of  13  patients  noted  decrease 
in  ring  size  or  other  soft  tissue  changes  within  three  to  five  days 
after  surgery.  Transsphenoidal  microsurgery  for  acromegaly  may  become 
the  treatment  of  choice  since  it  offers  several  distinct  advantages: 

(1)  it  is  a  relatively  simple  neurosurgical  procedure;  (2)  post¬ 
operative  recovery  is  rapid;  (3)  growth  hormone  is  rapidly  lowered  to 
levels  which  allow  dramatic  clinical  response;  and  (4)  surgery  under 
direc±  observation  with  the  microscope  allows  removal  of  abnormal  tissue 
and  selective  preservation  of  normal  tissue  and  pituitary  function  in 
most  of  the  cases. 

Stimulation  and  suppression  of  plasma  prolactin  in  patients  with  pitui¬ 
tary  disease  has  been  carried  out  in  nine  patient o  with  various  types 
of  galactorrhea.  All  patients  had  extensive  stundarc  pituitary  function 
tests  prior  to  the  prolactin  studies.  TRH  was  found  to  release  pro¬ 
lactin  from  patients  with  .ion -pituitary  tumor-re latea  galactorrhea; 
chlorprcmazine  released  prolactin  in  patients  with  intact  hypothalamic- 
pituitary  connections.  Breast  stimulation  was  not  an  effective  stimulus 


950 


to  prolactin  release  in  any  individual.  Too  few  patients  were  studied 
during  sleep  to  draw  any  ccnclusicns  at  this  time.  In  over  20  patients 
studied  with  pituitary  tumors  but  without  galactorrhea,  prolactin  re¬ 
lease  has  been  preserved  more  frequently  than  any  other  pituitary  hor¬ 
mone;  about  20%  have  elevated  prolactin  levels  without  evidence  of 
hormonal  excess.  It  can  be  concluded  that  prolactin  response  to  speci¬ 
fic  stimulatory  and  suppressive  tests  is  useful  in  determining  the 
etiology  of  galactorrhea.  Prolactin  response  is  also  an  excellent 
parameter  of  pituitary  function  and  preservation  in  patients  with 
pituitary  disease. 

It  is  well  established  that  several  of  the  polypeptide  hormones  may 
exist  in  the  circulation  in  heterogeneous  forms.  To  explore  the  possi¬ 
bility  that  a  similar  phenomenon  may  occur  among  glycoprotein  hormones, 
we  have  recently  compared  purified  pituitary  thyrotropin  (hTSH)  to 
serum  hTSH  by  gel  chromatography.  Standard  pituitary  hTSH  (Mill  Hill- 
A  in  hypopituitary  serum)  and  serum  samples  from  three  patients  with 
primary  hypothyroidism,  two  of  whom  were  also  studied  after  thyrotror  in 
releasing  factor  (TRF)  administration,  were  examined.  Each  sample  was 
co-chranatographed  with  I -hTSH  (National  Pituitary  Agency,  NIAMDD) 

serving  as  an  internal  standard  and  with  -^i-bovine  thyroglobulin  and 
12 5j  to  establish  the  void  volume  and  total  volume.  One  ml  sanples 
were  applied  to,  and  1  ml  fractions  were  collected  fran,  a  1.5  x  80  an 
column  of  Sephadex  G-100,  operated  at  a  flew  rate  of  3.4  ml/hr  at  4°  C. 

In  each  fraction,  labeled  pituitary  TSH  was  measured  in  terms  of  radio¬ 
activity  and  unlabeled  pituitary  TSH  was  symmetric  in  all  experiments 
and  was  indistinguishable  fran  unlabeled  pituitary  TSH,  validating 
the  labeled  internal  standard  as  a  chromatographic  marker  for  pituitary 
TSH;  the  Kav  for  pituitary  TSH  was  0.326  +  0.002  S.D.  However,  the 
elution  chromatogram  of  unlabeled  serum  TSH  for  each  of  the  five  sam¬ 
ples  was  clearly  distinguished  from  the  pituitary  TSH  marker  by  its 
asyrrmetry  and  by  its  greater  exclusion  (3. 0-3. 5  ml)  fran  the  gel 
(Kav  =  0.297  +  0.004  S.D. ;  p  <  0.001).  The  elution  chromatogram  for 
serum  TSH  was  essentially  the  same  before  and  after  TRF.  A  clear 
difference  between  pituitary  and  circulating  TSH  has  been  demonstrated 
by  gel  chromatography.  Further  investigation  will  be  required  to  de¬ 
termine  whether  this  difference  is  related  to  the  biosynthesis, 
secretion,  or  peripheral  metabolism  of  pituitary  TSH  or  to  its  alter¬ 
ation  during  extraction  and  purification. 

Hormonal  regulation  of  lipolysis  in  animal  tissue  is  due  to  the  acti¬ 
vation  of  triglyceride  lipase.  Lipolytic  hormones  such  as  epinephrine 
and  ACIH,  activate  adenyl  cyclase  and  increase  intracellular  cAMP  levels. 
Cyclic  AMP  activation  of  hormone-sensitive  lipase  requires  ATP  and  is 
due  to  cAMP  stimulation  of  protein  kinase.  Hormone-stimulated  lipolysis 
in  human  adipose  tissue  is  felt  to  have  a  similar  mechanism.  In  human 
adipose  cells  adenyl  cyclase  is  activated  with  an  increase  in  intra¬ 
cellular  cAMP  during  hormone-stimulated  lipolysis.  It  has  been  shown 


951 


that  a  partially  purified  lipase  from  human  adipose  tissue  is  stimulated 
by  cAMP  in  the  presence  of  ATP  and  MgC^.  This  stimulation  is  blocked 
by  a  heat  stable  protein  inhibitor  which  is  specific  for  cAMP  st  Emulated 
protein  kinase.  Partial  purification  and  characterization  of  cA ,P- 
stimulated  protein  kinase  from  human  subcutaneous  breast  and  pannicular 
adipose  tissue  were  accomplished  in  this  laboratory.  Tolbutamide,  an 
antilipolytic  drug,  has  been  previously  shewn  to  inhibit  protein  kinase 
from  rat  and  bovine  adipose  tissue  and  our  laboratory  has  confirmed 
these  studies  for  human  adipose  tissue.  The  isolation  and  characteri¬ 
zation  of  protein  kinase  from  human  adipose  tissue  provides  additional 
evidence  for  the  possibility  that  the  mechanism  of  action  of  hormone- 
stimulated  lipolysis  in  humans  is  mediated  by  protein  kinase. 


Plasma  prolactin  levels  were  measured  in  a  group  of  fourteen  young  men 
undergoing  their  first  parachute  experience  at  the  Infantry  School  at 
Fort  Benning,  Georgia.  Basal  prolactin  levels  were  determined  cn 
three  occasions  prior  to  the  first  parachute  jump  between  0600  and  0700 
hours  and  20  to  30  minutes  before  jumping  at  approximately  1300  hours; 
mean  basal  prolactin  levels  were  similar  cn  all  occasions  and  did  not 
increase  significantly  as  the  time  of  the  first  jump  approached.  How¬ 
ever,  mean  plasma  prolactin  levels  had  increased  significantly  over 
all  basal  samples  (p  <  0.005)  within  several  minutes  of  landing  in  the 
drop  zene.  Thus,  the  apprehension  of  an  initial  parachute  jump  stimu¬ 
lates  a  significant  plasma  prolactin  release  in  a  situation  controlled 
to  eliminate  physical  stress  and  plasma  prolactin  levels  may  be  useful 
as  a  marker  for  the  p^.  sence  of  apprehension. 


Day  -13 

Day  -3 

0600 

0600 

Mean  HPr 

8.69 

8.73 

SEM 

0.73 

0.85 

n 

14 

14 

P  value  of 

time  1400 

Day  0 

Compared  to: 

p  <  0.005 

Day  0 

Da>  0* 

Day  0** 

0600 

1300 

1400 

10.25 

10.37 

19.30 

1.35 

1.16 

3.10 

14 

14 

14 

<  0.005 

<  0.005 

*  Approx  imat  e  1  y  30  minutes  before  jumping  from  aircraft. 

** Approximately  10  minutes  after  jumping  from  aircraft. 


* 


952 


To  determine  if  the  secretory  mechanism  in  parathyroid  adenomas  is 
independent  of  blood  calcium  and  autonomous,  EDTA  and  calcium  in¬ 
fusions  have  been  carried  out  in  10  patients  with  primary  hyper¬ 
parathyroidism  who  had  an  adenoma,  three  patients  with  hyperplasia, 
and  one  patient  with  tertiary  hyperparathyroidism.  In  8  of  the  10 
patients  who  had  an  adenoma,  irmunoreact i ve  PHI  and  cyclic  AMP  were 
not  autonomous  and  in  two  patients  secretion  appeared  to  be  auto¬ 
nomous.  The  three  patients  with  hyperplasia,  all  shewed  nen-autenamy . 

The  one  patient  with  tertiary  hyperparathyroidism  received  only  an 
EDTA  infusion  and  showed  marked  increase  in  iPTH  and  urinary  cyclic 
AMP.  It  can  be  concluded  that  PTH  secretion  from  an  adenoma  is 
usually  not  autonomous  as  was  previously  believed.  The  cyclic  3"  5' 

AMP  findings  also  support  this  conclusion.  In  six  patients  with 
idiopathic  hypercalciuria,  the  urinary  cyclic  3'  5'  AMP  varied  in¬ 
versely  with  plasma  ionized  and  total  calcium.  The  rapid  responses 
of  cyclic  3'  3'  AMP  allow  the  conclusion  that  the  biological  half 
life  of  plasma  PTH  is  very  short.  Urinary  cyclic  3'  5"  AMP  is 
rapidly  suppressed  by  calcium  infusion  in  both  idiopathic  hypercal- 
ciuria  and  adenomatous  hyperparathyroidism. 

Observation  of  different  values  of  parathyroid  hormone  in  the  same 
patient^  serum  or  plasma  suggested  a  study  to  determine  the  effect  of 
heparin  on  the  radioimmunoassay  of  parathyroid  hormone  (PTH)  .  The 
assay  was  performed  using  -^I-labelled  bovine  PTH  (-^I-bPTIi)  and  a 
guinea  pig  antibovine  antibody.  Partially  purified  human  PTH  was  used 
as  standard.  Phase  separation  was  accomplished  by  dextran-coated  char¬ 
coal.  In  19  normal  volunteers  serum  and  plasma  samples  obtained  simul¬ 
taneously  were  analyzed  it;  the  same  assay.  Cnly  2  of  the  19  plasma 
samples  had  detectable  PTH  while  8  of  the  19  serum  samples  were 
detectable.  The  serum  PTH  values  were  significantly  higher  than  the 
plasma  values  (p  <  0.01) .  In  other  assays  using  three  different  125j_ 
bPTH  tracers  as  many  as  15  of  18  sera  of  normal  volunteers  had  detect¬ 
able  PTH,  while  only  5  of  the  simultaneously  obtained  plasma  were 
detectable.  The  addition  of  heparin  to  serum  sarples  (1.25  U/100  yl) 
similarly  depressed  the  irrmunoassayable  PTH  (IPTH)  levels  (p  <  0.05)  . 

As  little  as  1.4  U  heparin  added  to  the  partially  purified  human  PTH 
standards  also  depressed  the  IPTH  level  compared  to  the  same  amount  of 
standard  not  subjected  to  heparin.  Gel  filtration  studies  using  a  P-60 
Bio-gel  column  revealed  that  the  addition  of  heparin  to  "’i-bP'IH  re¬ 
sulted  in  a  persistent  shift  of  the  elution  point  toward  the  void  volume. 
This  suggests  binding  of  the  heparin  to  the  PTH  resulting  in  lower  values 
of  IPTH  in  plasma  ccrtpared  to  serum  samples. 

3.  Steroid  Metabolism. 

A  Porter-Si lber  procedure,  a  fluorometric  procedure ,  a  double-isotope 
derivative  procedure  and  a  competitive  protein-binding  assay  procedure 
were  employed  for  the  determination  of  plasma  17 -OH  corticosteroids. 


953 


Project  3AD62110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  120,  Metabolic  response  to  disease  and  injury 
Literature  Cited. 

Publications : 

1.  Heath,  H.,  Earll,  J.  M. ,  Schaaf,  M. ,  Piechocki,  J.  T.,  and  Li, 

T-K. :  Serum  Ionized  Calcium  During  Bedrest  in  Fracture  Patients  and  Men. 
Metabolism,  21:  633-640,  1972. 

2.  Wartofsky,  L. ,  Martin,  D.,  and  Earll,  J.  M. :  Alterations  in 
Ihyroid  Iodine  Release  and  the  Peripheral  Metabolism  of  Thyroxine  During 
Acute  Falciparum  Malaria  in  Man.  J.  Clin.  Invest. ,  51:  2215-2232,  1972. 

3.  Wartofsky,  L. ,  and  Earll,  J.  M. :  Non-thyroxine  Iodine  Release 
from  the  Thyroid  During  Acute  Malaria.  J.  Clin.  Endocr.  &  Metab.,  35: 
624-626,1972. 

4.  low,  J.  C. ,  Schaaf,  M. ,  Earll,  J.  M. ,  Piechocki,  J.  T. ,  and  Li, 

T-K. :  Ionic  Calcium  Determination  in  Primary  Hyperparathyroidism.  JAMA, 
223:  152-155,  1973. 

5.  Heath,  H. :  Plasma  Gonadotropins  in  Germinal  Cell  Aplasia  (Sertoli- 
Cell-Cnly  Syndrome)  .  J.  Urology,  109:  847-849,  1973. 

6.  Wartofsky,  L.  :  The  Endocrine  System,  Robert  J.  Brady  Co.  and 
Prentice  Hall,  Inc. ,  1973  (Monograph) . 

7.  Atkinson,  R.  L. ,  Becker,  D.  P. ,  and  Earll,  J.  M. :  Successful 
Treatment  of  Acromegaly  by  Transsphenoidal  Microsurgery.  (Abstract) 

Clin.  Research,  21:  249,  Feb  1973. 


8.  Wray,  H.  L. ,  Atkinson,  R.  L. ,  Lew,  J.  C. ,  Schaaf,  M. ,  and  Earll, 

J.  M. :  Evidence  for  Rapid  Suppressibility  of  Biologically  Active  Parathyroid 
Hormone  in  Diseases  of  Calcium  Metabolism.  (Abstract)  Clin.  Research, 

21:  48,  Jan  1973. 

9.  Monchik,  J.  M. ,  Argrett,  L.  C.,  and  Potts,  J.  T. :  The  Effect  of 
Heparin  on  the  Radi oirmunoas say  of  Human  Parathyroid  Homme.  (Abstract) 

Clin.  Research,  21:  45,  Jan  1973. 


954 


10.  Mcnchik,  J.  M.,  Nelson,  T. ,  Powell,  D.  A.:  Adenana  in  a  Fifth 
Parathyroid  Gland;  The  Role  of  Selective-Venous  Catheterization. 

Surgery ,  73 ;  782-785,  1973. 

11.  Dimcnd,  R.  C.,  Brairmer,  S.  R. ,  Howard,  W.  J.,  Atkinson,  R.  L. , 

e  id  Earll,  J.  M. :  Chlorprcmazine  Treatment  and  Growth  Hormone  Secretory 
Responses  in  Acromegaly.  J.  Clin.  Endocr.  &  Metab . ,  36:  June  1973. 

12.  Dimond,  R.  C. ,  and  Rosen,  S.  W. :  Chromatographic  Differences 
Between  Pituitary  and  Circulating  Thyrotropin,  (distract)  Progr.  55th 
Ann.  Meeting  of  Endocrine  Society,  p.  A-171,  June  1973. 

13.  Atkinson,  R.  L. ,  Becker,  D.  P.,  Martins,  A.  M. ,  and  Earll,  J.  M. : 
Transsphenoidal  Microsurgery  in  the  Treatment  of  Acromegaly.  (Abstract) 
Progr.  54th  Ann.  Meeting  Amer.  College  of  Physicians,  April  1973. 

14.  Wray,  H.  L. ,  Atkinson,  R.  L. ,  Low,  J.  C. ,  Schaaf,  M. ,  and  Earll, 

J.  M. :  Evidence  for  Ncn-Autcncmy  of  Biologically  Active  Parathyroid 
Hormone  in  Diseases  of  Calcium  Metabolism.  (Abstract)  Clin.  Research, 

21:  69,  Jan  1973. 

15.  Low,  J.  C.,  Djuh,  Y-Y.,  McNeil,  J.  S.,  and  Earll,  J.  M. :  The 
Effect  of  Sodium  L  (+)  Lactate  Infusion  on  Serum  Ionic  Calcium.  (Abstract) 
Clin.  Research,  21:  69,  Jan  1973. 

16.  Atkinson,  R.  L. ,  Becker,  D.  P. ,  and  Earll,  J.  M. :  Successful 
Treatment  of  Acromegaly  by  Transsphenoidal  Microsurgery.  (Abstract) 

Clin.  Research,  21:  249,  Feb  1973. 

17.  Wartofsky,  L. :  Incidence  of  Remission  after  Antithyroid  Drug 
Therapy  in  Graves'  Disease.  (Abstract)  Progr.  54Lh  Ann.  Meeting  Amer. 
College  of  Physicians,  April  1973. 


955 


M  4  I 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

»•  ABEMCT  ACCStttOW* 

DA  OA  6445 

73  07  01 

report  cow  mot  imaot 

DD-DR±E(AR)636 

k  DATE  P HE V  SUM*RV 

72  07  01 

*  KIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  CHANGE 

1.  IUMMARV  SCTV* 

u 

t.  WORK  SECURI  T  Y* 

u 

?  RI0RA0IN0* 

NA 

ia  our*  iNirrN 

NL 

lb.  SPECIFIC  DATA- 

CONTRACTOR  ACCEII 

Qyii  Dm 

1  LEVEL  OF  BUM 

A.  W0«K  UNIT 

to  no  /codci:*  prooram  clement 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

task  aria  number 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

H.  PRIMARY 

62116a 

3aS52116a822 

00 

TTT~ 

0.  CONTRIBUTING 

cjeXKMNttKMK 

CDOG  114  (f) 

It.  TITLE  rpr*r«A»  »<*  |««w rtty  CImiIEmiIhi  Carfaj 

if  START  0A  rt 

59  05 

TT  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATf 

CONT 

A .  . 

It  FUNDINO  AGENCY 

DA  | 

It.  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 

C.  IN  HOUSE 

IT  CONTRACT  ORANT  N/A 

A  OATEJ/EFFECTIVE:  EAPIRATION: 

bk  NUMBER  * 

C  TYRE  d  AMOUNT: 

KIND  OF  ANARO:  (.CUM.  AMT. 

IE  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  V  RS 

d  FUNDS  (In  iNutwiR) 

FISCAL 

VEAR 

PREC I  DIN  fl 

73 

4 

115 

CURIE WY - 

74 

4 

115 

20  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  |  j 

(U)  Pathogenesis  of  Enteric  Disease 


*1  ICICN  TIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOCICA 

010100  Microbiology 


nam«:»  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
ADDRESS:*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

name;  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
TELEPHONE:  202“576“3551 


*1  GENERAL  USE 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


ft  KlVtOAM  EACH  J •  cUnIHctllmr,  Corf*; 


NAME:* 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research 

ADDRESS:*  Div  of  CD&I 

Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IN  VEST  I  O  A  TOP  ffumltA  SSAN  H  U  S.  ffftlhiHm) 

name  *  Formal ,  S .  B . 
telephone  202-576-3344 

SOCIAL  SECUPITV  NUMBE  R' 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

Gemski,  P. 

NAME 


DA 


(U)  Diarrhea;  (U)  Dysentery  (U)  Bacillary;  (U)  Salmonellosis ;  (U)  Immunity ?  (U)  Immunizatior 


21  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  2  A  >  P  PRO  ACM,  2S  PROGRESS  <Pu»"/«A  InAlvlAust  ld*rttHt9d  fcy  nupNr  pr«(«E*  Nil  «l  ««cA  wdli  $«ruhl,  ClMllW(«ll«i  CW*  j 

23.  (U)  To  find  improved  procedures  to  control  diarrheal  disease.  Present  work 
involves  the  preparation  and  testing  of  oral  vaccines  against  bacillary  dysentery, 
the  identification  and  characterization  of  agents  involved  in  travelers  diarrhea, 
and  the  virulence  of  Salmonella. 

24.  (U)  Attenuated  dysentery  strains  are  being  developed.  They  are  being  evaluated 
for  safety  in  several  systems  and  are  being  tested  for  potency  in  monkeys  and  in  man. 

25.  (U)  72  07-73  06  A  new  E.  coli  hybrid  expressing  the  somatic  determinants  of 

S.  flexneri  2a  has  been  employed  as  a  vaccine  in  volunteers.  Dosages  of  ten  to  the 
tenth  cells  in  volunteers  have  produced  no  illness  and  in  preliminary  challenge 
experiments  two  doses  provided  /ome  degree  of  protection  against  shigellosis. 

Additional  hybrids  with  other  shigella  serotypes  are  now  being  prepared.  For  technical 
report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  - 
30  Jun  73. 


*  Available  to  contractor a 


DD,'°*“  1498 


i^n^nJtnatof£  iggroi 


[Pll  Redacted] 


PREVIf  US  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I40SA  I  NOV 
AND  I  ifl-1  1  MAR  <56  FOR  ARMY  USEI  ARE  OBSOLETE 

956 


Project  3A062110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Work  Unit  121,  Pathogenesis  of  enteric  diseases 
Investigators* 

Principal:  Samuel  B.  Formal,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  Peter  Gemski,  Jr.,  Ph.D. 

Description, 

The  pathogenesis  of  enteric  infections,  particulary  those  caused  by 
Shigella  and  Salmonella,  is  being  studied  to  establish  factors  and 
mechanisms  by  which  disease  is  provoked.  Through  an  elucidation  of 
such  elements,  procedures  for  prevention  and  control  of  diarrheal 
diseases  can  be  devised. 

Progress. 

* 

1.  The  virulence  of  Salmonella  typhimurium  with  reference  to  its 
lipopolysaccharide  (LPS)  structure 

a.  In  the  pathogenesis  of  salmonellosis,  the  capacity  of 
Salmonella  strains  to  provoke  disease  is  related  to  three  broad  bac¬ 
terial  attributes,  (a)  the  capacity  to  invade  the  gastrointestinal 
mucosal  layer,  (b)  an  ability  to  cause  fluid  secretion  by  the  bowel, 
which  results  in  diarrhea  and  (c)  the  capacity  to  disseminate  from 
the  intestinal  site  of  infection  to  various  vital  organs,  this  being  a 
consequence  of  the  organisms  ability  to  survive  and  multiply  within  the 
reticuloendothelial  system  (RES)  of  the  infected  host.  Much  of  the  pre¬ 
vious  work  on  virulence  of  Salmonella  strains  is  based  on  the  mouse  lab¬ 
oratory  model,  in  which  LD^ Q  determinations  after  intraperitoneal  challenge 
served  to  estimate  the  degree  of  virulence  of  an  organism.  Although  such  a 
laboratory  model  appears  adequate  for  distinguishing  between  strains  of 
different  virulence,  it  is  apparent  that  this  model  may  not  reflect  the 
capacity  of  an  organism  to  invade  the  intestinal  mucosa  and  to  produce 
diarrhea.  Indeed,  it  is  likely  that  the  intraperitoneal  challenge  of 
mice  represents  a  model  for  assessing  the  ability  of  an  organism  to  sur¬ 
vive  and  multiply  in  the  RES  of  this  species.  Thus,  much  of  the  pre¬ 
vious  work  on  Salmonella  virulence  has  not  attempted  to  investigate 
bacterial  factors  specifically  concerned  with  the  initial  steps  of 
pathogenesis,  i.e.  mucosal  invasion  and  subsequent  fluid  accumulation. 

As  a  consequence ,  we  have  initiated  studies  during  the  past  year  on 
the  relationship  of  LPS  structure  to  the  capacity  of  Salmonella 
typhimurium  to  invade  mucosa  and  evoke  fluid  accumulation.  We  employ¬ 
ed  the  ligated  rabbit  ileal  loop  as  an  animal  model  in  these  experiments. 


957 


Recent  studies  performed  in  conjunction  with  the  Gastroenterology 
Department,  Division  of  Medicine,  WRAIR  (see  Annual  Report,  1973) 
have  established  that  the  ligated  rabbit  ileal  loop  can  serve  as  a 
sensitive  model  for  studying  the  capacity  of  S_.  typhimurium  to  in¬ 
vade  mucosa,  evoke  fluid  accumulation,  and  translocate  across  the 
intestinal  wall. 

b.  S_.  typhimurium  strain  TML,  isolated  from  a  patient  with  severe 
salmonellosis,  served  as  the  parental  strain  in  this  study.  This  strain 
behaves  as  a  typical  £.  typhimurium  in  biochemical  tests.  In  addition, 
on  the  basis  of  serol^g^  and  phage  sensitivity,  it  is  fully  smooth  and 
thus  is  capable  of  synthesizing  a  complete  core  and  O-repeat  unit  LPS 
complex.  In  the  mouse  laboratory  model,  strain  TML  possessed  an  LD^q 

of  about  10-100  cells.  The  behavior  of  TML  in  the  rabbit  ileal  loop 
model  further  confirmed  its  highly  virulent  characteristics.  Ligated 
ileal  loops  (one  test  loop  and  one  broth  loop  with  an  intervening 
blank  loop  per  animal)  were  constructed  in  starved  rabbits.  One  ml  of 
an  overnight  broth  culture  of  TML  was  inoculated  into  test  loops  and 
after  18  hrs.,  the  animals  were  sacrificed,  examined  for  fluid  accumu¬ 
lation  in  infected  loops  and  then  subjected  to  routine  autopsy  proced¬ 
ures.  Strain  TML  consistently  evoked  fluid  secretion  in  the  infected 
ligated  loop.  Histological  examination  of  such  infected  ileum  revealed 
TML  to  be  hignly  invasive,  with  bacterial  cells  present  in  the  epi¬ 
thelium  and  lamina  propria.  Additional  evidence  for  the  high  invasive¬ 
ness  of  strain  TML  was  provided  by  the  recovery  to  TML  from  the  heart, 
liver  and  spleen  of  infected  rabbits,  thus  indicating  that  mucosal 
penetration  subsequently  led  to  dissemination  of  the  pathogen  to 
various  vital  organs. 

c.  Because  this  animal  model  of  salmonellosis  enabled  us  to  dis¬ 
tinguish  some  of  the  steps  in  pathogenesis,  we  next  decided  to  alter 
the  LPS  properties  of  the  pathogen  and  to  assess  the  affects  of  such  a 
change  on  pathogenesis.  S_.  typhimurium  TML,  grown  overnight  in  broth, 
was  seeded  on  nutrient  agar  plates  and  then  spotted  with  a  mixture  of 
phages  capable  of  infecting  only  smooth  S_.  typhimurium  strains.  After 
overnight  incubation  at  37°C,  clones  of  strain  TML  resistant  to  these 
phages  were  isolated.  Two  derivatives,  termed  47B2  and  47A5,  were 
chosen  for  further  study  and  found  to  be  spontaneous  rough  mutants  of 
S^.  typhimurium  TML.  On  the  basis  of  their  sensitivity  to  a  battery 

of  phages  specific  for  rough  strains,  it  became  apparent  that  strains 
47B2  and  47A5  were  rough  B  mutants  (rfb)  .  Extensive  studies  on  the 
genetic  control  of  Salmonella  LPS  have  indicated  at  least  two  broad 
classes  of  mutants,  termed  rough  A  (rfa)  and  rough  B  (rfb)  .  The  genes 
of  rfa  class,  located  near  the  xylose  fermentation  gene(s)  of  S^. 
typhimurium,  have  been  shown  to  control  the  biosynthesis  of  the  core 
of  the  LPS  layer.  Although  rfa  mutants  are  capable  of  synthesizing  the 
O-repeat  unit  of  the  LPS  layer,  they  are  unable  to  attach  these  serologi¬ 
cally  specific  sugar  determinants  to  a  defective  core  and  hence  are  rough. 


958 


In  contrast,  the  genes  of  the  rfb  cluster,  shown  to  map  near  the 
histidine  biosynthesis  locus  of  S_.  typhimurium ,  control  the  bio¬ 
synthesis  of  the  O-repeat  unit  structure  of  the  LPS  layer.  Thus 
mutants  of  the  rfb  class,  although  able  to  synthesize  a  fully  func¬ 
tional  LPS  core,  are  rough  as  a  consequence  of  some  defect  in  the 
steps  of  the  O-repeat  unit  synthesis.  Since  mutant  strains  47B2  and 
47A5  yielded  a  phage  sensitivity  pattern  typical  for  the  rfb  LPS 
mutant  type,  we  infer  that  these  two  rough  derivatives  are  capable  of 
producing  a  complete  LPS  core,  but  are  unable  to  synthesize  a  function¬ 
al  O-repeat  component.  In  the  case  of  mutant  47B2,  genetic  crosses 
were  employed  to  confirm  that  the  mutation  was  of  the  rfb  type.  By 
means  of  mutagenesis  with  N-methyl-N-nitro-nitrosoguanidine ,  a  xylose", 
histidine"  derivative  of  47B2  was  constructed  and  employed  as  a  re¬ 
cipient  in  matings  with  a  smooth  S^  typhimurium  Hfr  donor.  64  xyl* 
47B2  recombinants  (selected  for  the  inheritance  of  xylose*  utilization 
genes  from  th  ;  donor)  and  100  his*  47B2  hybrids  (selected  for  inheri¬ 
tance  of  donor  histidine*  genes)  were  then  analyzed  by  phage  sensiti¬ 
vity  testing  to  determine  whether  they  were  of  a  rfb  or  smooth  pheno¬ 
type.  A  high  incidence  of  smooth  recombinants  among  the  his*  hybrids 
would  be  expected  if  derivative  47B2  is  a  rfb  mutant,  since  this  locus 
has  been  positioned  near  the  histidine  operon.  The  results  of  these 
Hybridization  experiments  fully  support  our  conclusion  that  47B2  is 
altered  in  the  rfb  locus.  Eighty-five  of  100  his*  recombinants  were 
found  to  be  smooth,  while  none  (0/64)  of  the  xyl+  (rfa  region)  hy¬ 
brids  were  smooth,  all  retaining  their  rough  phenotype. 

c.  The  S_.  typhimurium  parent  strain,  TML,  and  the  two  rough  de¬ 
rivatives  47B2  and  47A5  were  next  compared  for  their  virulence  in  the 
mouse  model  (to  determine  LD50)  and  the  rabbit  ileal  loop  model.  As 
summarized  in  Table  1,  both  of  the  rough  derivatives  have  been  marked¬ 
ly  altered  in  their  LD50  value  for  mice  (  >  10^  cells)  as  compared 

to  the  parent  strain,  TML  <102  cells)  .  It  is  also  evident  that  both 
47B2  and  47A5  were  unable  to  provoke  fluid  accumulation  in  the  ligated 
loop.  Cytological  examination,  however,  revealed  significant  invasion 
of  the  mucosa  by  both  47B2  and  47A5  a  necessary  prerequisite  for  evok¬ 
ing  fluid  accumulation.  In  addition,  the  capacity  for  dissemination 
from  the  ileum  appears  reduced  in  the  rough  derivatives.  Unlike  the 
smooth  parent,  TML,  which  consistently  disseminated  to  other  vital  or¬ 
gans  in  this  animal  model,  both  rough  derivatives  (47B23  and  47A5)  ap¬ 
peared  variable  in  this  regard.  In  some  experiments,  no  pathogens 
were  recovered  from  either  the  heart,  liver  or  spleen?  in  many  experi¬ 
ments,  only  the  spleen  proved  positive  for  pathogens. 

d.  These  observations  suggest  that  a  single  step  mutation  altering 
the  synthesis  of  LPS  in  23.  typhimurium  results  in  a  loss  in  the  capaci¬ 
ty  of  the  organism  to  induce  fluid  accumulation.  Although  invasiveness 
of  such  rough  derivatives  is  not  altered  significantly  as  evidenced  by 


959 


our  histological  findings ,  47B2  and  17A5  appear  to  be  altered  in 
their  ability  to  survive  and  disseminate.  This  finding  is  not  un¬ 
expected,  since  rough  derivatives  are  more  sensitive  to  host  de¬ 
fense  mechanisms  (RES,  etc.) 

e.  The  possible  involvement  of  the  LPS  layer  in  the  capacity  of 

typhimurium  to  provoke  a  positive  ileal  loop  reaction  is  arther 

supported  by  genetic  hybridization  experiments.  Strain  47B2,  one  of 
the  rough  mutants  unable  to  evoke  fluid  accumulation,  was  mated  with 
a  smooth  £.  typhimurium  Hfr  donor  and  his*  recombinants  were  recover¬ 
ed.  A  high  proportion  of  these  his  hybrids  were  smooth  (based  on 
phage  sensitivity)  ,  a  result  of  inheriting  rfb+genes  from  the  donor. 
When  such  smooth  his*  hybrids  were  tested  in  the  rabbit  ileal  loop 
model,  over  75%  regained  the  capacity  to  evoke  fluid  accumulation. 

All  of  the  rough  hist  hybrids,  similarly  tested,  were  unable  to  cause 
a  positive  loop  reaction.  These  findings  thus  indicate  that  a  genetic 
repair  of  the  rfb  lesion  in  mutant  47B2  can  lead  to  a  return  of  the 
fluid  provoking  property. 

f.  In  an  effort  to  define  the  precise  role  of  LPS  in  this  step 

of  pathogenesis,  studies  are  being  directed  to  other  classes  of  rough 
mutants  cf  strain  TML. 

2.  Oral  living  shigella  vaccines 

a.  One  aspect  of  our  research  program  on  diarrheal  diseases 
involves  the  development  of  oral,  attenuated  vaccines  against  bacillary 
dysentery.  Previous  studies  in  this  department  have  been  based  on  the 
concept  of  preparing  avirulent  hybrids  and  mutants  of  Shigella  f lexneri 
for  possible  vaccine  strains  (sae  previous  annual  reports).  Although 
some  of  these  strains  were  shown  to  be  safe  and  significantly  effective 
in  limited  human  volunteer  studies  performed  by  the  University  of 
Maryland  Vaccine  Development  Group,  it  is  impossible  to  obviate  the 
theoretical  possibility  that  these  strains  could  revert  to  a  virulent 
state. 


b.  In  an  effort  to  eliminate  such  complications  with  the  safety 
of  living  oral  vaccines,  we  nave  taken  an  alternative  approach  for  pre¬ 
paring  possible  vaccine  candidate  strains.  In  principle,  or  approach 
has  been  to  alter,  by  genetic  manipulations,  avirulent  Eh  coli  strains 
so  that  they  now  express  the  group  and  type-specific  antigens  of 
Shigella  rather  than  their  native  Eh  coli  antigenic  complex.  Since  the 
Eh  coli  parent  strains  are  natively  avirulent,  the  problems  of  reversion 
to  virulence  by  hybrid  vaccine  strains  appear  non-existent.  The  feasi¬ 
bility  of  preparing  such  intergeneric  Eh  coli  hybrids  is  a  direct  con¬ 
sequence  of  our  investigations  (see  previous  annual  report)  on  the 
genetic  control  of  Shigella  antigens  which  identified  the  chromosomal 


960 


f 


location  and  functions  of  genes  controlling  both  type  and  group 
antigens  of  Shigella  f lexneri. 

3.  Construction  of  E.  coli  hybrids  which  express  Shigella  flexneri 
2a  group  and  type  antigens 

As  described  in  previous  annual  reports,  the  3,4  group  antigen 
gene(s)  of  S_.  flexneri  2a  are  close  to  the  histidine  locus  whereas 
the  type  2  gene(s)  are  distal  to  this  group  locus,  being  positioned 
between  the  praline  and  lactose  genetic  loci.  As  a  consequence,  E. 
coli  hybrids  expressing  these  antigens  had  to  be  constructed  by  "back- 
crossing"  experiments.  The  donor  strain  was  flexneri  2a  Hfr  256 
and  behaves  serologically  as  a  typical  C.  flexneri  2a.  As  recipients 
we  employed  two  Eh  coli  strains,  coli  K-12  strain  1133  and  E.  coli 
03  strain  RJ91,  which  did  not  express  any  virulent  properties  in  a 
number  of  animal  models.  In  order  to  introduce  the  genes  for  Shigella 
3,4  group  antigen,  the  Hfr  256  donor  was  mated  with  both  recipient  lines 
and  selection  was  made  for  hybrids  which  inherited  the  donor  his+  genes. 

A  high  proportion  of  such  E.  coli  hybrids  were  found  to  inherit  and  ex¬ 
press  the  S.  flexneri  2a  group  3,4  antigen. 

b.  Two  of  these  Eh  coli  hybrids  were  selected  for  additional 
hybridisation  experiments.  The  E.  coli  K-12  1133  his+  3,4,  group  fac¬ 
tor  +  hybrid  was  remated  with  the  Sh  flexneri  2a  Hfr  256  donor,  select¬ 
ing  this  time  for  the  inheritance  of  the  proline , type-antigen  chromo¬ 
somal  segment.  On  the  basis  of  genetic  and  serological  analyses,  one 
such  hybrid  was  chosen  as  a  possible  vaccine  strain.  E_.  coli  K-12 
hybrid  1133  his+  pro-f  was  found  to  be  stable  and  behaved  serologically 
as  a  typical  S_.  flexneri  2a,  expressing  both  the  group  3,4  and  type- 
specific  2  antigen  antigen.  By  similar  procedures,  an  Eh  coli  RJ91  hy¬ 
brid  expressing  S_.  flexneri  2a  antigens  was  also  prepared.  Since  both 
Eh  CQH  recipient  lines  are  natively  avirulent#f  no  problem  with  re¬ 
version  to  virulence  by  these  hybrids  was  anticipated.  Preliminary  tests 
on  human  volunteers  in  conjunction  with  Dr.  H.  L.  Dupont  of  the  Univer¬ 
sity  of  Maryland  have  shown  these  hybrid  strains  to  be  safe  at  dose 
levels  of  1  X  loll  cells  and  that  protection  to  challenge  by  virulent  S_. 

’  flexneri  2a  can  be  achieved  with  two  immunizing  doses. 

c.  Construction  of  E.  coli  hybrids  expressing  othe  S.  flexneri 
group  and  type-specific  antigens 

a.  The  promising  results  on  the  use  of  Eh  coli  hybrids  with 
— •  1 lex^eri  2a  antigens  as  a  live  vaccine  led  us  to  expand  our  investi¬ 
gations  to  other  Eh  flexneri  serotypes.  To  achieve  this,  we  have  in 
recent  month’s  given  top  priority  to  the  construction  of  Hfr  donor 
strains  in  the  other  serotypes  of  S_.  flexneri ,  such  strains  being  es¬ 
sential  for  the  construction  of  Eh  coli  hybrids  of  appropriate  sero¬ 
types.  employing  procedures  similar  to  those  described  in  previous 
annr:<i  repot ts  for  preparing  a  S_.  flexneri  2a  donor,  we  now  have  avail- 
ab]  Hfr  donor  strains  of  S.  flexneri  serotypes  la,  lb,  3a,  and  4b  in 


961 


addition  to  the  original  2a  donor.  Our  efforts  to  prepare  Hfr  deriva¬ 
tives  of  S_.  flexneri  serotypes  5  and  6  have  not  been  successful  as  yet. 
Preliminary  mating  experiments  with  these  new  S_.  flexneri  Hfr  strains 
indicate  that  they  are  capable  of  transferring  chromosomal  genes  to 
coli  K-12 ,  thus  making  it  feasible  to  conjtruct  E.  coli  hybrids 
with  different  S_.  flexneri  type  antigens. 

b.  In  addition,  we  are  continuing  studies  on  the  genetic  con- 
1  of  £.  flexneri  groups  antigens.  Besides  the  3,4  group  antigen 
">ady  discussed;  some  S_.  flexneri  serotypes  express  group  antigen 
an'  group  antigens  7,8,9.  We  have  recently  isolated  a  temperate 
h.  -  jriophage  from  flexneri  3a  which  is  capable  of  achieving  group 
e'  uigen  6  conversion.  Lysogenization  of  S_.  flexneri  strains  with  this 
phage  results  in  a  conversion  of  the  group  3,4  determinants  to  a  group 
6  serological  determinant.  Of  particular  relevance  to  our  vaccine  de¬ 
velopment  program  is  the  finding  that  E.  coli  hybrids  with  the 
flexneri  group  3,4  antigen  can  also  be  converted  to  group  factor  6, 
to  yield  derivatives  expressing  both  the  3,4  and  6  group  antigens. 

This  finding  suggests  the  feasibility  of  constructing  a  vaccine  strain 
which  may  stimulate  immune  response  to  the  two  major  group  antigens 
ty^.:  cal  of  f 1  c 

4.  Studies  -  x.wasive  E  coli 

a.  On  November  1971  a  social  affair  took  place  at  WRAMC. 
Twenty-eight  of  thirty-seven  persons  attending  this  party  developed 
acute  dysentery  24-48  hours  after  eating  contaminated  imported  French 
Camembert  cheese.  MAJ  E.  Frank  Tulloch  studied  this  outbreak.  An 
0:124  Escherichia  coli  was  isolated  from  the  cheese  and  from  the  stools 
of  nine  ill  individuals.  Biological  testing  revealed  this  organism  to 
be  invasive  in  character.  Predominant  symptoms  included  fever,  malaise, 
tenesmus,  abdominal  cramping  and  diarrhea.  None  of  the  patients  re¬ 
quired  hospitalization  or  antibiotic  therapy  and  most  were  asymptomatic 
within  one  week.  This  episode  was  part  of  the  first  known  outbreak  of 
invasive  E.  coli  dysentery  in  adults  occurring  in  the  United  States. 

Summary  and  Conclusions 

1.  The  pathogenicity  of  Salmonella  typhimurium  with  particular 
reference  to  invasiveness  and  fluid  accumulation  as  factors  in  virulence 
has  been  studied  in  the  ligated  ileal  loop  model  (Rabbit)  .  An  S_. 
typhimurium  strain  (mouse  LD^q  10^)  was  found  t:o  induce  positive  fluid 
accumulation  in  the  ligated  loop  and  to  invade  subsequently  into  the 
heart,  liver  and  spleen. 


962 


A  single  step  mutation,  altering  the  synthesis  of  lipopoly- 
saccharide  (LPS)  results  in  a  loss  of  the  capacity  of  the  organism 
to  induce  a  positive  loop  reaction,  but  does  not  significantly  alter 
the  invasiveness  of  the  organism.  The  findings  indicate  that  the  in¬ 
vasive  property  of  S.  typhimurium  may  not  be  dependent  upon  the 
presence  of  a  complete  LPS  layer. 

2.  An  aspect  of  our  program  on  diarrheal  diseases  involves 
the  development  of  oral,  attenuated  vaccines  against  bacillary  dysen¬ 
tery.  Previous  studies  have  been  based  on  the  concept  of  preparing 
avirulent  hybrids  and  mutants  of  Shigella  f lexneri  for  possible 
vaccine  strains. 

As  an  alternative  approach,  we  have  recently  constructed  by 
intergeneric  hybridization  techniques  coli  hybrids  which  now  ex¬ 
presses  the  group  and  type-specific  antigens  of  S_.  f lexneri  2a  rather 
than  their  native  antigens.  Since  the  original  Eh  coli  parents  are 
natively  avirulent,  the  problem  of  reversion  to  virulence  by  hybrid 
vaccines  is  obviated.  Preliminary  tests  on  human  volunteers  in  con¬ 
junction  with  the  University  of  Maryland  have  shown  that  the  vaccine 
is  safe  at  dose  levels  of  loll  cells/ml  and  tnat  protection  to 
chllenge  by  virulent  S_^  f lexneri  2a  can  be  achieved  with  two  immuniz¬ 
ing  doses. 

Hfr  derivatives  of  different  S_.  flexneri  serotypes  have  been 
constructed  for  use  in  the  preparation  of  Jfh  coli  hybrids  of  various 
S.  flexneri  serotypes.  In  addition,  continuing  studies  on  the  gene- 
tic  control  of  lipopolysaccharide  antigenic  determinants  of  Shigella 
flexneri  have  resulte -?  in  che  isolation  of  a  temperate  bacteriophage 
which  has  the  property  of  antigenic  conversion.  Lysogenization  of 
host  strains  with  the  S_.  flexneri  group  antigens  (3,4)  results  in 
antigenic  conversion  to  group  factor  6.  Preliminary  studies  with  this 
phage  indicate  that  it  will  be  useful  in  constructing  additional  E. 
coli  hybrids  with  S_.  flexneri  antigen  determinants  for  possible  use 
as  oral  vaccines. 

3.  An  outbreak  of  diarrhea  occurred  in  WRAMC  personnel  which 
was  caused  by  cheese  infected  with  invasive  E.  coli  0-124. 


9o3 


9.  Gemski,  P.,  Alexeichick,  Jr.  and  Baron,  L.S.  1972.  The  behavior 
of  ooliphage  lambda  in  Shigella  f lexneri  2a.  J.  Virology  1£:  668-674. 

10.  Gemski,  P.,  Jr.,  L.S.  Baron  and  Nobuto  Yamamoto.  1972.  Formation 
of  hybrids  between  coliphage  A  and  Salmonella  phage  P22  with  a 
Salmciella  typhimurium  hybrid  sensitive  to  these  phages.  P.N.A.S. 

69:  3110-3114. 


964 


965 


Project  3A062110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Work  Unit  121,  Pathogenesis  of  enteric  diseases 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications. 

1.  Levine,  M.N.,  H.L.  DuPont,  E.J.  Gangarosa,  R.B .  Hornick,  M.J. 
Snyder,  J.P.  Libonati,  K.  Glaser,  and  S.B.  Formal  (1972). 

Shigellosis  in  custodial  institutions.  II.  Clinical,  immunologic 
and  bacteriologic  response  of  institutionalized  children  to  oral 
attenuated  shigella  vaccines.  Am.  J.  Epidemol.  96_:  40-49. 

2.  Gemski,  P.  Jr.,  Sheahan,  D.G.,  Washington,  0.  and  Formal,  S.B. 
#1972.  Virulence  of  Shigella  f lexneri  hybrids  expressing  Escherichia 

coli  antigens.  Infect.  Immun.  104-111. 

3.  Gemski,  P.  Jr.,  A.  Takeuchi ,  O.  Washington  and  S.  B.  Formal. 

1972.  Shigellosis  due  to  Shigella  dysenteriae  1:  Relative  importance 
of  mucosal  invasion  versus  toxin  production  in  pathogenesis.  J.  Inf. 
Dis.,  126:  523-530. 


4.  Giannella,  R.  ,  S.  Forma1,  and  G.  Dammin.  1972.  Pathogenesis  of 
Salmonella  diarrhea.  Clin.  Res.  20_:  880. 

5.  Formal,  S.B.,  P.  Gemski,  R.  Giannella  and  S.  Austin.  1972. 
Mechanisms  of  Shigella  pathogenesis.  Am.  J.  Clin.  Mut.  25_:  1427-1433. 

6.  Giannella,  R.A.,  S.B.  Formal.,  G.J.  Dammin  and  H.  Collins.  1973. 
Pathogenesis  of  Salmonellosis.  Studies  of  fluid  secretion,  mucosal 
invasion,  and  morphologic  reaction  in  the  rabbit  ileum.  J.  Clin.  Inv.  , 
5_2 :  441-453. 

7.  Wilkinson,  R.G.  ,  Gemski,  P.  ,  Jr.,  and  Stocker,  B.A.D.  1972.  Non¬ 
smooth  mutants  of  Salmonella  typhimurium;  Differentiation  by  phage 
sensitivity  and  genetic  mapping.  J.  Gen.  Microbiology  110:  1022-1031. 

8.  Baron,  L.S.,  Ryman,  I.R.  ,  Johnson,  E.M.,  Gemski,  P.  1972.  Lytic 
replication  of  coliphage  lambda  in  Salmonella  typhosa  hybrids.  J. 
Bacteriology  110 :  1022-1031. 


96b 


RESEARCH  AMD  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


S.  DATE  RREV  SUM*RY 

72  07  01 

4.  KIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  CHANGE 

ft  SUMMARY  SCTY* 

U 

4.  WORK  SECURITY* 

U 

1.  RBDRAMN0* 

NA 

IA  CM 

•  B'R  INSTR'N 

NL 

Bk  SPECIFIC  DATA- 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Grn  G  mo 

S.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  WORK  UNIT 

10  NO  /CODES:* 

PROORAM  CLEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

62110A 

3A062110A8S2 

00 

122 

B.  CONTRIBUTING 

c.  ttMXMAbXiKX 

CDOC.i  114  (f] 

AMMCV  ACCESSION* 

DA  OA  6436 


73  07  01 


DDOR*E(AR)6J6 


I.  TITLE  fpr#e*4N  with  immuHtr  €•*•)* 

(U)  Microbial  Genetics  and  Taxonomy 

12  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 

010100  Microbiology 

7|.  START  DATE  |U  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATt 

63  08  CONT 


IT  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A  OATU/IMICTIVI,'  NA 


C.  TYRE. 

KINO  OT  AWARD: 


d  AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


•t.  NEIAONIIILE  DOO  ORGANISATION 


I 


20.  performing  orgakiiation 


name:*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
ADORE  AS.*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

name-  Buescher,  COL  E.L. 
TELEPHONE:  202”576“3551 


21  GENERAL  USE 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


Ik.  FUNDING  AGENCY 

DA  I 


It  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 


fiscal 

YEAR 


14-  PERFORMANCE  ME^r HO 0 

C  In-House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRS 


ArccKdin  4 

73 

3 

120 

cunmUV 

74 

3 

120 

d  FUNDS  (In  Ufwmn**) 


NAME  .•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research 

iREw*  Division  of  Communicable  Disease 
and  Immunol og y 

Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  tSAM  II  V  $.  4c«#*«iJc  /MilhillMj 

name*  Baron,  Dr.  L.S. 
telephone:  202-576-2230 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  number  ‘  ? 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

name:  Wohlhieter,  Dr.  J.A. 

name: Johnson,  Dr.  E.M. 


DA 


!TTTy WORDS  (#»***•<#«  BACH  ">Hfi  Security  cfTTTTfitZuQn^oS*^ 

(U)  Microbial  Genetics;  (U )  Vaccine ;  ( U )  Enteric  Bacteria;  (U)  Antigens  (U)  Virulence ; 
nn  Salmonella;  (U)  Drug  Resistance 


2)  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  2A  APPROACH,  2ft  PROGRESS  (Futnltb  Individual  parmgtmpfri  Idanlltlad  by  numb*  l<r*c»4*  l.il  ot  .«rh  wit*  s.iu/ffy  Clmaaltlcaiton  Coda 

23.  (U)  Definition  in  genetic  and  molecular  terms  of  the  properties  of  gene  transfer 
antigenicity,  and  virulence  of  pathogenic  enteric  bacteria  which  because  of  their 
disease  producing  capabilities,  are  of  importance  to  military  medicine  concerned  with 
the  prevention  and  treatment  of  such  infections  in  Army  personnel.  We  anticipate  that 
it  will  be  possible  to  genetically  modify  enteric  bacteria  to  any  desired  antigenic 
structure  and  pathogenicity  to  serve  as  vaccine  strains  or  as  tools  to  study  the 
infectious  process. 

24.  (U)  Use  of  genetic  recombination  between  strains  of  enteric  bacteria.  Where 
possible,  the  genetic  results  are  extended  to  include  study  of  the  informational 
macromolecules  involved. 

25.  (U)  72  07-73  06  We  have  successfully  employed  mouse  virulent  Salmonella 
typhimurium  hybrids  expressing  the  S.  typhosa  antigen  9,  d,  and  Vi  as  challenge  organ¬ 
isms  in  Swiss  white  mice  to  determine  the  degrees  of  protection  conferred  by  immuniza¬ 
tion  with  heat  killed,alcohol  treated  and  acetone  treated  typhoid  vaccines.  In  our 
continuing  investigation  of  the  behavior  of  foreign  DNA  in  bacterial  hosts,  we  have  de-' 
termined  that  extrachromosomal  conservation  of  S.  typhimurium  DNA  as  super  coiled  cir¬ 
cular  molecules  in  partially  diplc  id  Escherichia  coli  hybrids  requires  physical  asso¬ 
ciation  of  the  DNA  fragment  with  some  part  of  the  E.  coli  sex  factor,  F.  For  technical 
report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  - 

30  Jun  73. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


jvmlUbl*  to  Lontrmctora  t 


1  originator’ a  approval 


DD,'°?M1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  t  408  A 
AND  1408-1  1  MAR  88  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

967 


NOV  88 


Project  3A062110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 

Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit.  122,  Microbial  Genetics  and  taxonomy 

Investigators. 

Principal:  Louis  S.  Baron,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  J.  A.  Wohlhieter,  Ph.D.;  E.M.  Johnson,  Ph.D.; 

P.  Gemski,  Ph.D.;  I.R.  Ryman;  C.A.  Life;  J.R. 

Lazere,  B.S.;  SP-4  W.  G.  Craig,  Jr.,  A.B. ; 

PFC  R.  M.  Synenki ,  M.S.;  and  PVT  B.P.  Placek,B.S. 

Description. 

1.  Mouse  virulent  Salmonella  typhimurium  hybrids  expressing  the 
S_.  typhosa  antigens  9,  d,  and  Vi  were  employed  as  challenge  organ¬ 
isms  in  Swiss  white  mice  to  determine  the  degrees  of  protection  con¬ 
ferred  by  immunization  with  heat-killed,  alcohol-treated,  and  ace¬ 
tone-treated  typhoid  vaccines. 

2.  The  extrachromosomal  conservation  of  Salmonella  typhimurium 
deoxyribonucleic  acid  in  a  super  coiled,  circular  configuration  in 
partially  diploid  hybrids  of  Escherichia  coli  was  found  to  require 
physical  association  of  the  DNA  fragment  with  at  least  some  part  of 
the  E_.  coli  sex  factor  F. 

3.  Hybrids  have  been  constructed  between  coliphage  lambda  and 
Salmonella  phage  P22  through  the  use  of  a  Salmonella  typhimurium 
hybrid  sensitive  to  these  phages. 

Progress. 

1.  Assay  of  typhoid  vaccines  with  Salmonella  typhosa-Salmonella 
typhimurium  hybrids 

a.  A  number  of  investigators  have  shown  that  the  active  mouse 
protection  test  is  unable  to  differentiate  between  the  effectiveness 
of  various  typhoid  vaccines  for  man.  This  lack  of  a  meaningful, 
laboratory  biological  assay  has  handicapped  both  the  selection  and  im¬ 
provement  of  typhoid  vaccines.  Salmonella  typhosa ,  highly  pathogenic 
for  man,  exhibits  only  minimal  virulence  for  experimental  animals.  It 
takes  approximately  5  x  10^  organisms  to  kill  a  mouse  in  24  to  48  hr. 
and  the  death  is  due  to  toxemia  rather  than  to  infection.  This  may 
be  the  main  reason  why  the  results  of  animal  potency  tests  do  not 
reflect  the  value  of  typhoid  vaccines  for  preventing  typhoid  in  man. 


968 


b.  A  number  of  salmonellae ,  such  as  S_.  typhimurium,  S_.  enteri- 
tidis ,  and  moscow,  are  natural  pathogens  for  the  mouse,  producing 
a  systemic  disease  leading  to  septicemia  which  resembled  typhoid  in¬ 
fection  in  humans*  We  therefore  considered  the  possibility  of  over¬ 
coming  the  inadequacier  of  S,  typhosa  as  a  challenge  strain  by  pro¬ 
ducing,  by  conjugation  between  S_.  typhosa  and  S_.  typhimurium,  a  hy¬ 
brid  strain  with  the  antigenic  structure  of  S.  typhosa  and  the  patho¬ 
genicity  (for  the  mbuse)  of  S_.  typhimurium. 

c.  £.  typhimurium  WR5004  was  mated  with  the  S_.  typhosa  Hfr  donor 
WR4000,  and  WR5004  hybrids  were  selected  for  receipt  of  his+  marker 
of  the  donor.  As  we  have  shown  previously,  the  majority  of  his+ 
selected  S_.  typhimurium  hybrids  obtained  from  mating  with  S_.  typhosa 
WR4000  also  inherit  the  closely  linked  genetic  determinant  of  soma¬ 
tic  antigen  9.  Because  the  genetic  determinant  of  this  antigen  is 
the  allele  of  the  somatic  antigen  4  determinant  of  typhimurium, 
recombination  of  this  locus  results  in  loss  of  expression  of  antigen 
4  by  those  S_.  typhimurium  recombinants  which  express  antigen  9. In 
addition,  such  recombinants  also  lose  antigen  5  because  this  antigen 
cannot  be  expressed  in  strains  lacking  the  determinant  of  antigen  4. 

d.  The  genetic  locus  of  the  phase  1  flagellar  antigen  deter¬ 
minant  of  typhosa  is  sufficiently  close  to  the  hist  locus  that 
some  of  the  hist-selected  hybrids  of  S_.  typhimurium  undergo  recombi¬ 
nation  at  that  locus  as  well.  Inasmuch  as  the  phase  1  flagellar 
antigens  of  all  Salmonella  species  comprise  an  allelic  series  at  this 
locus ,  we  were  able  to  obtain  hist  hybrids  of  S,  typhimurium  WR5QQ4 
which,  in  addition  to  antigen  9,  expressed  also  the  phage  1  flagellar 
antigen  d  of  S_.  typhosa.  As  in  the  case  of  the  somatic  antigen,  such 
hybrids  lose  their  native  phase  1  flagellar  antigen,  i. 

e.  The  genetic  determinant  of  the  Vi  antigen,  viaB ,  was  introduced 
into  two  of  the  S_.  typhimurium  WR5004  hist  hybrids  (one  expressing  F . 
typhosa  antigen  9  and  the  other  expressing  S.  typhosa  antigens  9  and 
d)  by  mating  with  the  Vi  antigen-expressing  S.  typhimurium  Hfr  WR4010. 
Because  of  the  considerable  genetic  map  distance  between  the  viaB 
locus  and  the  nearest  available  selective  marker  in  the  S_.  typhimurium 
WR5004  hybrids  (ara~)  ,  it  was  necessary  to  examine  about  200  arat 
selected  recombinants  in  each  case  to  obtair  a  hybrid  expressing  the 
Vi  antigen.  As  described  below  each  of  the  two  Vi-expressing  hybrids, 
as  well  as  the  hybrid  expressing  only  the  9  antigen  of  S_.  typhosa, 
retained  the  virulence  of  the  typhimurium  WR5004  recipient. 

f.  16-  to  18-g  C57  mice  bred  at  the  Laboratory  Center  for 
Disease  Control,  Ottawa,  Ontario,  Canada,  were  used.  Groups  of  20 
mice  were  infected  intraperitoneally  with  graded  doses  of  bacteria 
in  a  0.5  ml  volume.  The  mouse  lethal  dose  (MLD)  was  less  than  50 
bacteria  for  each  hybrid.  Anatomopathological  and  bacteriological 


969 


findings  revealed  that  the  hybrids  caused  both  systemic  infection 
and  septicemia,  with  lesions  appearing  in  several  organs,  especially 
the  liver.  The  hybrids  had  therefore  retained  the  pathogenecity  of 
the  recipient  parent  strain  S_.  typhimurium  WR5004  and  caused  a  true 
infection  with  a  small  challenge  dose,  thereby  fulfilling  a  require¬ 
ment  for  the  establishment  of  a  model  typhoid  infection.  Similar  re¬ 
sults  were  obtained  using  the  LCDC  strain  of  Swiss  white  mice  (P.E.T.). 
All  of  the  hybrids  remained  stable  with  regard  to  their  inherited 
biochemical  and  antigenic  characters;  no  loss  or  reversion  of  any  of 
these  characters  was  observed  during  infection  in  the  mouse. 

g.  The  ability  of  S.  typhosa  vaccines  to  protect  against 
challenge  was  determined  by  immunizing  intraperitoneally  C57  mice 
with  a  dose  of  0.5  ml  of  one  of  the  three  types  of  S^.  typhosa  vaccine 
and  by  challenging  14  days  later  with  10  MLD  of  one  of  the  hybrids. 

It  was  found,  however,  that  this  immunization,  although  prolonging 
the  life  of  the  mice,  did  not  confer  complete  protection,  as  all  of 
the  mice  died  within  the  21-day  period  of  the  experiment.  The  pro¬ 
cedure  was  then  repeated  with  the  LCDC-bred  Swiss  white  mice  (P.E.T.), 
and  again  challenging  with  10  MLD.  With  this  breed  of  mice  a  pro¬ 
tective  effect  was  observed  over  the  full  21  days  against  challenge 

by  each  of  the  hybrid  strains.  The  results  of  this  experiment  are 
shown  in  Table  1.  The  least  degree  of  protection  was  afforded  by  the 
heat-killed,  phenol-preserved  vaccine,  which  proved  inferior  in  this 
regard  to  both  acetone-  and  alcohol-treated  products.  None  of  the 
vaccines  protected  the  mice  against  challenge  by  the  parent  S_. 
typhimurium. 

h.  The  consistently  higher  protection  which  we  observed  with 
the  acetone-treated  vaccine  is  in  keeping  with  clinical  trials  with 
humans.  The  lower  level  of  protection  afforded  by  the  heat-killed 
vaccine,  as  compared  to  the  alcohol  vaccine,  is  not  in  accordance 
with  the  results  of  reported  field  trials.  This  factor  has  to  be 
studied  since  it  is  possible  that  our  alcohol  vaccines  could  have 
been  substantially  different  from  those  used  in  the  field  trials. 

i.  The  observation  that  the  typhoid  vaccines  employed  here 
were  protective  against  the  hybrid  S_.  typhimurium  strains  which  ex¬ 
pressed  S.  typhosa  antigens,  but  not  against  the  S^.  typhimurium 
parent  strain,  is  in  agreement  with  the  predicted  results  if  S_.  typhosa 
antigens  are  indeed  involved  in  the  immune  mechanism.  No  significant 
df  f ferences  were  observed  in  our  assay  results  among  the  challenge 
strains  of  S.  typhimurium  hybrids  whether  they  contained  only  factor 

9;  9,  Vi?  or  the  9,  Vi,  d  antigens.  However,  it  would  be  premature 
at  this  stage  to  draw  any  conclusions  with  regard  to  the  roles  of  the 


970 


TABLE  1.  Representative  data  from  mouse  protection  tests  employing  Salmonella  typhosa  vaccines 


U) 

>. 

fd 

XJ 


u 

0) 

-p 


d> 

U 

■H 

£ 

XI 

Q) 

Cn 

C 

d) 


as 

P 

u 

\ 

W 

p 

O 

> 

*P 

> 

P 

3 

IQ 


C  H 
•P  O 


P 
P 
C 
0 
o 
o  — 

25 


O 

u 

fd 

> 


o 

CO 

CO 

o 

o 

in 

in 

S 

\ 

X 

X 

o 

m 

V 

X3 

a> 

rH 
r— I 
•H 
4* 

I 

P 

<d 

a) 

X 


rH 

XI 

0 

d) 

O 

O 

O 

o 

43 

p 

in 

n 

LT 

n 

0 

fd 

X 

X 

X 

X 

O 

CD 

i£> 

(M 

r* 

» — 1 

P 

CM 

CQ 

04 

< 

P 

in 

C 

•H 

<d 

P 

P 

cn 

CD 

Cn 

C 

CD 


fd 

43 

L> 


p 

<D 

00 

o 

O 

O 

d) 

H 

n 

n 

n 

04 

H 

X 

X 

X 

X 

id 

•H 

CM 

CO 

p 

H 

H 

rH 

p 

<D 

C 

XJ 

d) 

c 

P 

cn 

•*> 

A 

O 

0 

p  , 

n 

n 

n 

p 

fd  ! 

X 

X 

X 

X 

<D 

a) 

n 

04 

PQ 

rn 

0 

p 

ro 

CQ 

m 

< 

p 

P 

C 

<y 

P 

id 

04 

e 

o 

2 

s 


•rl 

P 

3 

£ 

•H 

I 

fd 


4* 

+ 

+ 

cn 

cn 

cn 

•rH 

■rH 

•H 

X 

X 

X 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

n 

n 

n 

« 

pcj 

04 

« 

CN 

5 

£ 

H 

iH 

n 

X 

1 

1 

♦r-| 

•rH 

H 

•p 

XI 

P 

P 

«• 

p 

P 

P 

•H 

p 

*p 

>1 

>1  > 

X  > 

P 

P 

p 

g 

£ 

CM 

g 

CM 

3 

rH 

3 

rH 

*P 

•H 

-p 

P 

CM 

P 

p 

cn 

53 

V 

0, 

cn 

£ 

H 

£ 

£ 

CM 

•H 

1 

•P, 

♦p 

P 

■H 

P 

| 

P 

1 

04 

•t 

oJ 

a 

CM 

H 

+ 

>1 

+ 

p] 

rH 

pi 

fd 

pi 

fd 

* 

P 

u 

♦ 

rn 

• 

id* 

1 

<r. 

cnl 

CQI 

W)| 

m 


rd 

a) 

C 

0 

p 

•P 


c 

*P 

c 

a) 

> 

•H 

cn 

a) 

c 

U 

U 

fd 

> 

TJ 

a> 

p 

3 

H 

•H 

XJ 


MH 

O 


in 


a) 

cn 

S 


cn 

0) 

C 

•H 

O 

O 

fd 

> 

fd 

in 

0 

I 


04 


p 

o 

<3 

0 

p 

04 

T3 


P 

(d 

a) 

43 

<D 

43 

P 

§ 

5 

CD 

> 

•H 

P 

O 

<D 

P 

O 

P 

04 

Q) 

P 

0 

£ 


o 

•P 

P 

•H 

c 

Cn 

■H 

in 

cn 

fd 

2 

a) 

C 

■H 

U 

U 

fd 

> 

xi 

0) 

p 

<d 

<d 

p 

P 

i 

d) 

o 

0 

p 

d) 

o 

< 


971 


individual  S_.  typhosa  antigens ,  and  in  fact,  these  experiments  were 
not  designed  with  that  aim  in  mind. 

j.  Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  selection  of  the 
mouse  strain  for  this  assay  was  of  critical  importance.  The  viru¬ 
lence  properties  of  the  hybrids  appeared  to  be  identical  in  both 
the  C57  mice  and  the  Swiss  white  mice,  but  there  was  a  marked 
difference  in  the  ability  of  the  vaccines  to  protect  the  two  mouse 
strains  against  challenge  with  these  same  hybrids.  Protection  was  ef- 
ective  for  the  Swiss  white  mice  over  the  21-day  observation  period, 
but  not  for  the  C57  mice.  All  of  the  latter  died,  and  the  rnmuniza- 
tion  served  only  to  bring  about  a  delay  in  death.  This  would  suggest 
that  the  C57  mouse  lacks  the  ability  to  develop  a  full  immunological 
response  against  the  challenge  organisms. 

2.  Conservation  of  Salmonella  typhimurium  deoxyribonucleic  acid 
in  partially  diploid  hybrids  of  Escherichia  coli 

a.  In  a  recent  attempt  (see  Annual  Report,  WRAIR,  1971)  to 
gain  some  knowledge  of  the  manner  in  which  supernumerary  genes  are  con¬ 
served  in  partially  diploid  bacterial  cells,  we  examined  unstable 
Salmonella  typhosa  hybrids  derived  from  matings  with  Escherichia  coli 
K-12  Hfr  strains.  Some  of  these  typhosa  hybrids  were  found  to 
contain  supercoiled  circular  deoxyribonucleic  acid  (DNA)  molecules, 
whose  presence  was  correlated  with  the  presence  of  the  added  Eh  coli 
genetic  material.  That  is,  segregant  cells  from  which  E.  coli  genes 
had  been  lost  were  found  also  to  have  lost  the  circular  DNA.  The 
possibility  ^hat  the  conservation  of  these  Eh  coli  genes  in  a  circular 
configuration  might  have  been  the  consequence  of  their  association 
with  the  sex  factor,  F,  was  not  indicated  by  tests  of  hybrid  donor 
ability  or  adsorption  of  male-specific  bacteriophage. 

b.  With  regard  to  its  susceptibility  to  those  presently  known 
phages  which  might  be  employed  to  detect  the  presence  of  F,  S.  typhosa 
is  severely  limited.  Male-specific  phages  do  not  form  visible  plaques 
on  male  derivatives  of  S_.  typhosa ,  as  they  do  on  E.  coli  K-12  males, 
and  the  sensitivity  of  F-containing  S_.  typhosa  strains  to  these 
phages  must  be  demonstrated  by  experiments  which  involve  an  increase 
in  titer.  As  for  female-specific  phages,  we  do  not  know  of  any  to 
which  S.  typhosa  is  sensitive,  whereas  a  number  of  such  phages  are 
available  which  lyse  E_.  coli  K-12.  We  therefore  examined  heterozygous, 
parti^Uy  diploid  E_.  coli  K-12  hybrids  derived  from  mating  with  an  S_. 
typhimurium  Hfr  strain.  The  hybrids  were  tested  with  respect  to  their 
patterns  of  susceptibility  to  the  male-specific  phage  R-17,  and  the 
female-specific  JJII,  and  were  examined  for  the  presence  of  super- 
coiled  circular  DNA  by  the  dye-buoyant  density  method.  Our  findings 


972 


in  this  mating  system  indicated  that  when  the  added  DNA  in  a  diploid 
hybrid  is  maintained  in  a  circular  configuration,  at  least  some  part 
of  the  sex  factor,  F  is  involved  in  that  maintenance. 

c.  The  transfer  origin  of  S.  typhimurium  Hfr  WR4016  is 
situated  between  the  xyl  and  malA  chromosomal  loci  of  this  organism, 
xyl+  being  the  marker  which  is  transferred  early,  and  mal-f  the  term¬ 
inal  marker  linked  to  F.  In  a  mating  of  S^.  typhimurium  WR4016  with 
the  E.  coli  K-12  recipient  strain  WR3026,  E.  coli  hybrids  selected 
for  receipt  of  the  Salmonella  xyl-t  character  were  recovered  at  a 
frequency  of  5  x  10^  per  donor  cell.  Of  100  xyl-f  hybrids  examined, 

40  expressed  also  the  tna-  character  of  the  donor.  This  expression 
of  a  recessive  allele  indicates,  of  course,  that  recombination  of  S_. 
typhimurium  DNA  did  occur  in  these  hybrids.  On  the  other  hand, 
among  those  xyl+  hybrids  in  which  recombination  of  the  tna-  marker 
was  not  observed,  37  were  seen  to  segregate  daughter  cells  from  which 
the  inherited  Salmonella  xyl-f  marker  had  been  lost. 

d.  Of  the  37  partially  diploid  hybrids  which  were  detected,  28 
were  found  to  have  acquired  sensitivity  to  the  male-specific  phage, 
R-17,  In  fact,  84  hybrids,  overall,  acquired  R-17  sensitivity  in 
this  mating,  an  indication  of  instability  (reversion  to  F+)  of  the 
Hfr  donor.  It  was  anticipated  that  the  mal-f  character  of  the  5  R-17 
sensitive,  xyl-f  mal-f  hybrids  (which  like  the  xyl-f  character,  was  un¬ 
stable)  would  prove  to  be  associated  with  F.  Upon  examination  of 
these  hybrids,  it  appeared,  in  fact,  as  if  both  the  xyl-f  and  mal-f 
markers  were  part  of  the  same  F-merogenote.  Conjugal  transfer  of 
either  marker  from  each  of  these  hybrids  to  the  E_.  coli  recipient 
strain  WR3030  occurred  at  a  frequency  of  1-2  x  10~2  0er  donor  cell. 

All  recipients  of  the  xyl-f  marker  were  found  also  to  have  received 
the  mal-f  character,  and  all  which  received  mal-f  as  the  selected  marker 
inherited  the  xyl-f  character  as  well.  Segregant  cells  (from  each  of 
the  five  xyl-f  mal-f  hybrids)  from  which  the  xyl-f  marker  was  1'  v  d 
also  become  mal- ,  and  mal-  segregants  invariably  were  for' 

lost  the  xyl-f  marker. 

e.  We  examined  also,  with  respect  to  their  ability  t_o  t  ^ 
fer  the  xyl-f  marker  to  E.  coli  WR3030,  three  diploid,  R-17  sei  ^ci’»e 
xyl-f  ilv-f  hybrids  and  10  diploid  R-17  sensitive,  xyl-f  hybrids.  In 
sharp  contrast  to  the  high  frequency  transfer  observed  with  the  xyl-f 
mal-f  hybrids,  xyl-f  transfer  by  these  13  hybrids  occurred  at  frequencies 
of  10'5  to  5  x  10~6  per  donor  cell.  In  this  instance,  therefore,  the 
hybrids  behaved  in  the  manner  of  F+  donors,  rather  than  as  F-prime 
strains. 


973 


f.  Nine  partially  diploid  hybrids  were  obtained  which  did  not 
exhibit  sensitivity  to  R-17.  Neither  as  expected,  did  they  show  any 
capability  of  transferring  the  xyl+  marker  in  mating  attempts  with 

E.  coli  WR3030.  When  examined  for  their  pattern  of  susceptibility  to 
the  female  specific  phage  011,  however,  6  of  these  hybrids  inhibit¬ 
ed  the  development  of  phage  plaques  in  the  manner  characteristic  of 
F-containing  derivatives  of  E.  coU  WR3026.  Several  xyl~  segregants 
obtained  from  each  of  the  6  R-17  non-sensitive  xyl+  diploid  hybrids 
which  had  exhibited  the  01 1  male  response  were  tested  with  011  and 
all  of  these  were  observed  to  respond  as  females.  Thus,  loss  of  the 
xyl+  marker  was  accompanied,  in  these  hybrids,  by  loss  of  their  male 
response  to  011. 

g.  Supercoiled  circular  DNA  was  found  in  each  of  the  R-17 
non-sensitivie  xyl+  diploid  hybrids  which  had  responded  as  males 
whentested  with  011.  The  sizes  of  the  circular  DNA  molecules,  as 
determined  by  sucrose  density  gradient  centrifugation,  differed  in 
each  hybrid,  ranging  from  a  low  of  25  million  daltons  to  a  high  of  150 
million  daltons.  In  the  3  R-17  non-sensitive  xyl+  diploid  hybrids 
which  had  responded  as  females  when  tested  with  011,  no  circular  DNA 
was  found.  Negative  findings,  with  respect  to  the  presence  of  cir¬ 
cular  DNA,  were  recorded  also  for  the  3  R-ly  non-sensitive  xyl+  hy¬ 
brids  in  which  no  instability  of  the  xyl+  marker  was  observed  (and 
which  had  responded  as  females  with  011)  and  for  WR3026  itself. 

h.  Segregant  cells  (xyl~)  from  each  of  the  six  xyl~  diploid 
hybrids  which  responded  as  males  with  01 1  and  contained  circular  DNA 
were  found,  as  reported  above,  to  have  lost  the  ability  to  inhibit 
011  plaque  formation.  When  these  segregant  cells  were  examined  for 
the  presence  of  circular  DN  A,  none  of  them  was  observed  to  contain  it. 
Thus,  the  loss  of  the  xyl-f  marker  from  each  of  these  hybrids  was 
correlated  with  loss  both  of  the  male  response  to  011  and  of  the 
circular  DNA. 

i.  We  examined,  for  the  presence  of  circular  DNA,  3  of  the  10 
R-17  sensitive,  xyl+  diploid  hybrids  which  had  appeared  from  the 
mating  experiments,  to  contain  a  cytoplasmic  F-factor  that  was  not 
associated  with  the  xyl+  marker.  Each  contained  as  expected,  a  super- 
coiled  circular  DNA  element.  The  molecular  weights  of  these  ele¬ 
ments,  as  determined  by  sucrose  density  gradient  centrifugation, 

were  in  therange  of  60  to  70  million  daltons,  which  is  reasonably 
consistent  with  the  61  million  dalton  molecular  weight  of  F.  When 


974 


xyl-  segregants  from  each  of  these  hybrids  were  examined,  they  were 
found  to  have  retained  their  sensitivity  to  R-17,  as  well  as  their 
contained,  circular  DNA  elements.  It  was  expected  that  if  the  Salmon¬ 
ella  chromosomal  fragment  bearing  the  xyl-f  marker  were  a  part  of  the 
circular  DNA  element,  some  change  in  the  size  of  this  element  should 
have  been  discernible  in  the  xyl-  segregants.  However,  in  experiments 
in  which  ^C-labelled,  .circular  DNA  obtained  from  the  xyl+  version  of 
each  hybrid  was  sedimented  in  the  same  sucrose  gradient  with  ^h- 
labelled  circular  DNA  obtained  from  its  xyl-  segregant,  no  such 
change  was  detected.  With  each  of  the  3  hybrids  tested  in  this  manner, 
the  sedimentation  rate  of  the  circular  DNA  of  the  xyl+  version  of  the 
hybrid  was  indistinguishable  from  that  of  the  circular  DNA  obtained 
from  its  xyl-  segregant.  Thus,  in  these  3  diploid  hybrids,  we  found 
no  indication  of  a  physical  association  of  the  contained,  F-f actor 
DNA  with  the  unstably  conserved  Salmonella  chromosomal  fragment. 

j .  In  earlier  experiments  in  which  E.  coli  Hf  r  donors  were 
mated  with  a  recombiantion  deficient  (recA)  E.  coli  recipient  strain 
the  formation  of  two  classes  of  merodiploid  hybrids  was  observed. 

The  first  class  consisted  of  hybrids  which  behaved  as  F-prime  strains; 
they  exhibited  sensitivity  to  the  male-specific  phage,  MS-2,  and 
transferred  at  high  frequency,  in  subsequent  conjugal  unions,  the  F- 
associated  chromosomal  fragments  which  they  had  acquired  in  the  ini¬ 
tial  mating.  Hybrids  of  the  second  class  were  resistant  to  MS-2, 
and  unable  to  act  as  donors  of  the  added  DNA;  nevertheless,  they  re¬ 
sponded  as  males  to  the  female-specific  phage,  011.  In  these  latter 
hybrids,  the  donor-derived  genetic  fragments  were  conserved,  it  was 
suggested,  by  association  with  a  portion  of  F,  which  allowed  replica¬ 
tion  of  the  element  but  which  lacked  the  determinants  of  F-pili  forma¬ 
tion  and  DNA  transfer.  The  interpretation  seems  the  most  plausible 
one  also  for  explaining  the  male  response  to  011  exhibited  by  6  of  the 
xyl+ ,  R-17  non-sensitive  diploid  hybrids  observed  in  the  present  study. 
Likewise,  it  would  account  for  the  conservation  of  the  added  Salmonella 
DNA  in  a  circular  configuration  in  these  hybrids. 

k.  In  the  5  xyl+  mal+  diploid  hybrids  that  we  encountered,  the 
Salmonella  DNA  seemed  to  be  conserved  as  part  of  a  functional  F- 
merogenote;  in  6  of  the  xyl+,  R-17  non-sensitive,  diploid  hybrids,  it 
was  maintained  as  part  of  what  appeared  to  be  an  incomplete  or  defec¬ 
tive  F-merogenote.  Conservation  of  the  Salmonella  DNA  in  the  remain¬ 
ing  diploid  hybrids  examined  apparently  did  not  involve  association 
with  either  a  complete  or  an  incomplete  F.  Circular  DNA  was  not  found 
in  the  3  R-17  non-sensitive  diploid  hybrids  that  responded  as  females 
when  tested  with  011.  In  view  of  the  fact  that  circular  DNA  was  found 


in  each  of  the  6  R-17  non-sensitive  hybrids  tha  t  responded  as  males 
with  011 ,  the  negative  findings  with  the  3  diploid  hybrids  behaving 
as  females  merit  a  positive  interpretation;  that  is,  the  Salmonella 
genetic  material  contained  in  them  was  perpetuated  in  a  manner  which 
did  not  involve  its  assuming  a  suporcoiled,  circular  configuration. 
Furthermore,  in  thos  examined  diploid  hybrids  which  behaved  as  F+ 
strains,  the  circular  DNA  contained  appeared  to  represent  only  the 
F  factor;  both  genetic  and  molecular  experiments  indicated  that  the 
added  Salmonella  chromosomal  fragments  were  not  associated  with  it. 

The  mechanism  by  which  such  chromosomal  fragments  are  conserved  in 
partially  diploid  hybrids  in  which  F  is  not  present  or,  if  present, 
is  not  involved  with  replication  of  the  fragment,  has  yet  to  be 
determined. 

3.  Hybrids  between  coliphage  A  and  Salmonella  phage  P22 

Salmonella  strains  are  normally  insensitive  to  coliphage  A  be¬ 
ing  unable  to  adsorb  this  phage  due  to  a  lack  of  appropriate  cell- 
surface  receptor  (A rep) .  Recent  studies,  however,  have  established 
the  feasibility  of  constructing  SaJ  monel  la  typhosa  hybrids,  de¬ 
rived  from  matings  with  Escherichia  coli  K-12  Hfr  strains,  that  are 
sensitive  to  coliphage  A  .  Introduction  of  malB-Arcp  gene  cluster 
from  £.  coli  K-12  into  £5.  typhosa  yields  hybrids  capable  of  adsorb¬ 
ing  A  that  are  still  unable  to  replicate  A  lytically.  Addition  of 
further  E.  coli  gene(s)  controlling  replication  of  A  (termed  A  rep) 
to  such  hybrids  results  in  S_.  typhosa  derivatives  that  are  fully 
sensitive  to  A  and  that  approximate  12.  coli  K-12  in  their  interaction 
with  A  (2).  The  X  rep  gene(s)  that  enable  A  to  replicate  in 
typhosa  have  been  mapped  in  the  60-  to  72-min  segment  of  the  E.  coli 
K-12  chromosome.  Although  not  fully  resolved,  recent  observations 
also  indicate  the  necessity  of  the  E.  coli  malA  cluster  for  express¬ 
ion  of  A  sensitivity  by  £.  typhosa  hybrids. 

b.  These  findings  clearly  suggested  the  possibility  of  re¬ 
covering  intergeueric  hybrids  that  would  facilitate  genetic  recombina¬ 
tion  between  evolutionary  diverse  phages,  such  as  coliphage  A  and 
salmonella  phage  P22.  The  £.  typhosa  hybrids  shown  to  be  sensitive 
to  A  appear  unable  to  support  lytic  replication  by  phage  P22.  Con¬ 
sequently  intergeneric  crosses  were  initiated  between  E^.  coli  K-12 
Hfr  donors  and  a  P22-sensitive  Salmonella  typhimurium  recipient  to 
isolate  an  S.  typhimurium  hybrid,  which  in  addition  to  being  sensi¬ 
tive  to  phage  P22,  also  expresses  lytic  sensitivity  to  coliphage  A  . 
Such  a  strain  is  a  suitable  host  for  construction  of  new  hybrid 
phage  species,  their  genomes  being  derived  from  both  P22  and  A  . 


976 


4.  Isolation  of  S.  typhimurium  hybrid  with  sensitivity  to 
coliphage  A  and  phage  P22 

a.  Based  on  previous  experience  with  S .  typhosa  we  anti¬ 
cipated  that  Sj  typhimurium  hybrids  with  lytic  sensitivity  to  A  would 
have  to  express  at  least  the  malB-  A  rep  E.  coli  gene  cluster  and  the 
xyl-A linked  A  rep  E.  coli  gene(s).  The  possibility  that  the  E_.  coli 
malA  cluster  was  also  essential  for  expression  of  A  sensitivity,  like¬ 
wise,  had  to  be  considered.  Initial  attempts  to  prepare  a  A-sensi- 
tive  derivatives  by  first  crossing  with  an  E.  coli  donor  for  in¬ 
heritance  of  the  malB-  A  rep  loci  and  then  remating  for  additional 
loci  were  unsuccessful.  As  a  consequence,  we  performed  "double  selec¬ 
tion"  crosses  in  the  hope  of  recovering  a  hybrid  that,  from  a  single 
conjugation  with  an  E.  coli  K-12  Hfr,  inherited  all  the  necessary 
E*  coli  determinants  for  expression  of  A  sensitivity.  £.  typhimurium 
WR4026,  a  Thr-Xyl-  derivative  of  £5.  typhimurium  LT7  HfrSC19,  was  used 
as  a  recipient.  Although  this  strain  is  an  Hfr  donor,  we  chose  to 
use  it  as  a  recipient,  considering  it  advantageous  for  future  studies 
to  have  a  A -sensitive  S_.  typhimurium  derivative  with  Hfr  donor 
properties.  The  donor  strain  in  these  initial  crosses,  E.  coli  K-12 
Hfr  WR2004,  was  mated  with  the  S_.  typhimurium  WR4026  recipient,  and 
hybrids  that  had  inherited  the  donor  thr+  and  xyl+markers  were  iso¬ 
lated  on  minimal  medium  containing  xylose  as  the  carbon  source  and 
lacking  threonine.  With  this  double  selection  system,  it  was  con¬ 
ceivable  that  some  of  the  hybrids  would  inherit  the  malB-  Arcp  gene 
cluster  (min.  79)  and  the  Afcp  gene(s)  present  in  the  xyl  (min.  70) 
through  thr  (min.  90)  region  of  the  E.  coli  chromosome.  Moreover, 
the  close  proximity  of  malA  (min.  65)  to  the  xyl  marker  (min.  70) 
allowed  for  its  inheritance,  since  this  E_.  coli  marker  may  also  be 
essential  for  expression  of  A  sensitivity  by  S_.  typhimurium .  More 
than  200  such  "double  selected  xyl+  tnr+S .  typhimurium  hybrids  were 
accumulated  and  subsequently  screened  for  sensitivity  to  >  .  Over¬ 
night  broth  cultures  of  these  clones  were  spread  on  TB  agar  and  spotted 
with  drops  of  a  Acltl  lysate  (1  x  10^®  PFU  per  ml)  prepared  on  E_. 
coli  K-12.  Only  one  hybrid  showed  evidence  of  lysis  by  Acltl,  and 
upon  further  testing  revealed  sensitivities  to  A  vir ,  Ai434  and  sx. 

When  used  as  an  over  layer  indicator  host,  this  hybrid  yielded  distinct 
A  plaques  at  an  efficiency  of  plating  that  approximated  an  E.  coli 
K-12  host  (0. 5-1*0)  Subsequent  characterization  revealed  that  this 
clone  also  inherited  the  E.  coli  tna+  gene  region  (min.  73)  and  that 
the  inherited  xyl+  tna+  segment  was  genetically  unstable.  When  plated 
on  MacConkey  xylose  medium  xyl-tna-  segregants  were  readily  detected 
thus  indicating  tint  this  hybrid  was  partially  diploid  for  this  chromo¬ 
somal  segment.  One-  such  segregant  (WR4027)  ,  picked  at  random  and  found 


977 


to  conserve  sensitivity  to  X  ,  was  chosen  for  further  study.  Addi¬ 
tional  characterization  revealed  that  WR4027  also  expresssed  E.  coli 
K-12  type  1  pili  (pil+ ,  min.  89)  and  the  metB  allele  of  the  WR2004 
E.  coli  K-12  donor.  Moreover,  it  became  immediately  evident  that 
WR4027  was  not  sensitive  to  phage  P22  having  become  rough  in  its 
lipopoly saccharide  character.  By  using  the  series  of  "smooth"  and 
"rough"  specific  phages,  P22,  9NA,  FO,  Ffm,  BR60,  6SR,  BR2 ,  and  C21, 
we  identified  the  genetic  lesion  causing  the  rough  lipopolysaccharide 
property  as  being  a  rough  A  (rfa)  ,  core  defect.  The  origin  of  this 
rough  mutation  in  WR4027  is  obscure.  Although  S_.  typhimurium  WR4026 
appeared  smooth  and  sensitive  to  P22,  reexamination  of  this  stock 
culture  revealed  the  presence  of  rfa  lipopolysaccharide  mutants;  thus 
it  was  possible  that  the  clone  used  in  our  mating  with  E.  coli  K-12 
Hfr  WR2004  was  an  rfa  mutant.  Alternatively,  the  rough  lipopoly¬ 
saccharide  character  of  WR4027  could  be  a  consequence  of  the  mating 
with  E.  coli  Hfr  WR2004,  which  like  other  E_.  coli  K-12  strains  is 
rough. 


5.  Isolation  of  a  P22-sensitive  derivative  of  S.  typhimurium 
WR4027 


a.  Sensitivity  of  typhimurium  to  phage  P22  depends  upon 
expression  of  smooth** somatic  (0)  antigens.  The  lipopolysaccharide 
component  responsible  for  0  antigen  factor  12  is  considered  to  be 
at  least  part  of  the  P22  adsorption  site.  Thus  to  obtain  a  P22- 
sensitive  derivative  of  WR4207,  it  was  necessary  to  repair  the  rfa 
lesion,  since  this  defect  in  the  lipopolysaccharide  core  prevented 
attachment  of  O-specific  polysaccharides  and  led  to  the  P22-resis- 
tant,  rough  phenotype.  Our  efforts  to  isolate  smooth,  P22-sensitive 
revertants  from  populations  of  WR4027  were  not  successful.  We  there¬ 
fore,  mated  WR4027  (rfa~ ,  xyl~)  with  smooth  (rfa+ ,  xyl+)  S_.  typhi¬ 
murium  Hfr  WR4016  and  selected  for  inheritance  of  the  donor  xyl-f 
marker.  Previous  studies  have  shown  a  close  genetic  linkage  of  the 
xyl  and  rfa  loci.  Seven  of  25  such  hybrids  were  smooth,  being 
sensitive  to  phage  P22  and  resistant  to  various  "rough  specific" 
phages.  All  seven  hybrids  retained  their  sensitivity  coliphage  X  . 

One  of  these,  termed  WR4028,  was  used  in  our  further  studies. 

b.  typhimurium  hybrid  WR4028  as  a  host  for  phage  P22  and 
X.  When  used  as  a  host  for  phage  P22c+  in  soft  agar  titrations, 

WR4028  yielded  P22c+  plaques  typical  of  those  produced  on  a  native 
typhimurium  LT-7  strain.  The  efficiency  of  plating  of  P22  by 
WR4028  approximated  that  of  the  original  S_.  typhimurium  parent 
(efficiency  of  plating  0. 1-1.0).  When  similar  plaque  assays  were 
performed  with  cltl  plaques  were  faint  and  often  indistinct  when  low 


978 


amounts  of  phage  were  plated.  Moreover,  we  observed  some  variation 
in  plating  efficiency  and  plaque  resolution  among  independent  clones 
of  WR4028.  In  distinct  contrast,  "rough"  S_.  typhimurium  hybrid 
WR4027,  the  immediate  parent  of  WR4028,  consistently  yielded  typical 
distinct  Acltl  plaques  at  a  predictable  plating  efficiency.  We 
consider  these  variations  in  the  behavior  of  A  ,  evident  with  the 
"smooth"  WR4028  host  but  not  with  the  "rough"  WR4027  host,  to  be  a 
reflection  of  an  adsorption  problem,  created  by  the  presence  of 
smooth  O-repeat  lipopolysaccharide  layers.  Recent  studies  on  the 
interaction  of  A  with  flexneri  indicate  that  smooth  lipopoly¬ 
saccharide  layers  interfere  with  efficient  adsorption  of  A  ;  "smooth" 
host  derivatives  adsorbed  A  poorly  when  contrasted  to  "rough"  hosts, 
whose  efficiency  of  adsorption  approached  that  of  E.  coli  K-12. 

c.  These  difficulties  with  A  plaque  resolution  on  the  smooth 
WR4028  host  can  be  obviated  by  isolation  of  host  range  mutants  of 
capable  of  producing  distinct  plaques  at  a  predictable  plating  ef¬ 
ficiency  on  WR4028.  One  such  derivative,  termed  Acltltm,  has  been 
isolated  by  plating  Acltl  on  WR4028  and  picking  a  plaque  that  was 
far  more  distinct  than  that  typical  of  Acltl  on  this  host.  After 
cloning  by  repeated  platings  on  WR4028 ,  we  prepared  a  lysate  of 
Acltltm  that  yielded  typical  A  plaques  on  both  smooth  (WR4029  and 
rough  ( WR4 027)  hybr i ds . 

d.  Lysogenization  of  S_.  typhimurium  WR4028  with  P22£+  and 
Acltl.  As  expected  WR4028  could  be  readily  lysogenized  with  phage 
P22£+.  A  high  proportion  of  bacterial  clones  isolated  from  plaques 
of  P22£+  were  P22  lysogenic  derivatives  of  WR4028.  They  expressed  an 
immunity  to  P22£2,  and  spontaneously  or  upon  induction  with  mitomycin 
C,  produced  free  P22£+. 

e.  S.  typhimurium  WR4028  was  readily  lysogenized  with  coli- 
phage  A  .  "Props  of  Acltl  lysate,  prepared  on  E_.  coli  K-12  were  de¬ 
posited  on  lawns  of  WR4028,  and  after  overnight  incubation,  colonies 
from  the  area  of  lysis  were  purified  and  scored  for  their  lysogeny. 

All  eight  clones  so  tested  were  lysogenic  for  Acltl,  expressing  im¬ 
munity  to  Acltl  and  sensitivity  to  Aimm434  and  Avir ,  and  pro¬ 
duced  free  >  cltl  phages.  One  such  derivative  chosen  for  further  ex¬ 
amination  responded  to  temperature  induction  of  \  cltl  in  a  manner 
similar  to  an  E.  coli  K-12  (Acltl)  lysogen.  To  exclude  the  possi¬ 
bility  that  this  derivative  was  lysogenized  with  a  host  range  Acltltm 
mutant  rather  than  Acltl,  we  assayed  this  induced  lysate  on  E_.  coli 
K-12  and  £.  typhimurium  WR4027  (rough)  and  WR4028  (smooth)  .  The  plaque 
morphology  on  E.  coli  K-12  and  WR4027  was  typical  of  Acltl.  On  the 
smooth  WR4028  host,  the  plaques  were  very  faint  and  indistinct, 
paralleling  our  previous  findings  with  Acltl.  This  strain  was  next 
lysogenized  for  P22£+  yielding  a  derivative  lysogenic  for  both  Acltl 
and  P22£+.  The  feasibility  of  preparing  various  lysogens  of  S_. 


979 


typhimurium  WR4028,  needed  for  formation  of  hybrid  phage  species, 
was  thus  established  by  these  experiments. 

6.  Isolation  of  new  phage  species 

a.  The  dual  sensitivity  of  £.  typhimurium  hybrid  WR4028  to 
phage  P22  and  X  and  the  availability  of  various  lysogenic  deriva¬ 
tives  of  this  strain  enabled  us  to  isolate  hybrid  phages  between 
these  two  phages.  Phage  P22  was  grown  on  various  X  lysogens  of  £. 
typhimurium  WR4028,  and  about  10*  PFU  of  such  lysates  were  plated 
on  a  X  lysogenic  derivative  of  WR4027  (rough) ,  which  was  immune  to 
X  and  resistant  to  phage  P22.  After  overnight  incubation  at  37°, 
about  50  small  plaques  were  detected.  Several  of  these  were  cloned 
and  tested  to  determine  whether  they  were  antigenically  identical 

to  coliphage  X  .  Antiserum  against  coliphage  X  ,  which  inactivated  X 
at  a  rate  constant,  k,  of  156  min~l,  neutralized  the  new  phage  iso¬ 
lates  with  a  rate  constant  of  148+  3  min~l.  No  inactivation  of  these 
phages  was  detected  with  antiserum  against  P22  (k  =  2200  min~^) . 

These  data  indicated  that  the  tail  antigens  responsible  for  adsorp¬ 
tion  of  this  new  phage  isolate  were  serologically  identical  to  those 
of  X#  Due  to  their  antigenic  structure  and  capacity  to  plate  on  a 
P22-resistant,  X  lysogen  of  S.  typhimurium,  we  considered  these  clones 
to  represent  hybrids  between  X  and  P22,  henceforth  designated  to 
the  X-P22  class.  The  X-P22  class  forms  plaques  on  X  lysogens  of 
both  WR4028  and  WR4027.  Although  X-P22  plaques  appear  small,  it  was 
evident  that  the  £  markers  of  X-P22  plaques  mimic  those  of  the  P22 
strains  used  in  preparation  of  lysates  of  X  lysogens,  regardless  of 
the  X  c_  marker  present.  For  example,  when  a  wild-type  P22£+  strain 
is  used  for  infection,  the  X-P22  hybrids  exhibit  turbid  plaques.  In 
contrast,  infection  with  the  cl,  c2 ,  or  c£  clear  plaque  mutants  of  P22 
yields  a  X-P22  derivatives  that  express  the  corresponding  degrees  of 
clearness  typical  of  P22  mutant  used.  In  addition,  when  a  A-P22£+ 
hybrid  class  contains  at  least  the  £  locus  of  phage  P22  and  conserves 
the  protein  of  coat  of  X  . 

b.  We  next  attempted  to  isolate  hybrid  phages  exhibiting  the 
P22  protein  coat  with  the  £  region  of  X  .  Efforts  to  isolate  this 
class  (termed  P22-  X)  by  plating  on  a  P22  lysogen  of  a  A-resistant 
derivative  of  WR4028  were  not  successful.  We  could  infrequently  de¬ 
tect  this  class  of  hybrids,  however,  by  examining  for  distinct  super¬ 
imposed  plaques  on  confluent  lysis  plates  of  a  X  lysogen  of  WR4028 
infected  with  P22  stocks  previously  propagated  on  this  lysogen.  After 
purification  by  plating  on  a  X-resistant  derivative  of  WR4028,  we 
found  that  the  P22-X  hybrid  class  expresses  the  P22  protein  coat  and 
the  £  marker  of  the  P22  strain  used.  This  conclusion  was  based  on 

our  finding  that  antiserum  against  P22  inactivated  P22  and  representa- 


tives  of  the  P22-A  class  at  about  the  same  rate  constant 
(k  =  2200+  10“^)  .  No  cross  neutralization  was  detected  with  anti¬ 
serum  against  A  (k  *  155  min“l) .  In  addition,  backcrosses  of  a 
P22-A  £+  hybrid  with  AcII  yielded  A£+  derivatives  at  a  fre¬ 

quency  of  about  0.13%. 

c.  Derivatives  of  WR4028,  lysogenized  with  either  a  A-P22 
or  a  P22-A  hybrid  were  scored  for  their  pattern  of  immunity  to 
parental  and  hybrid  phages.  A-P22  hybrids  form  plaques  on  A  lyso- 

gens  of  both  WR4027  and  WR4028,  but  not  on  P22  lysogens  of  WR4028. 

Moreover,  A-P22  lysogens  of  S_.  typhimurium  WR4028  are  sensitive 
to  A  because  this  phage  hybrid  contains  the  P22£  region  in  place 
of  the  A£  region.  The  A-P22  lysogen  tested,  however,  was  sensi¬ 
tive  to  P22,  indicating  inheritance  by  the  phage  of  the  £  region 

of  P22,  but  not  of  the  P22  Im  region  essential  for  conferring  im¬ 
munity  to  P22.  In  contrast  to  P22,  only  the  genes  in  or  near  the  £ 
region  of  A  function  in  control  of  immunity.  Our  findings  of  an 
absence  of  P22  Im  locus  in  the  A-P22  hybrid  is  analogous  to  the  ob¬ 
servation  that  the  P22  Im.  region  is  retained  by  the  P22-A  hybrid. 

The  P22  lysogen  of  WR4028  shows  immunity  to  the  P22-A  hybrid  used. 

In  addition,  the  P22-A  lysogen  of  WR4028  is  immune  to  both  P22  and 
A  .  It  thus  appears  that  the  P22-A  hybrid  tested  possesses  the 
Im  region  of  P22  while  inheriting  the  £  region  of  A. 

Summary  and  Conclusions 

1.  Salmonella  typhimurium  hybrids  expressing  the  £.  typhosa 
antigens  9,  d,  and  Vi  were  constructed  by  genetic  crosses  with  an 
£.  typhosa  Hfr  donor.  The  hybrids  retained  the  same  degree  of 
mouse  virulence  as  their  £.  typhimurium  parent  strain,  the  minimum 
lethal  dose  being  less  than  50  organisms  when  tested  either  in 
black  mice  or  Swiss  white  mice.  Vaccination  of  the  Swiss  white  mice 
with  £.  typhosa  Ty2  vaccines  prepared  by  acetone  treatment,  alcohol 
treatment,  or  heat-xilling  conferred  significant  protection  against 
challenge  by  the  hybrid  strains  but  not  against  their  !S.  typhimurium 
parent.  Both  the  acetone-treated  and  alcohol-treated  typhoid  vac¬ 
cines  were  markedly  more  protective  than  the  heat-killed,  phenol- 
preserved  vaccine. 

2.  Partially  diploid  Escherichia  coli  K-12  hybrids  recovered 
from  mating  with  a  Salmonella  typhimurium  Hfr  strain  were  found  to 
differ  with  respect  to  the  manner  in  which  they  conserved  the  added 
Salmonella  deoxyribonucleic  acid  (DNA) .  Five  of  the  diploid  hybrids 
examined  appeared  to  maintain  the  Salmonella  DNA  as  part  of  a  func¬ 
tional  F-merogenote ;  these  hybrids  were  sensitive  to  the  male-specific 
phage,  R-17,  responded  as  males  to  the  female  specific  phage,  011, 

and  transferred  their  inherited  Salmonella  genetic  markers  at  high 


981 


frequency  in  conjugation  experiments.  Six  diploid  hybrids  were 
observed  which  were  not  sensitive  to  R-17,  and  from  which  the 
added  Salmonella  DNA  was  not  transmissible  in  conjugation  tests; 
nevertheless,  these  hybrids  responded  as  males  to  011,  and  the 
Salmonella  chromosomal  fragments  were  conserved  in  them  as  parts  of 
supercoiled,  circular  DNA  elements.  It  was  concluded  that  these 
circular  DNA  elements  were  defective  P-merogenotes ,  unable  to  direct 
the  synthesis  of  F-pili.  Three  diploid  hybrids  were  found  which 
were  not  sensitive  to  R-17,  and  which  responded  as  females  to  011; 
no  circular  DNA  was  found  in  them,  and  it  was  concluded  that  their 
conservation  of  the  Salmonella  genetic  fragments  was  accomplished 
in  some  manner  which  did  not  involve  association  with  F  or  assump¬ 
tion  of  the  supercoiled  circular  configuration.  Other  partially 
diploid  hybrids  were  observed  which  appeared  similar  to  these 
latter  three  hybrids  with  regard  to  their  conservation  of  the 
Salmonella  DNA,  but  which  also  contained  an  infecting  F-factor;  in 
these  hybrids,  both  genetic  and  molecular  experiments  indicated  that 
the  unstably  conserved  Salmonella  DNA  was  not  associated  physically 
with  the  F-factor. 

3.  An  unusual  Salmonella  typhimurium  hybrid  with  sensitivity 
to  coliphage  X  and  salmonella  phage  P22  has  been  recovered  from 
matings  between  an  Escherichia  coli  K-12  Hfr  donor  and  an  S.. 
typhimurium  recipient.  The  hybrid  is  an  excellent  host  for  achieving 
genetic  recombination  between  X  and  P22.  Two  broad  classes  of  hy¬ 
brid  phages  were  isolated.  The  X-P22  hybrid  class  which  has  the 
protein  coat  of  X  ,  contains  at  least  the  £  region  of  P22.  The 
P22-X  hybrid  class  has  the  protein  coat  of  P22  and  has  inherited 
at  least  the  c  marker  of  a  . 


Project  3A062110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Work  Unit  122,  Microbial  Genetics  and  taxonomy 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications. 


1.  Datta,  A.,  C.C.  Parker,  J.A.  Wohlhieter  and  L.S.  Baron.  1973. 
Isolation  and  characterization  of  the  feritility  factor  P  of  Vibrio 
cholerae .  J.  Bacteriol.  113:  763-761. 

2.  Diena,  B.B. ,  E.M.  Johnson,  L.S.  Baron,  R.  Wallace,  and  L. 
Greenberg.  1973.  Assay  of  typhoid  vaccines  with  Salmonella  typhosa- 
Salmonella  typhimurium  hybrids.  Infect.  Immunity  7_:  5-8. 

3.  Gemski,  P. ,  Jr.,  L.S.  Baron,  and  N.  Yamamoto.  1972.  Formation 
of  hybrids  between  coliphage  and  Salmonella  phage  P22  with  a 
Salmonella  typhimurium  hybrid  sensitive  to  these  phages.  Proc. 

Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  69:  3110-3114. 

4.  Gemski,  P. ,  Jr.,  J.A.  Alexeichik,  and  L.S.  Baron.  1972. 

Behavior  of  coliphage  lambda  in  Shigella  flexneri  2a.  J.  Virol. 

10:  668-674 . 


983 


CONTRACT /BRAN  T 

t«.  RCIOURCCt  ESTIMATE 

B  FRO  FISSION  AL  MAN  YUS 

a  FUNDS  ff"  AxmmRJ 

a  oatci/kfnccti vit 

EXPIRATION: 

fc  NUMBCRt*  NA 

fiscal 

73 

5 

150 

C  TYPEt 

4  AMOUNT! 

year 

f. CUM.  AMT. 

74 

5 

200 

RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  W0*K  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  AMNCT  ACCESSION* 

DA  0A  6446 

A  DAT!  OP  BUMMARY* 

73  07  01 

REPORT  OORTWOt  IFW EOS 

DD-DRhB(AR)$H 

a  DATE  PM V  SUITRY 

72  07  01 

4.  RIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

•<  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

u 

U 

F.  RIBA  A  DINE* 

NA 

IB  WSB*N  |NSTR*M 

NL 

Bfc  SPECIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

D  VIS  □  MO 

A  WORK  UNIT 

»•.  WO./COOCti* 

RROORAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  ARIA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMMR 

a  PRIMARY 

6 21 10 A 

3A062110A822 

00 

123 

fc.  CONTRIBUTING* 

•ofi******* 

LDQG  114(f) 

II.  TITLE  (R|I»A  wf*  | 

IMMrt*  c ImiIHmNm  C«p»j 

* 

(U)  Histopathologic  Manifestations  of  Military  Diseases  and  Injuries 

ItlCICNTIFIC  AMD  TECHNOLOGICAL  ARIAS*  — - 

00  26  00  Biology 

ii  mu  iiat  mi..  ..  — 


II.  START  DATI 

63  03 


14.  ESTIMATED-COMPLETION  DATE 

C0NT 


It.  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORBANIXATION 


I 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


AODNES*:* 


Mir  'NSIBLI  INDIVIDUAL 

Buescher,  COL,  E.L. 
telephone:  202-576-3551 


♦.  < 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


TTunEno  AokNcv 

DA 


14.  pi rfSrm a nce  method 

C.  In-House 


ao.  performing  oroanixation 


NAN*:*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VII  TIG  A  TON  fpuml* A  UAM  It  O  ».  AMPMlc  /imUNiNm; 

kani*  Takeuchi,  A.,  M.D. 

telephone  202-576-2024 _ 

IOCI AL  IICUNITV  ACCOUNT  HUMBER: 

AUOCIATI  IN  VIST)  G  A  TONI 

*kM"  H. Jervis,  T.Hase,  R.  Colvin 


DA 


mvi&ra  Tunas  ms  ct?  izsn;  assagssas  sag - 

fUl  Immunopathology;  fUl  Kidney;  (U)  Ulcer;  (U)  Intestine;  (U)  Electron  Microscopy ;  (U)  Infection 


KJL  TtrMAllCAL  OBJ|CTLV(E,*  1A  APPROACH,  1L  PNQONCIf  fPimiJaA  l*frMb*l  RMREMf Al  l4mUtl*4J*  P*V*P*  •>  M'*  ft*  feuflty  n.  C*4p  > 

73(UJ  To  define  histopathologic  manifestations  of  injuries  ana  diseases  which  riave  cur¬ 
rent  or  potential  problems  in  military  personnel.  The  current  effort  is  directed  toward 
studies  of  the  digestive  tract  and  kidney  with  infections  and  injuries.  These  studies 
provide  a  basis  for  a  comprehension  of  pathogenesis,  prognosis  and  treatment. 

24(U)  Various  morphologic  techniques  including  histology,  histo-  and  cytochemistry,  auto¬ 
radiography,  immuno fluorescent  microscopy,  transmission  and  scanning  electron  microscopy 
are  employed. 

25(U)  72  07-73  06  EM  studies  have  determined  ultrastructural  characteristics  of  spiral 
microbes  which  are  unculturable  fastidious  anaerobes,  yet  common  in  the  normal  flora  in 
the  digestive  tract  of  man  and  monkeys.  Studies  of  experimental  E  histolytica  infec¬ 
tions  indicates  that  penetration  of  the  gut  epithelium  by  amoeba  occurs  without  producing 
histolysis  and  results  from  the  secondary  involvement  of  altered  microcirculation.  Ex¬ 
perimental  ulcer  formations  were  investigated  in  "he  duodenum  of  the  guinea  pig  due  to 
fasting,  and  rat  stomachs  under  stress;  the  former  showed  depletion  of  mucus  of  Brunner's 
glands  and  altered  kinetics  of  epithelial  renewal  while  in  the  latter  altered  microcir¬ 
culation  played  a  major  role.  Immunopathologic  study  of  kidney  lesions  associated  with 
experimental  trypanosomiasis  in  monkeys  indicated  the  renal  lesion  represented  membrano- 
proliferative  glomerulonephritis  with  immune  deposits  consisting  of  C3,  properdin, 
occasional  IgM,  while  serum  C3  was  significantly  reduced.  Experimental  obstructive 
nephropathy  in  rabbits  have  provided  evidence  that  interstitial  fibroblasts  were  capable 
of  acquiring  characteristics  of  smooth  muscle  cells. 

For  technical  reports  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Report, 

1  Jul  72  -  30  June  73. 


DD,:°V‘J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DO  FORMS  149SA 
AND  1  491-  I  I  MAR  «•  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


984 


fPII  Redacted] 


I  .iNliMl^ni 


Project  3A062110A»I2  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Military  Internal  Medicine 


Work  Unit  123  Histopathologic  Manifestations  of  Military  Diseases 
and  Injuries 


Investigators . 

Principal:  Akio  Takeuchi,  M.  D. 

Associates:  LTC  Ray  B.  Nagle,  MC;  MAJ  Robert  Colvin,  MC;  Tatsuo 
llase,  M.D.;  Helen  R.  Jervis,  Dr.  Nat.  Sc.;  MAJ  Jack 
Zeller,  MC;  LTC  Paul  K.  Hildebrandt,  VC. 

Description 

To  define  histopathologic  manifestations  of  injuries  experimentally 
produced  and  diseases  which  present  current  or  potential  problems  in 
military  personnel.  The  current  effort  is  directed  toward  studies  of 
diseases  of  the  digestive  tract  and  kidney  due  to  infections  and  in¬ 
juries.  These  studies  provide  a  basis  for  a  comprehension  of  patho¬ 
genesis,  scientific  treatment,  and  determination  of  prognosis  in 
diseases  and  injuries  in  military  personnel. 

Approach  to  the  Problem 

A  multi-disciplinary  approach  including  conventional  histology, 
histo-  and  cytochemistry,  autoradiography,  immunof luorescent  micro¬ 
scopy,  transmission  and  scanning  electron  microscopy  is  employed. 

Progress 

In  the  past,  this  work  unit  vas  primarily  concerned  with  studies 
of  histopathologic  manifestations  of  acute  diarrheal  diseases  of  in¬ 
fection  origin.  In  the  past  two  years,  we  have  expanded  this  work 
unit  and  included  studies  of  diseases  of  the  digestive  tract  of  non- 
infectious  origin  and  experimental  infections  and  injuries  in  the 
kidneys . 

I.  STUDIES  OF  HOST-INDIGENEOUS  MICROBE  RELATIONSHIP  IN  THE  COLONIC 
MUCOSA. 

Medical  microbiology  has  been  concerned  primarily  with  the  potential¬ 
ly  pathogenic  members  of  indigeneous  microflora.  Symhiotic  ^ecies  are 
of  at  least  equal  importance  because  they  maintain  essential  anatomical 
and  physiological  function  with  the  host  (Dubos  1967)  .  The  lumen  of  the 


digestive  tract  is  now  acknowledged  as  the  site  of  a  dynamic  eco¬ 
logical  system  composed  of  extremely  large  populations  of  different 
microbes  maintained  in  balanced  proportions. 

Studies  have  indicated  that  indigeneous  microbes  are  not 
randomly  present  in  the  lumen  of  the  gut  but  populate  definite 
anatomical  and  histologic  divisions  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract 
(Savage,  Dubos  §  Schaedler  1968).  A  recent  study  indicated  that  the 
large  concentration  of  epithelial-associated  indigeneous  microbes 
resist  access  of  pathogenic  bacteria  to  the  intestinal  epithelial 
surface  (Savage  1972) .  * 

Little  is  known  about  "intestinal  epithelial  cell-associated 
indigeneous  microbes"  in  mammals  including  monkey  and  man  (Nelson 
§  Mata  1970).  For  this  reason,  we  have  expanded  our  previous  study 
on  spiral-shaped  microbes  in  the  colonic  mucosa  of  the  rhesus  monkey 
and  man  (Takeuchi  5  Sprinz  1969)  and  rat. 

A.  Studies  of  Spiral -shaped  Microbes  in  the  Colonic  Mucosa  of 
the  Rhesus  Monkey 

Spiral-shaped  microbes  are  one  of  the  most  common  components 
of  the  indigeneous  flora  of  the  large  bowel  in  mammals  including  monkeys 
and  man.  They  are  fastidious  anaerobes  and,  therefore,  difficult  or 
impossible  to  culture  and  isolate.  Little  is  known  of  their  struc¬ 
tural  characteristics  and  their  relation  to  the  host.  Our  earlier 
studies  on  spiral-shaped  organisms  which  characteristically  colonize 
in  almost  pure  culture  on  the  surface  of  the  colonic  epithelium  of 
healthy  monkeys  and  man  have  been  expanded.  In  the  rhesus  monkey,  we 
have  established  for  the  first  time  the  structural  characteristics  of 
this  fastidious  anaerobic  spiral-shaped  organism  and  its  relationship 
to  the  host-cell. 

1.  Host  Cell  Relationship:  Previous  studies  from  this  de¬ 
partment  indicate  that  about  12%  of  normal  rhesus  monkeys  and  5%  of 
normal  human  subjects  have  spiral-shaped  microbe  infestations  on  the 
colonic  mucosa  which  are  indistinguishable  in  both  hosts  (Takeuchi  §  • 

Sprinz  1970) . 

Utilizing  conventional  histology,  transmission  electron  micro¬ 
scopy  (TEM) ,  and  scanning  electron  microscopy  (SEM) ,  we  investigated 
spiral  microbe-epithelial  cell  relationship  in  the  colon  of  the  healthy  <■ 

rhesus  monkey. 


986 


In  paraffin  sections  stained  with  HGE,  the  brush  border  of  the 
normal  colonic  epithelium  was  narrow  and  uniformly  stained  by  eosin 
(Fig.  1) .  However,  the  brush  border  of  the  colonic  epithelium  in¬ 
fested  by  spiral  organisms  was  broader  than  normal  and  characteristically 
basophilic  (Fig.  2).  The  Warthin-Starry  stain,  a  silver  stain  for 
spirochetes,  intensely  colored  the  infested  brush  border.  The  Gram 
staining  was  inconsistent. 

Spiral-shaped  organisms  appeared  to  be  confined  to  the  brush 
border  and  not  to  penetrate  deeper.  Only  surface  epithelial  cells 
including  crypt  openings,  were  infested;  the  depth  of  the  crypt  was 
not  infested.  There  were  no  structural  changes  in  the  infested 
mucosa,  and  the  lamina  propria  exhibited  no  inflammatory  response. 

At  less  than  100X  magnification,  photographs  of  the  surface  of 
the  normal  colonic  mucosa  obtained  by  SEM  were  fairly  comparable  to 
those  obtained  by  the  dissecting  light  microscope.  At  100X  magnifi¬ 
cation  under  SEM,  the  colonic  mucosa  with  spiral-shaped  microbe 
infestation  was  similar  to  the  normal  counterpart;  the  surface  was 
regularly  arranged  in  a  geometrical  pattern  consisting  of  numerous 
polygonal  units  (Fig.  3  §  4) .  At  magnification  from  100X  to  300X, 
the  surface  of  the  normal  mucosa  appeared  finely  granular.  In  con¬ 
trast  to  the  normal  mucosa  (Fig.  3) ,  in  the  infested  mucosa  the  poly¬ 
gonal  units  were  circumscribed  by  less  well-defined  furrows  (Fig.  4). 

The  polygonal  units  and  the  central  holes  (crypt  orifice)  were  better 
seen  at  magnifications  of  up  to  1000X;  the  ridges  observed  on  the 
normal  mucosa  (Fig.  5)  under  SEM  at  a  comparable  magnification  were 
absent  in  the  infested  mucosa  (Fig.  6).  They  were  completely  replaced 
by  a  coarsely  granular  surface,  which  corresponded  to  the  spiral - 
microbe  infested  brush  border,  seen  as  hairy  fuzz  in  light  microscopic 
preparations  (Fig.  2) .  The  furrows  outlining  polygonal  units  were 
occasionally  obscured  by  the  presence  of  multiple  spirochetes  at  the 
surface. 

At  a  3000X  magnification  under  SEM,  the  coarsely  granular  surface 
was  further  resolved  into  multiple  closely  packed  spirochetes  oriented 
perpendicular  to  the  mucosal  surface.  Numerous  organisms  extended 
into  the  crypt  through  the  crypt  orifice  (Fig.  6) . 

At  magnifications  of  10.000X  under  SEM,  spirochetes  could  be 
well-distinguished  as  an  individual  organism  and  were  often  attached 
to  each  other  especially  at  their  lower  one  third  (Fig.  7-8).  They 
were  approximately  up  to  5nm  and  O.Snm  in  diameter.  Quantitative 
counts  were  made  on  the  number  of  spirochetes  at  a  photographic 


magnification  of  30,000X;  the  approximate  figure  for  the  density  of 
spirochetes  at  the  surface  was  estimated  to  be  1,700  organisms  per 
square  millimeter. 

At  higher  mangification  under  TEM,  individual,  slender,  gently 
curved,  spiral-shaped  organisms  were  seen  (Fig.  9),  which  measured 
up  to  6nm  in  length  and  0.5nm  in  diameter.  At  even  higher  magnifi¬ 
cation,  they  were  identified  as  two  structurally  different  microbes  - 
a  flagellated  microbe  and  a  spirochete. 

Spirochetes  and  flagellates  were  the  only  two  organisms  iden¬ 
tified  in  the  brush  border.  The  ratio  of  the  two  types  of  organisms 
varied  from  one  case  to  another  but  spirochetes  always  predominated. 

The  brush  border  of  normal  colonic  epithelium,  which  is  composed 
of  four  distinct  ultrastructural  components,  was  heavily  penetrated 
by  both  organisms  as  illustrated  in  Fig.  9.  The  glycocalyx,  the  most 
superficial  component,  was  absent.  The  microvilli,  located  beneath  the 
glycocalyx,  were  almost  completely  destroyed;  the  few  remaining  were 
blunted  and  had  irregular  contours.  The  next  deeper  component,  the 
terminal  web,  was  attenuated  and  was  abutted  by  the  penetrating  por¬ 
tions  of  the  organisms.  The  deepest  component,  apical  cytoplasm, 
remained  unaltered.  Embedded  side  by  side,  both  types  of  organisms 
were  always  arranged  perpendicular  to  the  brush  border  where  they 
closely  abutted  the  invaginated  plasmalemma  of  the  epithelial  cell 
(Fig.  9,10).  Sometimes,  the  coiled  flagella  of  the  flagellate  assumed 
an  advanced  position  in  front  of  the  organism  against  the  host  cell 
plasma  membrane  (Fi,*.  ll).  More  often,  however,  the  flagella  turned 
backwards  from  the  tip  of  the  organism  and  coiled  around  it. 

2.  Ultrasturctural  Identification  of  Spirochetes  and 

Flagellated  Microbe:  In  order  to  determine  ultrastruc¬ 
tural  characteristics  of  two  different  spiral  organisms,  we  used  the 
following  three  techniques  of  electron  microscopy  -  conventional  thin- 
sectioning,  negative  contrast  and  metal  shadowing  techniques. 

Results  -  The  structural  character  of  spiral -microbes  determined 
by  these  three  techniques  are  summarized  in  Table  1. 

Spirochetes  had  2-6  spirals,  gently  tapered  ends,  and  measured 
from  3-6um  in  length  and  0.2-0.4yir.  in  diameter.  This  organism  had  a 
central  nrotoplasmic  cylinder  (cytoplasm)  enclosed  by  a  cytoplasmic 
membrane  which  appeared  as  a  single  dense  layer,  6.0-8.0nm,  and  an 
outer  external  coat  (cell  wall).  The  external  coat  appeared  as  a 
triple-layered  structure  14-16nm  thick  (Fig.  9,10)-,  consisting  of  two 
dense  layers.  Between  the  cytoplasmic  membrane  and  the  cell  wall  was 


988 


a  moderately  dense  homogeneous  space  which  was  occupied  in  part  by 
a  group  of  fibrils  located  at  one  side. 

Some  spirochetes  showed  12  individual  fibrils  at  the  midportion 
and  6  fibrils  at  each  end  (Fig.  12  5  13);  others  revealed  8  fibril.: 
at  the  midportion  and  4  fibrils  at  each  end  (6-16-6  and  4-8-4  arrange¬ 
ment).  All  axial  fibrils  wound  around  the  protoplasmic  cylinder  in  a 
helical  form  and  extended  from  one  end  of  the  organism  to  the  other 
(Fig.  13).  The  fibrils,  originating  from  opposite  ends,  overlapped, 
thus  giving  the  impression,  when  viewed  only  in  the  area  of  overlap, 
that  the  spirochete  had  twice  as  many  fibrils.  At  each  end,  the  fibril 
made  a  sharp  bend  before  insertion  into  a  disc-like  structure  (Fig.  12), 
which  measured  approximately  40nm  in  diameter.  This  disc-like  structure 
extended  through  the  entire  length  of  the  organism  and  corresponds  to 
the  "annular  swellings"  seen  in  Reiter  treponema  (Ryter  8  Pillot)  and 
the  "terminal  disc"  seen  in  Spirochete  aurantia  (Breznak  and  Canale- 
Parola)  and  oral  spirochetes  (Listgarten  8  Socransky)  (Fig.  13)  . 

The  cytoplasmic  cylinder  contained  uniformly  distributed  ribosomes 
and  ill -defined  areas  of  electronopacity  containing  fine  meshes  of 
dense  strands.  These  ill-defined  areas  appeared  to  be  the  mesosorae 
of  the  organism.  The  characteristic  number  of  the  axial  fibrils, 

8-12-8,  the  size  of  the  cytoplasmic  cylinder,  and  the  structure  of  the 
outer  envelope  were  identical  to  those  of  Borellia  vincentii  studied  by 
Listgarten  8  Socransky  (1964  8  1965). 

The  flagellated  microbe  was  seen  less  frequently  than  spirochetes. 
It  had  2-4  spirals  and  ranged  from  4-6nm  in  length  and  0.2-0.4nm  in 
diameter;  therefore,  size  alone  could  not  distinguish  these  two 
organisms.  The  ends  of  this  latter  organism  were  distinctly  different 
in  that  they  terminated  bluntly,  and  a  single  flagellum  emanated  from 
each  end,  which  identified  it  as  a  flagellate.  The  flagellate  was 
composed  of  a  protoplasmic  cylinder,  cell  wall,  and  polar  flagellum 
at  each  end.  The  cell  wall,  which  was  approximately  lOnm  thick,  con¬ 
sisted  of  a  composite  of  two  electron-dense  layers  3.0nm  in  thickness, 
separated  by  a  less  electron  dense  homogeneous  layer  of  4.0nm.  There 
was  a  moderately  dense  homogeneous  layer,  approximately  20nm,  between 
the  cell  wall  and  the  cytoplasmic  membrane.  Occasional  ill-defined 
opaque  masses  appeared  in  the  cytoplasmic  cylinder.  Flagella  varied 
from  l-6um  in  length  and  3.5  +_  2.5nm  in  diameter  and  originated  at 
each  end  of  the  cytoplasmic  cylinder  from  a  "flagellar  stub"  (Fig.  11, 
14,15  8  16).  The  flagellum  consisted  of  a  sheath  and  core;  the  sheath 
measured  6.0+^1.5nm,  and  the  core,  14.5+1.5nm  in  diameter.  The  structure 
of  the  flagella  and  flagellar  stub  were  similar  to  that  of  flagellated 
bacteria  such  as  Vibrio  fetus  and  Proteus  vulgaris . 


990 


Discussion 


In  the  past,  spiral-shaped  microbes  recovered  from  the  gastro¬ 
intestinal  tract  or  stools  of  mammals  were  given  different  names  such 
as  spirillum,  leptospirillum,  spirochetes , vibrio,  and  bacterioid  (12). 
Identification  in  many % instances  was  based  mainly  on  morphological 
characteristics  in  tissues  and  direct  smears  observed  by  light  micro¬ 
scopy.  As  exemplified  in  this  study,  the  light  microscope  cannot 
adequately  identify  spiral-shaped  microbes.  The  use  of  a  single 
technique  in  electron  microscopy  is  also  inadequate.  SEM  is  capable 
of  demonstrating  the  natural  environment  of  spiral  microbes;  however, 
it  is  incapable  of  resolving  their  relationship  with  the  host  and 
their  structural  characteristics.  Thin-sectioning  technique  provides 
a  view  of  the  host-microbe  relationship  but  does  not  give  complete 
information  about  the  microbe.  Negative-staining  technique  does  give 
more  information  about  the  microbe  structure,  but  does  not  provide 
a  view  of  the  host-microbe  relationship.  Each  technique  provides 
conclusive  information  but  has  distinctive  limitations,  however,  col¬ 
lectively  these  techniques  give  a  more  accurate  picture  of  host- 
parasite  relationship. 

Prior  to  the  advent  of  SEM,  the  dissecting  microscope  proved 
indispensable  in  illustrating  changes  of  the  mucosal  surface  archi¬ 
tecture  of  the  small  and  large  intestine,  but  offered  limited  resolu¬ 
tion.  The  three-dimensional  reconstruction  of  intestinal  biopsies 
from  serial  sections  proved  useful  in  demonstrating  architecture  of 
the  gut  mucosa  but  was  cumbersome.  With  superior  scanning  capabilities 
and  great  depth  of  focus,  SEM,  at  higher  magnification,  can  provide 
a  far  clearer  image  of  the  surface  structure.  With  this  new  tool,  the 
present  study  has  clearly  shown  how  intestinal  spirochetes  inhabit  their 
natural  environment.  Three-dimensional  views  reveal  that  organisms 
characteristically  fluorish  almost  as  a  pure  culture  on  the  mucosal 
surface  of  the  colonic  mucosa. 

With  SEM  observation,  we  were  able  to  demonstrate  the  spatial 
relationship  between  spiral  microbes  and  the  colonic  mucosa.  No 
organisms  were  randomly  oriented  on  the  mucosal  surface;  all  were 
well-oriented  perpendicularly  to  the  surface.  This  spatial  relation¬ 
ship  suggests  that  organisms  may  utilize  their  forward  portion  for 
nutritional  intake  from  the  host  cells.  Consequently,  this  unique 
orientation  may  permit  equal  access  for  each  organism  to  the  host 
cells,  while  simultaneously  providing  such  access  to  a  maximum  number 
of  spirochetes. 


SEM  was  capable  of  counting  the  number  of  spiral  microbes  on 
the  mucosal  surface  of  the  bowel.  This  method  of  counting  directly 
bacterial  flora  has  advantages:  (a)  The  problem  of  bacterial  viability 
and  retrievability  is  bypassed,  and  (b)  The  variation  in  bacterial 
population, which  is  averaged  by  dilution  counting  techniques,  can  be 
appreciated.  However,  this  method  of  counting  makes  no  distinction 
between  viable  and  nonviable  organisms.  The  combination  of  dilution 
counting  and  SEM  counting  was  not  possible  in  this  study,  since  these 
spiral  organisms  are  not  culturable. 

Spiral-shaped  microbes  exclusively  and  intimately  populated  the 
brush  border.  This  unique  host-microbial  relationship  was  further 
clarified  by  the  thin-sectioning  technique;  spiral  organisms  do  invade 
host  cells.  Yet,  this  invasion  was  always  limited  to  the  upper  three 
cytocomponents ,  glycocalyx, microvilli ,  and  terminal  web.  Despite  these 
remarkable  alterations,  the  remaining  host  cellular  structure  was 
unchanged.  This  implied  that  cell  structures  may  be  selectively  des¬ 
troyed  without  apparent  ill  effect.  No  attempt  was  made  in  this  study, 
however,  to  detect  specific  functional  alterations. 

The  same  techniques  have  been  used  to  describe  spirochetes  and 
spiral-shaped  flagellates  in  the  colon  of  mice  by  Savage  et  al  and 
by  Davis  et  al.  These  organisms  are  located  in  the  lumen,  often  en¬ 
meshed  in  mucus,  intermixed  with  fusiform  bacteria  and  sometimes  are 
close  to  the  brush  border.  They  never  reside  within  or  cause  struc¬ 
tural  alteration  to  the  brush  border.  Since  some  of  'the  luminal  spiral¬ 
shaped  organisms  described  in  mice  and  rats  are  ultrastructurally 
similar  to  the  ones  demonstrated  in  this  report,  their  location  and 
host-cell  relationship  become  important  criteria  in  distinguishing 
between  spiral-shaped  organisms  in  different  hosts.  In  particular, 
the  intimate  cohabitation  of  spirochetes  and  spiral-shaped  flagellates 
in  the  brush  border  of  the  colonic  epithelium  of  monkey  and  man  rep¬ 
resents  a  unique  host-microbe  relationship. 

Conclusion 


Intestinal  spirochetes  share  the  general  ultrastructural  charac- 
tersitics  of  other  types  of  spirochetes.  The  variable  number  of 
axial  fibrils  (4-8-4  or  6-12-6)  in  other  spirochetes  has  been  dis¬ 
cussed  elsewhere  (Listgarten  1966)  .  The  intestinal  spirochete  bearing 
the  axial  fibrils  of  4-8-4  arrangement  is  indistinguishable  from 
Borrelia  vincentii ,  grown  in  pleuropneumonia- like  organism  media  in 
95%02  and  5%C02»  reported  by  Listgarten  5  Socransky.  At  present,  it 
cannot  be  concluded  from  an  ultrastructural  description  alone  that 
both  oral  and  intestinal  spirochetes  are  identical  organisms. 


992 


The  traditional  methods  of  microbiological  identification  of 
bacteria--in  vitro  culture,  isolation  and  identification--are  not 
applicable  to  spiral-shaped  anaerobes  which  are  difficult  or  impossible 
to  culture.  When  cultured,  infrequently  as  that  may  be,  the  structure 
of  spirochetes  can  be  altered  by  the  artificial  environment  (Listgarten 
1964).  In  contrast,  in  vivo  ultrastructural  identification  of  spiral¬ 
shaped  organisms  by-passes  the  problem  of  culture  and  providss  a 
detailed  description  of  the  structure  of  the  organism  and  its  host 
relationship.  In  vivo  ultrastructural  techniques  may  provide  a  new 
approach  to  the  recognition  and  classification  of  spiral-shaped 
organisms  in  the  digestive  tract. 


993 


Fig.  3  -  SEM  view.  The  normal  surface 
is  divided  into  polygonal  units  de¬ 
fined  by  furrows  (dotted  lines) .  The 
polygonal  unit  shows  a  central  hole 
(arrows).  X300. 

Fig.  4  -  SEM  view  of  spirochete- 
infested  mucosal  surface.  The  finely 
granular  surface  is  different  from  the 
convoluted  ridges  of  the  normal  con¬ 
trol  (Fig.  3)  crypt  orifice  (arrows) . 
X300 . 


995 


X30005  "  SEM  VleW*  mUC0Sal  surface  of  normal  colon. 

Fig.  6  -  SEM  view,  spirochete-infested  colonic  mucosa. 
The  normal  mucosal  surface  is  completely  replaced  by 
numerous  spirochetes.  The  central  hole  is  a  crvnt 
opening.  X2000. 

Fig.  7  -  SEM  view,  mucosal  surfac;  of  normal  colon. 
Semi -spherical  elevations  average  Jnm  in  diameter  and 
2nm  in  height.  X10,000. 

F*g\8'  Higher  magnification  of  SEM  view  illustrates 
the  individual  spirochetes.  Organisms  are  often 
attached  to  each  other.  XIO.OOO. 

996 


Fig.  9  -  TEM  illustrates  the  spirochete-infested  brush 
border  region  of  an  epithelial  cell.  Numerous  spirochetes 
averaging  5y  in  length  and  0.5y  in  diameter  almost  totally 
replace  microvilli  (MV).  The  spirochetes  consists  of 
cytoplasjn  enclosed  by  a  cytoplasmic  membrane  (small  arrow) 
and  an  outer  cell  wall  (large  arrow).  There  are  charac¬ 
teristic  axial  fibrils  (semicircular  lines).  X48.000. 


997 


i 

i 

i 

\ 


Fig.  10  -  Cross-section  at  the  brush  border  infested  predomi¬ 
nantly  by  spirochetes.  Spirochetes  show  several  individual 
axial  fibrils  (parenthesis)  which  are  located  between  the  cell 
wall  (large  block  arrow  point)  aid  the  cytoplasmic  membrane 
(small  black  arrow  point).  Flagellates  (FL)  show  absence  of 
axial  fibrils.  Portions  of  the  flagellum  (semicircular  line) 
are  seen  in  proximity  to  flagellates.  Note  that  the  cell  wall 
(large  arrow)  of  spirochetes  abuts  the  plasmalemma  of  the 
brush  border  cytoplasm  (small  arrow).  X98.000. 


in1 

I  ia  ’  •! 

*  :>* 

Fig.  11  -  Terminal  web  region  infested  by  flagellated  microbes. 

In  upper  right  comer,  a  flagellum  originates  from  the  blunted 
end  of  the  organism  (large  black  arrow)  and  coils  around  itself 
and  indents  the  host  cell  plasmalemma.  In  the  upper  left  corner, 
a  flagellum,  at  cross  section  (small  arrows) ,  similarly  indents 
the  host  cell  membrane.  The  cell  wall  (CW)  of  flagellates  is 
closely  approximated  to  the  trilaminar  unit  membrane  (OL:  Outer 
leaflet:  IL:  Inter  leaflet)  of  the  host  cell.  A  spirochetes 
(SP)  characterized  by  abundant  ribosomes  is  close  to  adjacent 
flagellates.  X119,000. 

9s>9 


Fig.  12  -  Terminal  bends  in  axial  fibrils  lead  to  attachment  discs 
(arrows)  in  protoplasmic  cylinder  of  the  spirochete.  Negative  con 
trast.  X135,000. 

Fig.  13  -  Spirochete  shows  six  terminal  discs  at  each  end  from 
which  individual  fibrils  originate,  extend,  and  wind  around  the 
protoplasmic  cylinder  like  a  helix.  Negative  contrast.  X36,000. 
Fig.  14  -  Flagellate  shows  bipolar  flagellation  and  punched-out 
round  areas  in  the  cytoplasm.  Negative  contrast.  X32,000. 


1000 


Fig.  15  -  Flagellated  microbe  shown  by  the  shadow-casting  tech¬ 
nique.  A  long  flagellum  originates  from  one  end  of  the  organism. 
X42.000. 

Fig.  16  -  A  polar  flagellum  originates  at  one  end  of  the  cytoplasm 
(arrow)  and  extends  through  the  cell  wall.  Negative  contrast. 
X47.000. 


I 


B.  Studies  of  Spiral-Shaped  Microbes  in  the  Rat  Cecum. 

*  This  study  was  attempted  to  determine  whether  any  specific 
bacterial  population  is  localized  in  the  cecum  of  the  normal  rat,  a 
common  experimental  animal.  Fifteen  young  male  Wistar  rats  were  fed 
D&G  laboratory  diet  and  allowed  tap  water  ad  libitum.  They  were 
anesthetized  and  perfused  through  the  heart  with  chilled  fixative. 

The  following  procedures  were  conducted:  1.  Cecal  contents 
were  gently  scraped  from  the  mucosa,  then  homogenized  in  the  cold 
fixative.  The  homogenized  material  was  filtered  through  gauze  to 
remove  most  coarse  cellular  debris.  The  filtrate  was  prepared  for 
the  following  techniques:  examination  by  phase  contrast  microscopy; 
Gram,  crystal  violet  and  iodine  staining;  negative  staining  for  TEM. 

2.  Portions  of  cecum  were  processed  for  conventional  histology  and 
thin-sectioning  technique  for  TEM. 

All  rats  examined  showed  that  the  crypts  were  packed  with 
organisms  whose  structural  character  differed  from  those  of  the  cecal 
lumen.  Organisms  found  in  the  cecal  lumen  consisted  of  gram-positive 
and  gram-negative  rods,  cocci  and  also  spiral  organisms.  In  contrast, 
almost  every  crypt  was  populated  solely  by  spiral  organisms. 

By  thin-sectioning  and  negative  contrast  technique,  spiral - 
shaped  organisms  were  divided  into  three  types  according  to  their 
ultrastructural  characteristics;  true  spirochetes,  flagellated 
microbes  and  microbes  with  helically  coiled  fibers.  The  details  of 
these  structural  characteristics  are  being  studied.  Individual  crypts 
often  exhibited  a  majority  of  one  of  the  three  types  of  organisms, 
whereas  many  other  crypts  in  the  same  rat  showed  an  intermingling  of 
two  or  three  types  of  organisms.  Occasionally,  spiral-shaped  organisms 
were  seen  within  mucus  granules  of  goblet  cells  and  also  in  the  lamina 
propria, eliciting  inflammatory  response. 

In  this  study  we  have  noted  that  in  the  normal  adult  rat  cecum, 
spiral-shaped  organisms  are  closely  associated  with  the  cecal  mucosa 
and  occasionally  penetrate  it  with  no  noticeable  effect  on  the  host. 
These  observations  lead  to  a  few  intriguing  questions.  If  the  host  is 
associated  with  the  normal  flora  from  infancy,  is  it  tolerant  for  some 
members  of  the  normal  flora  especially  with  regard  to  flora  that  may 
penetrate  the  mucosa?  Would  such  tolerance  enable  certain  organisms 
to  resist  the  host's  defenses  if  they  share  antigenic  determinants  with 
the  host's  normal  flora?  Would  alterations  in  the  normal  flora  be 
beneficial  or  harmful  to  the  host  during  certain  infections?  To  our 
knowledge,  no  data  in  the  literature  can  satisfactorily  answer  any 
of  these  questions.  Further  studies  on  spiral-shaped  microbes  in  vivo 
may  provide  some  clue  in  answering  these  questions. 


1002 


II.  STUDIES  ON  HOST- PATHOGENIC  MICROBES  IN  THE  CUT  MUCOSA 


A .  Studies  on  the  Gut  Mucosa  Challenged  with  Shi  go 1  la  dysentcriae . 

In  collaborative  studies  on  Shigella  dysenteriae  infections 
in  experimental  animalstand  human  volunteers,  we  have  described 
histopathologic  changes  in  the  colonic  mucosa  infected  by  this  classic 
strain  of  shigella.  (See  Annual  Report,  1972,  Department  of  Applied 
Immunology,  DCDGI,  WRAIR). 

B.  Study  on  the  Small  Intestinal  Mucosa  of  the  Rabbit  Loop 

Inoculated  by  Shigella  dysenteriac-derived  Enterotoxin. 

Shigella  dysenteriae  1  enterotoxin  inoculated  into  ligated 
ileal  loops  of:  rabbits  produced  alterations  and  extrusion  of  villous 
epithelial  cells  as  early  as  1  hour  after  challenge.  By  6  hours, 
epithelial  cells  were  cuboidal  rather  than  columnar;  the  villi  were 
shortened  with  a  decreased  villus-to-crypt  ratio  and  with  many  intact 
or  degenerating  transmigrating  lymphocytes.  Neither  Vibrio  cholerae 
enterotoxin  nor  heat-inactivated  Shigella  toxin  caused  any  detectable 
alterations  in  the  mucosal  architecture.  These  data  indicate  that 
£.  dysenteriae  1  enterotoxin  is  cytotoxic  to  the  intestinal  epithelial 
cell  in  vivo.  The  changes  induced  are  similar  to  those  previously 
found  after  oral  challenge  of  guinea  pigs  with  live,  virulent  Shigella 
flexneri  2a.  These  results  suggest  that  some  of  the  virulence  of 
Shigella  species  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract  may  be  mediated  by 
cell-free  toxins.  They  further  serve  to  distinguish  the  mode  of 
action  of  Shigella  enterotoxin  from  that  of  cholera  enterotoxin. 

III.  STUDIES  OF  EXPERIMENTAL  ULCERS  IN  THE  DIGESTIVE  TRACT 


Pathogenesis  of  experimental  ulcer  formation  was  studied  in 
guinea  pigs  and  rats:  the  former  was  produced  in  the  duodenum  by 
fasting  and  the  latter  in  the  stomach  by  stress. 

A.  Acute  Duodenal  Ulceration  in  the  Guinea  Pig  due  to  Fasting. 

The  pathogenesis  of  acute  mucosal  ulcers  following  1-6 
days  of  fasting  was  investigated  in  Walter  Reed  or  Hartley's  guinea 
pigs.  Animals  were  deprived  of  food  but  not  of  water  and  were 
sacrificed  at  daily  intervals.  The  gross  appearance  of  the 
mucosa  was  examined  after  processing  for  the  demonstration  of 
alkaline  phosphatase  activity  (Jervis  1965).  Histologic  and  histo- 
chemical  study  of  mucins  (Sheahan  et^  a_l^  1970)  were  carried  out 
on  10%  buffered  formal in- fixed  and  routinely  processed  paraffin 


1003 


H2R  r*  -«  :i 


TABLE  II 

ENZYME  HISTOCHEMISTRY  OF  THE  GUINEA  PIG  DUODENUM 


in 

tn 

in 

tn 

in 

rH 

r-H 

H 

r— H 

r-H 

i-H 

r-H 

H 

i-H 

rH 

l-H 

<D 

<D 

<D 

<D 

o 

0) 

O 

U 

o 

o 

'J 

u 

VJ 

l-H 

£  in 

f-H 

■3 

r-H 

in 

«-H 

m 

i-H 

in 

in 

P  T3 

p 

as 

V)  T) 

TO 

TO 

T3 

03 

”3 

aJ 

T3 

as 

T3 

O  C 

<u 

•  H 

TO  C 

•  H 

c 

•  rH 

C 

♦  eH 

G 

•H 

C 

■H 

C 

T)  aS 

r-M 

> — m  TO 

i— « 

TO 

r—M 

ctJ 

f-H 

03 

H 

03 

f-H 

3 

P  i— • 

P 

<D 

Pm  •— t 

0> 

i-H 

0> 

H 

»-H 

<D 

i-H 

<3 

l-H 

c 

O  W) 

O 

x 

O  Q0  i/i 

X 

to 

bfl 

9r*\ 

to 

r* 

Dfl 

X 

rtf 

o 

x 

X 

V 

4— 

D 

*-> 

♦-> 

4~> 

P 

4-» 

•rH 

•  r4 

X  m 

oo 

•|H 

6 

»n 

•  «-4 

E 

»n 

•  H 

E 

tn 

•  iH 

E 

tn 

*  rH 

E 

in 

-o  - 

"O 

Pm 

o  ► 

03 

Pm  in 

- 

Pm  in 

Pm  in 

« 

Pm  tn 

Pm 

in 

» 

TO 

0)  P 

<D 

(D 

P 

X 

< D 

TO 

P 

rj 

P 

<D 

03 

p 

<u 

oJ 

P 

ID 

0? 

P 

u 

4-1  O 

4-> 

rH  <D 

a 

^H 

0) 

•-H 

o 

i— M 

o 

r— * 

o 

f-H 

o 

o 

as  C 

ct5 

•  H 

TO  C 

0 

•H 

Pm 

G 

•«H 

Pm  G 

•H 

Pm 

c 

If* 

Pm  C 

•  rM 

Pm 

c 

— J 

•H  C 

*H 

«-h 

O  G 

p 

r*H 

o 

G 

»-H 

o 

G 

i-H 

0 

G 

r-H 

o 

G 

i-H 

O 

c 

P  3 

P 

l-H 

•H  3 

u 

i-H 

4-J 

3 

H 

X 

3 

i-H 

4~> 

3 

•—4 

4H 

3 

f-H 

4-> 

3 

4->  P 

•H 

CU  P 

TO 

•H 

X 

P 

mH 

X 

P 

•H 

X 

P 

•H 

X 

P 

*H 

X 

P 

CO  CO 

LO 

> 

<  CO 

E 

> 

u 

co 

> 

u 

00 

> 

u 

CQ 

> 

u 

CO 

> 

u 

00 

0) 

4) 

o 

</| 

d 

*3 

a 

to 

•  H 

4-> 

X 

TO 

03 

Pm 

0) 

X 

X 

0) 

Pm 

o 

3 

Pm 

Pm 

TO 

in 

tn 

tn 

tn 

O 

4-J 

0 

oj 

TO 

o 

c 

03 

X 

p 

P 

X 

•  H 

X 

CL 

o 

O 

Pm 

E 

Pm 

l 

Q 

X 

o 

CQ 

in 

vO 

Pm 

Dm 

O 

i 

u 

03 

TO 

tn 

G 

<D 

X 

ID 

•iH 

•H 

•rH 

<L> 

•  H 

C 

Pm 

in 

c 

03 

"0 

6 

rH 

•H 

O 

•H 

X 

0} 

U 

"O 

u 

u 

X 

— • 

X 

3 

•H 

3 

o 

?: 

2 

O 

G 

rH 

<D 

o 

H 

3 

Pm 

CL 

< 

X 

< 

< 

e? 

GO 

O 

H 

*M 

1004 


A 


I 


The  activity  of  the  a-glyc^rophosphate,  £-hydroxybutyri c  and  glutamic  dehydrogenases  in  control  animals 
was  so  slight  that  it  was  not  possible  to  determine  changes  due  to  fasting. 


3HTHY  UPTAKE  IN  UPPER  DUODENUM  OF  CONTROL  GUINEA  PIGS  AND  OF 

GUINEA  PIGS  FASTED  5  DAYS 


sections.  Histuchemical  study  of  mucosal  enzymes  and  fat  was  carried 
out  on  fresh  frozen  sections  processed  according  to  techniques  well- 
established  in  this  laboratory  (Kent  et^  a_l_  1966)  for  the  demonstration 
of  the  following  enzymes:  alkaline  and  acid  phosphatase,  glucose-6- 
phosphatase,  reduced  DPNH  and  TPNH  diaphroases,  succinic  dehydrogenase, 
glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase,  alpha  glycero-phosphate  dehydro¬ 
genase,  beta-hydroxybutyric  dehydrogenase,  glutamic  dehydrogenase, 
leucine  ami  nopeptidase,  monoamine  oxidase. 

Cell  renewal  in  the  mucosa  was  studied  by  means  of  autoradio¬ 
graphic  preparations  of  mucosal  strips  from  control  and  starved 
guinea  pigs  given  tiitiated  thymidine  (3HTHY)  intraperitoneal ly 
(lyCi/gr  body  weight)  either  1  or  24  hours  before  sacrifice.  The 
pH  of  luminal  content  was  measured  by  introducing  a  unipolar  elec¬ 
trode  into  the  stomach  and  the  upper  duodenum. 

Fasted  animals  loose  weight  very  rapidly.  Shortly  after  the 
beginning  of  fast,  the  duodenal  mucosa  develops  longitudinal  lesions 
characterized  by  severe  mucosal  atrophy  accompanied  bv  almost  complete 
mucus  depletion  in  the  Brunner's  glands,  reduction  of  mucosal  enzy¬ 
matic  activity  (Table  2),  and  followed  by  ulcerations.  After  5  days 
of  starvation,  there  is  at  least  80°o  incidence  of  ulcerations  which 
may  perforate  by  the  6th  day.  Starvation  does  not  significantly  alter 
the  pH  content  of  the  stomach  or  the  duodenum,  although  there  is  a 
tendency  to  higher  acidity  in  the  luminal  content  of  many  experimental 
animals.  Autoradiographic  studies  of  the  bowel  (Fig.  17)  show  that: 
a)  starved  animals  have  similar  3HTHY  uptake  in  both  ulcerated  and 
non-ulcerated  areas,  the  latter  showing  a  normal  looking  but  much 
thinner  mucosa,  b)  starved  animals  which  showed  mucosal  atrophy  with 
severe  ulcerations  have  a  significantly  reduced  3HTHY, uptake  through¬ 
out  the  gut,  when  compared  to  control  or  fasted  but  non-ulcerated 
animals.  The  latter,  in  the  jejunum  and  ileum,  have  a  much  thinner 
mucosa  but  no  villus  atrophy. 

These  observations  indicate  that  the  initial  duodenal  atrophy 
is  not  due  to  a  focal  slowdown  in  cell  renewal  but  rather  to  other 
local  factors  such  as  mucosal  irritation  by  gastric  juices  which  cannot 
be  protected  by  the  action  of  the  depleted  Brunner's  glands.  In  the 
later  period,  decreased  epithelial  cell  renewal,  presumably  due  to 
protracted  fasting,  and  also  accelerated  epithelial  cell  desquamation, 
possibly  stimulated  by  persistent  gastric  juice  irritation,  result  in 
altered  mucosal  integrity  which  leads  to  mucosal  ulceration  in  the 
duodenum. 


1006 


B .  Studies  on  Pathogenetic  Factors  of  Experimental  Stress  Ulcer 

The  objective  of  this  study  was  to  clarify  pathogenetic 
factors  of  experimental  stress  ulcer  and  to  formulate  effective 
preventive  and  therapeutic  measures. 

Gastric  microvasculature  V.  the  normal  rat  has  been  studied 
by  the  use  of  a  2-color  silicone  rubber  perfusion  technique  (Reynolds 
et  ad_  1967).  The  glandular  portion  of  the  rat  sto.i.ich  generally  shows 
the  same  vascular  arrangement  as  that  of  the  huma;  stomach.  As  seen 
in  Figure  18,  arteries,  upon  penetrating  the  serosa  and  the  muscularis, 
form  a  plexus  in  the  submucosa.  Those  arteries  which  run  just  beneath 
and  parallel  to  the  muscularis  mucosae  are  called  distributing  arteries. 
They  give  off  numerous  arterioles  (connecting  arterioles) ,  which  pene¬ 
trate  the  muscularis  mucosae  and  immediately  branch  into  capillaries 
at  the  base  of  the  gastric  glands.  The  mucosal  capillaries  enclose 
individual  gastric  glands  by  their  meshwork,  run  upward,  and,  near  the 
mucosal  surface,  connect  with  collecting  venules  which  are  distributed 
regularly  among  the  gastric  glands.  Collecting  venules  descend  the 
depth  of  the  mucosa  in  a  straight  line,  penetrate  the  muscularis 
mucosae,  and  connect  with  collecting  veins,  the  venous  counterpart 
of  distributing  arteries  in  the  submucosa.  Existence  of  arteriovenous 
anatomatic  channels  measuring  from  20-40u  in  size  are  demonstrated  for 
the  first  time  between  the  arteries  and  veins  of  the  submucosal  plexuses 
of  the  rat  stomach. 

To  study  gastric  microvascular  changes,  rats  were  subjected  to 
rotational  stress  at  60rpm  for  varying  periods  (Hase  ti  Scarborough, 
1971).  Their  gastric  microvasculature  was  studied  either  by  in  vivo 
India  ink  injection  or  postmortem  silicone  rubber  perfusion.  Gastric 
mucosa  from  30  minute-stressed  rats  shows  generalized  ischemia. 

Gastric  mucosa  from  2-hour  rats,  on  the  other  hand,  show  focal ization 
of  ischemic  and  well-circulated  areas.  In  ischemic  foci,  the  entire 
thickness  of  the  mucosa  above  the  level  of  connecting  arterioles 
shows  filling  defects  by  the  silicone  rubber  perfusion,  suggesting 
the  connecting  arterioles  as  the  blockage  site  of  mucosal  circulation. 
Signs  of  microvascular  breakage  begin  appearing  in  ischemic  mucosal 
foci  at  this  stage. 

Once  lesions  appear,  the  mucosal  microcirculatory  pattern 
seems  to  become  increasingly  irregular.  In  stomachs  of  4  and  6 
hour-stressed  rats,  small  lesions  lie  in  relatively  ischemic  areas 
and  are  accompanied  by  little  hemorrhage;  whereas,  large  lesions  are 
surrounded  by  an  engorged  mucosa  and  are  associated  with  severe  hemor¬ 
rhage.  It  is  possible  that,  with  the  initiation  of  mucosal  lesions, 
various  vasoactive  substances  are  liberated  (Guth  5  Kozbir  1968) , 
which,  in  turn,  affect  the  local  circulatory  pattern. 


1007 


In  conclusion,  mucosal  mici  vascular  changes  in  the  development 
of  stress  ulcer  are  as  follows: 

1.  Gastric  mucosa  of  rats  in  the  acute  stress  initially  show 
generalized  ischemia,  which  become  increasingly  focal  and  irregular 
in  later  periods. 

2.  Mucosal  ischemia  in  stress  seems  to  occur  as  the  result  of 
microcirculatory  blockage  at  the  level  of  connecting  arterioles.  It 
is  most  likely  caused  by  contraction  of  connecting  arterioles  under 
influence  of  the  sympathetic  nerve. 

3.  Focalization  of  mucosal  ischemia  with  consequent  intermingling 
of  ischemic  and  well-circulated  areas  appears  to  be  important  for  the 
development  of  stress  ulcer.  In  the  presence  of  prolonged  ischemia, 
surface  regions  of  the  gastric  mucosa  are  particularly  vulnerable  to 
hypoxic  change,  because  the  surface  mucosa  lies  at  the  venous  end  of 
the  mucosal  capillary  flow.  Protective  capacities  of  mucus  and  surface 
epithelium  may  also  be  altered  in  the  ischemic  areas  so  as  to  allow 
the  areas  vulnerable  to  erosive  action  of  gastric  juice  secreted  from 
adjacent  mucosa.  Focalization  of  different  circulated  areas  in  the 
gastric  mucosae  in  the  later  periods  of  stress  is  thought  to  occur  as 
the  result  of  increasingly  disharmonious  control  of  the  gastric 
functions  by  the  automonic  nervous  system. 


IV.  EFFECT  OF  VINCRISTINE  SULFATE  ON  TUB  SMALL  INTESTINE 


The  use  of  vincristine  in  cancer  therapy  is  often  associated  with 
neuropathy  and  in  certain  cases  is  complicated  by  severe  gastrointes¬ 
tinal  symptoms  followed  by  acute  peritonitis  (Kingry  et  al  1973). 

This  investigation  was  planned  to  determine  the  effect  of  vin¬ 
cristine  solely  on  the  intestine,  without  possible  synergistic  effect 
of  other  therapeutics.  Vincristine  sulfate  (Oncovin  R,  Eli  Lilly  5 
Co.,  Indianapolis,  Ind.)  was  given  to  Walter  Reed  guinea  pigs  according 
to  the  schedule  listed  below: 


Experiment  # 

#  of  Animals 
''Exper) 

Dose 

#  of  Animals 
(Control) 

Method  of 
Administration 

I  Group  1 

10 

250  yg/kg/day 

2 

Intraperitoneally 

Group  2 

10 

100  " 

2 

II 

Group  3 

10 

50  " 

2 

11 

Group  4 

10 

25  " 

2 

II 

Group  5 

10 

10  " 

2 

II 

II 

14 

200  yg/ animal/once  5 

Intravenously 

III 

16 

2000  yg/animal/once4 

Intraperitoneally 

IV 

5 

50  yg/kg/weekly/  1 

ir 

12  weeks 

Samples  from  ileum,  cecum  and  colon  were  fixed  in  10%  buffered 
formalin  and  processed  for  routine  histology.  Samples  from  the  muscular 
coats  of  the  ileum,  fixed  overnight  in  10%  buffered  formalin,  were  proces¬ 
sed  for  the  demonstration  of  alkaline  phosphatase  in  the  Auerbach  plexus. 
Samples  from  the  ileum  were  processed  for  the  demonstration  of  catechola¬ 
mines  by  the  Falk  Hilliarp  technique  (J.  Histochem.  Cytochem.  10:  348, 

1962) . 

The  results  of  acute  experiments  showed  that:  a)  Vi.'.cristine  is 
highly  toxic  for  the  guinea  pig  producing  a  rapid  loss  of  weight,  hign 
mortality  rate  (Fig.  19).  b)  Vincristine  produces  severe  atrophy  of 
the  mucosa  (Fig.  20  §  21),  due  to  mitotic  arrest  in  metaphase,  which 
subsequently  leads  to  ulcerations,  c)  Vincristine  produces  morphologic 
and  enzymatic  changes  in  the  Auerbach  plexus  (Fig.  22)  .  d)  Vincristine 
produces  marked  loss  of  catecholamine  fluorescence  (Fig.  23). 


1010 


In  the  chronic  experiment,  mucosal  and  neural  changes  were  present, 
but  to  a  much  slighter  degree  than  in  the  acute  experiments. 

In  conclusion,  vincristine  appears  to  have  a  two-fold  effect  on 
the  bowel;  it  may  produce  ulcerations  due  to  progressive  mucosal 
atrophy  resulting  from  arresting  mitosis  of  mucosal  Cells  and  it  may 
interfere  with  gut  motility  and  blood  flow  through  neuronal  impairment. 
Changes  observed  may  explain  gastrointestinal  compilations,  such  as 
perforations  and  adynamic  ileus,  observed  occasionally  in  cancer 
patients  during  vincristine  therapy. 


1011 


22  Control 


23  -  Catecholamines,  fluorescence 


1014 


/.  STUDIES  ON  KIDNEY  PATHOLOGY 


Obstructive  nephropathy  is  a  frequent  complication  arising  from 
partial  or  complete  occlusion  of  the  urinary  tract.  Occlusion  may 
occur  in  any  portion  of  the  urinary  tract  and  may  result  from  dif¬ 
ferent  causes.  The  occlusion  may  result  in  progressive  destruction 
of  the  kidney.  The  pathogenesis  of  the  renal  changes  are  currently 
incompletely  understood  and  adequate  clinical  and  morphological 
criteria  with  which  to  recognize  the  extent  of  renal  damage  are  not 
available. 

The  present  study  was  initiated  to  relate  the  physiological 
changes  of  acute  ureteral  obstruction  in  the  rabbit  with  morphological 
alterations  seen  by  light  and  electron  microscopy  as  well  as  the 
changes  in  cellular  enzyme  activity  studied  by  histochemistry .  Par¬ 
ticular  emphasis  has  been  placed  on  the  changes  which  occur  within 
the  renal  interstitium  because  they  are  related  to  the  subsequent 
fibrosis  and  tubular  atrophy  which  leads  to  irreversible  loss  of  renal 
function. 

Complete  unilateral  ureteral  obstruction  was  produced  in  male 
New  Zealand  white  rabbits  by  tying  a  suture  around  the  right  ureter 
just  above  the  ureteroves Lcle  junction. 

The  function  of  each  kidney  was  separately  examined  on  days  1,4, 
7,16  and  32  ;  fter  ligatioi  of  one  ureter  as  well  as  in  two  normal 
animals.  Water  was  removed  20  hours  before  the  tests  of  renal  func¬ 
tion  were  conducted. 

Each  ureter  was  cath Jterized  and  separate  urine  collections  were 
begun.  A  constant  perfusion  solution  of  50%  glucose  and  0.5uCi  of 
125i  Iothalamate  and  Pitressin  was  administered  intravenously.  Urine 
samples  were  collected  from  each  ureter  at  10  minute  intervals  and 
their  volumes  were  accurately  determined.  Blood  samples  were  obtained 
by  cardiac  puncture.  The  radioactivity  of  blood  and  urine  Iothalamate 
was  determined  by  gamma  counting.  The  osmolarity  of  urine  and  serum 
were  determined  on  an  Advanced  Osmometer.  Urine  and  serum  glucose 
levels  were  determined  with  an  autoanalyzer  by  the  fcrrocyanide 
method.  From  this  data,  the  Iothalamate  clearance  (GFR) ,  osmolar 
clearance  (Cosm) ,  net  free  water  reabsorption  (TCH2O)  and  glucose 
reabsorption  (Tmglucose)  were  calculated. 

Morphological  studies  were  performed  on  all  animals  which  included 
control  and  animals  obstructed  1  and  4  days.  Fixation,  except  in  those 
animals  used  for  histochemical  stady,  was  by  in  vivo  perfusion  of  one- 
half  strength  Karnovsky's  solution.  Thin,  1  mm,  sagital  sections  were 
further  fixed  and  processed  for  EM. 


1015 


Histochemical  Studies:  For  histochemistry ,  control  and  animals 
obstructed  1  and  4  days  were  killed.  Histochemical  reactions  were 
performed  on  frozen  sections  to  demonstrate  the  activity  of  a  number 
of  enzymes  and  the  presence  of  fat  (Table  3).  Each  level  of  the  nephron 
was  graded  semiquantitatively  from  0  (no  reaction)  to  4+  (prominent, 
reaction)  by  two  separate  investigators 

Results:  The  glomerular  filtration  rate  (GFR)  was  reduced  in 
the  obstructed  kidney  to  approximately  50%  of  the  contralateral 
kidney  GFR  within  24  hours  of  the  obstruction  (P<0.005).  By  the 
fourth  day  the  GFR  was  less  than  2  mg/min  or  about  30%  of  the  contra¬ 
lateral  GFR  (P<0.001). 

Proximal  tubule  function  measured  as  capacity  for  tubular  re¬ 
absorption  of  glucose  fell  from  a  mean  of  48mg/min  to  30mg/min  after 
24  hours  and  to  less  than  lOmg/min  after  4  days  of  obstruction. 

When  these  values  are  corrected  for  GFR,  there  was  no  fall  in  Tm 
glucose  until  the  7th  day  and  15th  day  after  obstruction.  The  ob¬ 
structed  kidney  lost  the  ability  to  concentrate  urine  within  the 
first  24  hours  (P<0 .001) .  By  light  microscopy,  the  glomeruli  were 
observed  to  be  congested  on  day  1,  but  otherwise  normal. 

In  the  proximal  convoluted  tubules  at  1  day,  EM  revealed  col¬ 
lapsed  lumina  and  an  inta:t  brush  border  except  focal ly  where  swollen 
apical  blebs  of  cytoplasm  protruded  into  the  lumen.  The  apical  cyto¬ 
plasm  showed  a  decrease  in  tubular  invaginations  and  vesicles  and 
numerous  large  membrane-limited  bodies,  as  well  as  scattered  electron 
dense  tiioules.  Mitochondria  were  rounded  and  many  had  lost  their 
vertical  orientation  to  the  basement  membrane  (Fig.  24  5  25).  On  the 
fourth  day  these  changes  were  more  prominent  and  there  was  thinning 
and  focal  loss  of  the  brush  border. 

Descending  thick  segments  at  day  1  had  patent  lumina,  intact 
brush  borders,  although  there  was  extensive  vacuolation  of  the  cytoplasm. 
By  the  4th  day,  the  cells  revealed  numerous  membrane-limited  bodies, 
thinning  of  the  surface  microvilli,  and  loss  of  basal  interdigitation 
(Fig.  26).  The  thin  limb  revealed  no  significant  changes  at  day  1 
or  4  except  near  the  tip  of  the  papilla  where,  at  day  4,  there  was 
obvious  necrosis.  Occasionally,  their  epithelium  contained  numerous 
lipid  droplets  (Fig.  27). 

Ascending  thick  segment  revealed,  at  day  1,  slight  swelling  of 
mitochondria,  markedly  decreased  basilar  interdigitation,  basal 
lipid  droplets,  and  increased  rough  ER,  The  lumen  contained  an 
occasional  protein  cast.  These  changes  wore  more  prominent  at  four 
days  (Fig.  28). 


1016 


Distal  convoluted  tubules  at  days  1  and  4  were  dilated  and,  in 
some,  the  epithelium  appeared  flattened. 

Collecting  ducts  were  dilated  throughout  their  course  after  1 
day  of  obstruction  and,  in  the  medullary  rays  and  cortex,  they  were 
lined  by  a  flattened  epithelium  (Fig.  24  5  29),  with  widening  of 
the  intercellular  space  which  was  often  invaded  by  mononuclear 
cells.  The  junctional  complexes  at  the  cell  surfaces  were  intact. 

At  the  tip  of  the  papilla,  the  transitional  epithelium  was 
intact  but  there  was  necrosis  of  the  underlying  cells  lining  the 
collecting  ducts  (Fig.  30). 

Cortical  collectir^  ducts  at  4  days  remained  widely  dilated 
and  contained  an  occasional  cell  (Fig.  31).  At  the  papillary  tip, 
there  was  more  extensive  necrosis  of  the  tubular  epithelium. 

The  interstitial  space  was  enlarged  after  1  day  of  obstruction, 
particularly  near  the  collecting  ducts  (Fig.  24).  The  interstitial 
spaces  contained  three  main  cell  types:  altered  interstitial  fibro¬ 
blasts,  occasional  mononuclear  cells,  and  extravasated  red  blood 
cells.  In  addition,  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  were  seen  marginated 
within  the  capillaries.  The  interstitial  fibroblasts  were  very  en¬ 
larged.  Their  processes  often  were  wrapped  around  smaller  mono¬ 
nuclear  cells. 

At  the  4th  day  of  obstruction,  the  interstitial  space  was  further 
enlarged  (Fig.  32).  The  cortical  fibroblasts  were  further  enlarged 
with  increased  rough-surfaced  endoplasmic  reticulum,  dilated  cisternae 
containing  electron  dense  material  and  prominent  Golgi  apparatus 
(Fig.  32  &  33) .  The  interstitium  contained  many  more  mononuclear 
cells  than  previously.  The  ground  substance  of  the  cortex  contained 
an  increased  amount  of  finely  flocculent  electron  dense  material 
(Fig.  34). 

rhere  was  variable  congestion  of  the  glomerular  and  peritubular 
capillaries.  The  capillaries  within  the  outer  medulla  wore  consitently 
congested  and  occasional  small  microthrombi  containing  fused  platelet 
aggregates  were  seen  within  the  inner  medulla  (Fig.  35).  • 

At  the  4th  day  also,  the  larger  veins  were  dilated.  Not  infre¬ 
quently,  polymorphonuclear  leukocytes  were  marginated  along  the 
capillary  endothelium. 


1017 


The  distribution  of  enzyme  activity  in  normal  rabbit  kidneys  is 
seen  on  Table  III.  Table  IV  shows  the  major  changes  in  these  acti¬ 
vities  occurring  with  obstruction  of  the  ureter. 

Discussion 

Few  previous  studies  on  the  effects  of  ureteral  obstruction 
have  attempted  to  correlate  physiological  and  morphological  data. 

Much  of  what  is  known  physiologically  concerning  the  effects  of 
obstruction  in  the  kidney  deals  with  the  very  acute  changes,  while 
most  pathologists  are  familiar  only  with  the  effects  of  chronic 
obstruction. 

These  studies  have  revealed  no  anatomic  lesion  in  the  vessels 
or  glomeruli  which  could  explain  the  reduction  in  glomerular  fil¬ 
tration  observed.  Although  the  majority  of  proximal  tubules  appeared 
after  in  vivo  perfusion  to  be  abnormally  collapsed,  this  may  reflect 
decreased  filtered  load.  A  second  factor  in  the  reduction  of 
glomerular  filtration  could  be  decreased  net  filtration  pressure. 

Ultrastructural  and  histochemical  changes  in  the  proximal 
tubule  were  seen  to  coincide  with  functional  changes  related  to 
Tmglucose. 


The  loss  of  concentrating  ability  following  acute  ureteral 
obstruction  as  seen  in  this  study  has  also  been  observed  in  man, 
dog  and  rat.  The  present  study  raises  a  number  of  questions. 

First,  there  seems  to  be  decreased  GFR  and,  therefore,  in  the 
nephrons,  a  decreased  osmotic  load  is  delivered  to  the  distal 
nephron  which  would  expect  to  interfere  with  the  maintenance  of 
the  tissue  osmotic  level.1  Secondly,  the  ascending  thick  segment 
of  the  nephron,  where  sodium  ion  is  actively  pumped  from  the  nephron 
into  the  interstitium,  is  deranged  suggesting  a  decreased  transport 
of  sodium  ion  into  the  interstitium.  The  finding  of  coagulation 
necrosis  at  the  papillary  tip,  where  the  maximal  tubular  tissue 
osmotic  gradient  usually  exists,  and  occasional  microthrombi  within 
the  vasa  recta  support  the  idea  that  medullary  perfusion  is  deranged. 
Further  studies  are  needed  to  ascertain  to  what  extent  each  of  these 
lesions  contributes  to  loss  of  renal  concentration. 

Changes  in  cellular  metabolism  might  be  expected  in  view  of  the 
functional  and  morphological  changes  observed  in  the  early  phases 
of  acute  ureteral  obstruction  and  of  the  striking  changes  in  the 
activity  of  various  enzymes  within  the  cells,  which  correlated 
with  morphologic  changes.  Increased  activity  of  acid  phosphatase 
in  the  proximal  tubule  reflected  increased  prominence  of  the  mem¬ 
brane-bound  lysosomes  and  the  decreased  reaction  of  alkaline  phos¬ 
phatase  in  the  proximal  tubules  and  pars  recta  reflected  the  loss 
of  the  brush  border  and  decreased  glucose  reabsorption.  A  small 
population  of  proximal  tubules  retaining  strong  alkaline  phosphatase 
reaction  even  on  the  4th  day  of  obstruction  could  be  correlated  with 
the  occasional  normal  tubule  that  was  seen  by  electron  microscopy. 

It  is  clear  from  these  studies  that  acute  ureteral  obstruction 
leads  to  a  complex  series  of  events  which  affects  virtually  all 
segments  of  the  nephron.  This  is  reflected  in  biochemical  and  mor¬ 
phologic  alterations  of  the  component  parts  of  the  nephron  which 
ultimately  are  reflected  in  deranged  function.  The  extent  to  which 
these  early  changes  are  reversible  is  not  known  and  will  require 
further  study.  The  implication  of  the  work,  however,  is  that  complete 
ureteral  obstruction  leads  to  considerable  damage  to  the  mammalian 
kidney  even  in  the  early  stages. 


TABLE  III 

NORMAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  ENZYME  ACTIVITY  IN  RABBIT  NEPHRON 


TJ 

O 

♦-» 

TJ 

3 

CD 

o 

*-> 

O 

■H 

CD 

3 

o 

> 

c 

o 

£ 

£ 

O 

> 

3 

Q 

u 

&o 

c 

OO 

— <  CD 

C  -M 

•i 

00  4-J 

o 

C 

•H  C 

G  C 

CJ  ID 

•H 

<TJ  «-H 

"O  CD 

•H  O 

4-J 

E  3 

K-i 

C  E 

O  bo 

U  id 

c 

1  & 

<D  <D 

— <  *3 

U 

<D 

iH 

O  H 

00  CO 

■H 

U  CO 

on  H 

•-H 

£ 

i) 

a 

£ 

</> 

< 

b 

o 

u 

Acid  Phosphatase 

i-3 

3-4 

— r~ 

1-2 

1-2 

- 2 

Alkaline  Phosphatase 

4 

4 

0 

0 

0 

0 

ATPase 

2-4 

2-3 

0 

2-3 

0 

Glucose-6-Phosphatase 

4 

3 

0 

0 

0 

0 

Succinic  Dehydrogenase 

3-4 

3-4 

0 

3 

1-4 

0 

Monamine  Oxidase 

3 

3 

0 

1-3 

1-2 

0 

Leucine  Amino- 

2-4 

2-4 

0 

0-1 

0 

0 

peptidase 

DPNH  Dehydrogenase 

4 

4 

2 

4 

4 

3 

TPNH  Dehydrogenase 

4 

4 

1-2 

3-4 

1 

3 

Alpha-Glycero 

0 

3-4 

1 

3 

0 

3-4 

Phosphate  Dehy. 

Glutamic  Dehy. 

2 

2 

0-2 

1-2 

2 

1-3 

Glucose-6-P. -Dehy. 

1 

2-3 

0 

0-2 

2-3 

1 

Beta-Hydroxy 

1 

.3 

0-1 

4 

4 

3 

Butyric  Dehy. 

Oil  Red  0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

(> 

0 

Enzyme  Activity  Graded 

from  0 

(no  activity) 

to  4  + 

(intense 

react i on) . 

1020 


TABLE  IV 

CHANGES  IN  ENZYME  ACTIVITY  WITH  OBSTRUCTIVE  NEPHROPATHY 


o 


o 

> 

c 

o 

u 

— <  V 
nj  i— i 

e  3 

3* 

O  t— 

u 

Du 

1  4 


•h  <y  tj 

£  2  —  3 

z  £  > 

G  +>  JQ  OO  W  o  C 

3  S  t  .5  g  5  *  -5 

j  -si  5 

o  o  c  o  o  2  3  JU 

-h  u  tn  <*  p-  ^ 

o  e  <  s  £ 

J _ 4  14  14 _ 14  14  14 

4  44  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 

4  44  -  -  4  -  -  -  -  -  - 

*  4  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  -  - 


1  44 


Acid  Phosphatase  t  t 

Alkaline  Phosphatase  4  44 

ATPase  t  44 

Glucose-6-  -  4 

Phosphatase 

Succinic  Dehydrogenase  4  4 

Monaraine  Oxidase 


Leucine  Amino- 
peptidase 

DPNH  Dehydrogenase 

TPNH  Dehydrogenase 

Alpha-Glycero 
Phosphate  Dehy. 

Glutamic  Dehy. 

Glucose-6- P . -Dehy. 


4  4 

-  4 
4  4 
4  44 


Beta-Hydroxy 
Butyric  Dehy. 

Oil  Red  0 


H 


Arrows  indicate  areas  in  nephron  with  significant  change  in  enzyme  activ.ty. 
4=1+  decrease,  44=  2+  decrease,  a  dash  indicates  no  significant  change. 
Each  segment  of  the  nephron  is  graded  for  each  enzyme  on  days  1  and  4. 


1021 


Glomerulus 


'r-yfi' 


U-+: 


■  p*;M 


s*.  Li 


-V 


t* 


!**-. 


^  * 


?•  *£h. 


9 


fig.  «-Rcnal  cortex  after  1  day.  Note  collapse  of  some  proximal  tubules,  lined  with 
finely  vacuolated  cells.  A  cast  is  seen  in  distal  tubule.  Note  increase  in  interstitium 
around  collecting  ducts  which  have  dilated  lumina.  Toluidinc  blue  X^O 
biK.^-l'roximal  convoluted  tubule  with  occluded  lumen.  Note  rounded ‘mi  tochondria  (arrows, 
enlarged  lysosomes  (1.1,  decreased  apical  tubular  invaginations  and  vesicles,  and  loss  of 
basal  i  nterdigi tat i on  and  of  mitochondrial  orientation.  Xb200. 


Hig.  55-Lapillarv  from  inner  medulla 
red  cells  and  adherent  10  the  endoth.' 


Fig.26-Descending  thick  segment  after  4  days.  Note  thin  microvilli,  dilated  lvsosomes 
and  loss  of  basal  interdigitation.  X2900. 

Fig.  27-Thin  limb  after  4  days.  Note  lipid  droplets  (arrows! .  X3400. 

Fig.  28-Thick  ascendinp  segment  after  4  days.  Mitochondria  appear  rounded.  X3300 . 


jw./' 

v  iHH 

Fig.  29-Cortex  after  4  days.  Note  dilated  collecting  duct  (C.D.).  Mononuclear  cell  (M) 


and  interstitial  cells  (arrows)  are  present  in  enlarged  intersti tium.  X2100. 


4U 


X  *  i 

*■»-  '  T 


’  >•.'  'BIS*., 


«"/-?.•  .  ‘«L  vr  V>*.i.v.r  ^  «  \i'  v*-vi' 

■  -  <  ;  *  .  •  •••  ■AJ'Jx&t'ib* *. .  ..,S&v-  .'  >  v* . 

c;fiS31xS“0e0Ctlng  ^  3fter  4  dayS'  Intercellular  sPaces  (Is)  contain  mononuclear 

SiJss'Lr^r-;-  "oto  «**«». 

cytic  cell  characterized  by  clumped  h^erochJo^t  n  i  'T*?0"-  Hott™ .ccl1  is  a 
but  few  organelles,  X20,200.  nc^  °yt0P^asm  W1th  ribosomal  rosettes 


lys.  Stimulated  interstitial  cells 
Note  the  nuclear  chromatin  and  the 


"J 

3 

J  ■  '  r 

B.  Smooth  Muscle  Characteristics  in  Renal  Interstitial  Cells 


The  classic  view  that,  with  fibrosis,  contraction  resulted 
from  the  shortening  of  collagen  was  seriously  questioned  when  it  was 
shown  that  wounds  in  scorbutic  animals  could  contract  independently 
of  collagen  formation.  Recently,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  fibro¬ 
blasts  within  healing  wounds  developed  cytoplasmic  filaments  and  dense 
plaques  similar  to  those  characteristic  of  smooth  muscle  and  also 
developed  antigens  which  cross-reacted  with  anti-smooth  muscle  antibody 
by  immunofluorescence  study. 

In  our  previous  studies,  the  renal  interstitial  cells  have 
been  shown  at  EM  levels  to  resemble  inactive  fibroblasts  connected 
through  a  series  of  junctions.  The  present  study  was  undertaken  to 
follow,  by  f'uorescent.  antibody  and  electron  microscopy,  the  changes 
which  occur  m  these  cells  following  complete  unilateral  ureteral 
obstruction. 

Our  model  of  complete  unilateral  ureteral  obstruction  in  rabbits 
was  used.  Specimens  from  kidneys  of  control  rabbits  and  of  rabbits 
obstructed  24  hours  and  4,7,16,  and  32  days  were  quenched  at  -160°C 
for  antibody  immunofluorescence  study  or  they  were  processed  for 
electron  microscopy  by  standard  technique. 

Cryostat  sections  of  fresh  frozen  kidneys  were  covered  with 
human  sera  containing  anti-smooth  muscle  antibody  (HASA)  and  reacted 
for  45  minutes  at  room  temperature.  The  sections  were  then  washed 
3  times  with  phosphate  buffered  saline  (PBS),  pH  7.2,  and  then  reacted 
with  fluorescein- labelled  goat  anti -human  gamma  globulin.  The  fluores¬ 
cein  labelling  of  the  interstitial  cells  of  both  the  cortex  and  medulla 
were  graded  from  0  (no  reaction)  to  4+  (cytoplasm  with  diffuse  positive 
fluorescence) . 

The  antisera  used  for  immunofluorescent  characterization  was 
obtained  from  patients  with  chronic  activie  hepatitis.  These  anti¬ 
sera  have  been  shown  to  have  specific  activity  for  smooth,  but  not 
skeletal  or  cardiac  muscle  in  humans,  rabbits  and  rats.  Smooth  muscle 
areas  tested  were:  rat  stomach,  human  myometrium  and  rat,  rabbit, 
and  human  vascular  smooth  muscle.  Ultrastructural  localization  of  the 
tissue  antigen  by  use  of  the  peroxidase  labelling  technique  indicated 
that  antibody  binds  to  the  filamentous  bundles  within  the  smooth 
muscle  cell  cytoplasm. 


1028 


The  results  of  the  reaction  of  the  fluorescein- label  led  anti- 
smooth  muscle  antibody  with  the  interstitial  cells  are  summari  ^ed 
in  Table  V.  Following  8  days  of  obstruction,  there  was  a  marked 
increase  of  the  labelling  of  the  cortical  and  medullary  interstitial 
cells  (1-3+) .  By  the  16th  day  and  the  32nd  day,  the  long  cytoplasmic 
processes  of  the  interstitial  cells  were  intensely  labelled  (3-4+) 
(Fig.  36-37). 

At  the  EM  level,  the  control  interstitial  cells  appeared  as 
inactive  fibroblasts  having  a  Golgi  apparatus  in  the  perinuclear 
region,  a  scant  amount  of  rough-surfaced  endoplasmic  reticulum,  and 
long  cytoplasmic  processes  (Fig.  38).  The  cytoplasmic  processes 
occasionally  contained  filamentous  bundles  just  beneath  the  plasma 
membrane  and  the  processes  of  neighboring  cells  were  closely  related 
and  separated  by  a  constant  gap. 

By  the  7th  day  of  obstruction,  the  interstitial  space  was 
enlarged  and  contained  numerous  interstitial  fibroblasts.  The  fibro¬ 
blasts  appearing  in  the  cortex  and  outer  medulla  had  a  central, 
oblong  nucleus  and  numerous  long  stellate  cytoplasmic  processes. 
Ultras tructurally,  the  cells  had  prominent  nucleoli,  well -developed 
Golgi  apparatus,  and  greatly  increased  rough-surfaced  endoplasmic 
reticulum.  The  most  interesting  change  was  the  presence  of  numerous 
filaments  and  dense  plaques  seen  at  the  periphery  of  the  cells  and 
particularly  in  the  cytoplasmic  processes. 

By  the  16th  day  of  obstruction,  the  fibroblasts  were  more 
r imerous  in  both  the  cortex  and  medulla,  the  evidence  of  diffuse 
fuchsinophilic  fiberswas  clearly  present.  The  cells  in  the  cortex 
revealed  elongated  processes  which  frequently  made  close  contact  with 
similar  processes  from  neighboring  cells  (Fig.  39).  Processes  were 
separated  by  250-300*A  gaps.  The  peripheral  cytoplasm  of  these 
fibroblasts  had  a  striking  increase  in  the  number  of  filaments 
measuring  approximately  55-70A  in  diameter.  These  filaments  were 
arranged  in  a  parallel  fashion  and  were  inserted  intc  dense  plaques 
similar  in  appearance  to  those  characteristic  of  smooth  muscle  (Fig. 
40).  The  perinuclear  areas  revealed  a  prominent  Golgi  apparatus. 

The  rough -surfaced  endoplasmic  reticulum  was  greatly  increased. 

The  medullary  fibroblasts  revealed  similar,  though  less  dramatic 
changes  •. 

By  the  32nd  day  of  obstruction,  the  interstitial  fibroblasts 
were  separated  by  increased  amounts  of  collagen.  Long  cytoplasmic 
processes  could  be  seen  coursing  through  the  group  of  collagen  fibers 
and  surrounding  the  duplicated  basement  lamina  of  the  atrophic  tubule 
The  peripheral  filaments  were  present,  but  were  less  prominent  than 
those  seen  at  16  days.  There  were  numerous,  coated  vesicles  in  the 
cytoplasm  and  several  fibroblasts  were  seen  to  contain  myelin  figures 


1029 


The  present  work  indicates  that  the  interstitial  cells  of  the 
kidney  are  similar  to  fibroblasts  seen  in  granulation  tissue  in  that 
they  have  the  capacity  to  synthesize  numerous  cytoplasmic  filaments 
and  to  develop  an  antigen  or  antigens  which  cross-react  with  antibody 
specific  for  smooth  muscle. 

The  filaments  and  the  antigen  are  most  likely  related.  The 
filaments  measure  60-75°A  and  are  similar  in  morphologic  appearance 
to  actin  seen  in  smooth  muscle  and  correspond  to  the  filaments  des¬ 
cribed  in  activated  fibroblasts  of  healing  wounds.  Three  types  of 
filaments  occurring  in  3T3  fibroblasts  grown  in  confluent  cultures 
have  been  described:  (1)  Alpha  filaments  measuring  60-80°A  in  diameter 
arranged  in  parallel  bundles  within  the  ectoplasm  and  associated  with 
dense  regions  (2)  Beta  filaments  which  are  100°A  in  diameter  and  tend 
to  form  loose  fascicles  within  both  the  ectoplasm  and  endoplasm  (3)Micro- 
tubules,  250A  in  diameter  present  throughout  the  cytoplasm.  The  fila¬ 
ments  seen  in  the  renal  interstitial  cells  appear  to  correspond  to  the 
60-80°A  alpha  filaments  of  McNutt. 

Several  important  factors  have  been  ascribed  to  these  filaments 
such  as  control  of  cytoplasmic  viscosity;  participation  in  contractile 
mechanism  and  participation  in  cell-to-cell  contacts.  These  filaments 
have  been  observed  in  certain  non-muscle  cells  to  bind  heavy  meroir./cin 
to  form  arrowhead  complexes  suggesting  a  relationship  to  the  F-actin 
of  muscle  cells . 

The  smooth  muscle  antibodies  which  develop  in  human  patients 
suffering  chronic  active  hepatitis  have  been  shown  to  react  with  a 
variety  of  vascular  and  visceral  smooth  muscle.  The  exact  nature  of 
the  antibodies  is  not  known;  when  labelled  with  peroxidase, they  have 
been  shown  to  bind  to  the  filaments  of  smooth  muscle  and  thrombo- 
sthenin  derived  from  platelets.  It  is  becoming  clear  that  these 
filaments  are  an  actin-like  protein  and  with  proper  fixation  have 
been  seen  in  a  variety  of  non-muscular  cells.  It  is  of  interest  that 
a  low  level  of  antibody  binding  to  normal  renal  interstitial  cells 
occurs  and  careful  examination  indicates  the  presence  of  the  filaments 
in  the  peripheral  ectoplasm  of  the  normal  resting  interstitial  cells. 

Contacts  between  stimulated  renal  interstitial  cells  are  similar 
to  those  described  in  fibroblasts  of  granulation  tissue.  This  is  a 
requirement  for  an  effective  contractile  system.  Preliminary  work 
from  our  department  has  indicated  that  these  cells  respond  by  con¬ 
traction  when  stimulated  in  vitro  with  serotonin,  angiotensin  II  or 
norepiniphrine .  This  is  similar  to  the  response  recorded  in  granulation 
tissue,  but  may  have  special  significance  in  a  parench/mous  organ  such 
as  the  kidney. 


1030 


Conclusion 


It  is  quite  conceivable  that  stimulated  renal  interstitial  cells 
once  present  could  respond  by  contraction  to  local  concentrations  of 
catecholamines  or  oth^r  vasoactive  substances.  This  could  lead  to 
local  changes  in  .i  icrocirculation,  producing  ischemia,  and  could 
further  potentiate  >n-  injury.  Such  a  pathogenetic  mechanism  may  in 
part  explain  the  slowly  progressive  tubulo-interstitial  damage  observed 
in  kidney  diseases  from  different  causes.  We  have  observed  similar 
cells  containing  numerous  filaments  and  dense  plaques  in  association 
with  degenerating  glomeruli  in  a  variety  of  chronic  human  renal  diseases. 
Therefore,  further  studies  on  stimulated  renal  interstitial  cells  by 
other  parameters  will  provide  additional  information  on  injuries  and 
diseases  of  the  kidney. 


1031 


TABLE  V 


No.  of  Days 
Obstruction 


Number  of 
Animals 


Reactivity  of  Fibroblast 
with  Antismooth  Muscle 


Antibody 


Cortex 


Moduli  a 


0  7 

8  5 

16  4 

32  5 


.93 

(0-1) 

.93 

(0-1) 

2.1 

(1-3) 

2.5 

(1-3) 

2.0 

(2-2) 

3.5 

(3-4) 

2.0 

(1-3) 

3.6 

(3-4) 

*  Fluorescence  due  to  binding  of  labelled  anti-smooth  muscle  antibody- 
graded  from  0  (no  reaction)  to  4+  (high  reactivity) ,  expressed  as  mean 
(range) . 


Fig.  36-Normal  rabbit  cortex  showing  indirect  immunohistochcm; cal  staining  with 
HSMA*.  Antibody  is  bound  to  smooth  muscle  of  interlobular  artery,  afferent  arterioles 
and  mesangium.  Interstitial  cells  are  almost  reactive.  X100. 

Fig.  37-Rabbit  cortex  after  16  days  of  ureteral  obstruction  showing  indirect  immune - 
h i stochemical  staining  with  HASA.  The  antibody  is  bound  to  the  stimulated  interstitial 
cells.  X100. 

Fig.  38-Normal  rabbit  cortical  interstitial  cell.  Note  the  junction  between  cytoplasmic 
processes  of  adjacent  cells  (arrow).  XI 1,000. 


L&'VI  f  i 


Ms*' 


‘  \ ,  - 


>t  t! 


iv"l 


•:  •'-vC',v;^ 
V/; . .  -•  n  .-  ( «* 

>  .>■■  £g'  -  , 

*L\r  ^  '  'JV 


r  '  .  * 

*  '  >  1  4 


*  >  ’  t 


3f' 


^  -rk  > 

. . 


fe# 

§»*%; 

p$.y 

,  ft  ^  ':®|j 

f,._  ^ 


r,f  ■  ■ 


■**»-  -  ’i 


1  .  ^  *  +  t~*i  ^  1  ■ 


'  ■  Oi  ,■>  ■ 

'  “:.'div'^:- 


ifesanfei 


3WHS 


SumiSU'Lfr1  ST“*r  16  ***■  S0,C  l0ns  ■*"«—*  Of  s*  •  fn.il  a  red 
interstitial  cells.  Ihe  cytoplasm  contains  numerous  parallel  filament,  nt  ri  k*i 

i  ote  junction  between  the  processes  of  two  cells.  X2'1  000  a  t)- 

Fife.  40-Peripheral  cytoplasm  of  stimulated  cortical  interstitial  cell.  ,t>  ,* 

days.  Note  numerous  filaments  inserting  in  dense  plaques.  X60.000. 


10.14 


Glomerulonephritis  in  Experimental  African  Trypanosomiasis 


When  infected  with  protozoa,  such  as  malaria  and  babesia, 
mammals,  including  man  and  monkeys,  may  develop  glomerulonephritis. 
These  studies  were  spurred  by  the  findings  that  monkeys  injected 
with  a  trypanosome  strain,  originally  isolated  from  a  patient, 
developed  chemical  and  histologic  evidence  of  renal  failure  and 
glomerulonephritis.  Some  of  these  kidneys  contained  the  morphologic 
changes  similar  to  those  described  in  human  cases  of  membrano- 
proliferative  glomerulonephritis.  This  study  was  undertaken  to  clari¬ 
fy  glomerulonephritis  induced  by  the  trypanosoma  infection  in  the 
monkey. 

Sixteen  rhesus  monkeys  were  each  inoculated  intravenously  with 
10,000  organisms  of  Trypanosoma  rhodesiense  (EATRO  #1886  strain) 
contained  in  0.5ml  of  phosphate-buffered  saline-glucose  (FSG)  solu¬ 
tion.  Control  animals  received  0.5ml  of  PSG  solution  only.  The 
EATRO  #1886  strain  was  isolated  from  a  human  patient  in  Uganda  in 
1971  and  has  since  been  maintained  in  the  laboratory  either  by 
storage  at  -70°C  or  by  passage  in  albino  rats.  Blood  obtained  by 
ear  puncture  from  infected  monkeys  were  examined  5  days  each  week 
to  monitor  paraistemia.  Blood  for  serum  collection  was  taken  from 
the  femoral  veins.  The  sera  were  stored  at  -70°C  until  used. 

Biopsy  wedges  of  renal  cortex  were  taken  under  anesthesia  at 
14,29,  or  30  and  50  days  following  inoculation  of  trypanosomes. 

Fresh  frozen  cryostat  sections  were  processed  for  immunof luores- 
cent  antibody  study.  It  has  been  demonstrated  that  antibodies  to 
human  IgG,  IgA,  IgM,  C4  and  properdin  (Ward  1969)  gives  a  strong 
cross-reaction  to  the  heterologous  monkey  serum  protein, as  shown  by 
double  diffusion  in  gels.  Accordingly,  antibodies  to  the  human  pro¬ 
teins  were  used.  The  only  exception  were  antibodies  to  monkey  C3 
prepared  in  rabbits  as  previously  described.  In  immunofluorescent 
studies,  the  direct  technique  was  used  for  all  proteins  except 
properdin,  with  incubation  of  tissue  sections  with  the  fluorescein- 
labelled  antibody,  followed  by  washing.  In  the  case  of  properdin, 
the  indirect  immunofluorescent  technique  was  employed,  incubating 
tissues  first  with  rabbit  antibody  to  human  properdin  followed  by 
washing  and  incubation  of  the  tissue  with  fluorescein-tagged  sheep 
to  rabbit  IgG  (Ward  6  Conran  1969)  . 

Serum  CH^Q  levels  were  assayed  with  sensitized  sheep  red  cells 
according  to  the  technique  of  Kent  6  Fife.  Complement  components  C3 
and  C4  were  assayed  utilizing  the  cross-reactions  of  antibodies  to 
the  human  components  with  monkey  proteins,  using  the  single  radial 
immunodiffusion  technique  of  Mancini  et^  <y_  as  modified  by  Yount  et^ 
al . 


1035 


Results:  Rhesus  monkeys  infected  with  Trypanosoma  rhodesiense 
develop  a  proliferative  glomerulonephritis  associated  with  deposits 
consisting  of  the  third  component  of  complement  (C3) ,  properdin,  and, 
in  some  cases,  IgM.  A  few  renal  biopsies  contained  IgG  and  C4;  none 
contained  IgA.  The  pattern  of  deposits  as  revealed  by  immunofluorescence 
was  granular.  Sera  from  animals  developing  glomerulonephritis  were 
hypocomplementemic ;  by  radial  immunodiffusion  most  animals  showed 
depression  of  C3  but  not  C4  levels.  These  findings  suggest  that  the 
glomerulonephritis  associated  with  trypanosomal  infections  in  monkeys 
is  related  to  deposition  of  immunological ly  important  serum  proteins, 
two  of  which  represent  reactants  in  the  alternate  complement  pathway. 


1036 


D.  Ilistochemical  Studies  on  Transplant  Kidneys 


During  the  past  2  years,  nephrectomies  and  kidney  biopsies 
have  been  collected  from  52  patients  admitted  to  Walter  Reed  General 
Hospital  for  kidney  transplant,  for  the  purpose  of  investigating 
possible  changes  in  fat  content  and  activity  of  intracellular  enzymes 
of  the  kidney  parenchymal  cells.  Biopsies  were  collected  at  the 
time  of  transplant  and  at  3  months,  1  year  and  2  years  post-surgery. 
They  were  inserted  in  a  slit  made  on  the  surface  of  a  mouse  kidney, 
which  provided  support  and  a  positive  control  for  the  enzymatic 
reactions,  and  quenched  in  isopentane  at  -160°C.  Eight  y  sections, 
cut  in  the  cryostat,  were  stained  for  histologic  study  with  HSE 
and  for  histochemical  investigations  with  PAS,  0R0  and  with  the 
techniques  used  for  the  demonstration  of  the  following  enzymes: 
alkaline  and  acid  phosphatases,  leucine  aminopeptidase,  glucose-6- 
phosphatase,  succinic  dehydrogenase,  DPNH  diaphrase,  beta-hydro- 
xybutyric  and  alpha-glycerophosphate  dehydrogenase. 

In  rejected  kidneys,  there  is  a  severe  loss  of  enzymatic  acti¬ 
vity  which  may  become  evident  shortly  after  transplantation.  The 
correlation  of  histochemical  findings  and  clinical  data  is  currently 
in  progress. 


1037 


Project  3A0621 10A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 
Task  00  Military  Internal  Medicine 

Work  Unit  123  Histopathologic  Manifestations  of  Military  Disease 
and  Injuries 

Literature  Cited. 

Publications : 

1.  Takeuchi,  A.  and  Zeller,  J.A.:  Scanning  electron  microscopic 

observations  on  the  surface  of  the  normal  and  spirochete-infested 
colonic  mucosa  of  the  rhesus  monkey.  J.  Ultrastruc.  Res.  40:  313- 

324,  1972. 

2.  Takeuchi,  A.  and  Zeller,  J.A.:  Ultrastructural  identification 
of  spirochetes  and  flagellated  microbes  at  the  brush  border  of  the 
large  intestinal  epithelium  of  the  rhesus  monkey.  Inf.  $  Imm.  6: 
1008-1018,  1972. 

3.  Davis,  C.P.,  Mulcahy,  D. ,  Takeuchi,  A.  and  Savage,  D.C.: 

Location  and  description  of  spiral -shaped  microorganisms  in  the 
normal  rat  cecum.  Inf.  5  Imm.  6:  184-192,  1972. 

4.  Gemski,  P.,  Takeuchi,  A.,  Washington,  0.,  and  Formal,  S.B.: 
Shigellosis  due  to  Shigella  dysenteriae  1:  Relative  importance  of 
mucosal  invasion  versus  toxin  production  in  pathogenesis.  .1.  Inf. 

Dis.  126:  523-530,  1972. 

5.  Levine,  M.V.,  DuPont,  H.L.,  Formal,  S.B.,  llornick,  R.B., 
Takeuchi,  A.,  Gangarosa,  E.J.,  Snyder,  M.J.  and  Libonati,  J.P.: 
Pathogenesis  of  Shigella  dysenteriae  1  (Shiga)  dysentery.  J.  Inf. 

Dis.  ^27:  261-270,  1973'. 

6.  Keusch,  G.T.,  Grady,  G.F.,  Takeuchi,  A.  and  Sprinz,  H. : 

The  pathogenesis  of  Shigella  diarrhea.  II.  Enterotoxin-induced 
acute  enteritis  in  the  rabbit  ileum.  J.  Inf.  Dis.  126 :  91-95,  1972. 

7.  .Jervis,  H.R.  and  Hobson,  R.W.:  Effect  of  Vincristine  on 
mucosa  and  nerve  plexuses  of  guinea  pig  small  gut.  Fed.  Proc.  32_: 

722,  1973. 

8.  Hase,  T. :  Gastric  mucosa  microvascular  changes  in  the 

pathogenesis  of  stress  ulcer.  Fed.  Proc.  3T-:  322,  1973. 

9.  Jervis,  H.R.,  Sheahan,  D.G.  and  Sprinz,  H.:  Acute  duodenal 

ulcerations  in  the  guinea  pig  due  to  fasting.  Lab.  Inv.  28. :  501- 

513,  1973. 


1038 


10.  Nagle,  R.B.,  Ward,  P.A. ,  Sadun,  E.H.,  Berkaw,  R.E., 

Johnson,  A.'J.,  Duxbury,  R.E.  and  Hildehrandt,  P.K.  :  Glomerulo¬ 
nephritis  in  experimental  trypanosomiasis.  Fed.  Proc .  32 :  827, 

1975. 

11.  Giannella,  R.  ,  Toskes,  P.,  Rout,  R. ,  Jervis,  H.R.  and 

Takeuchi,  A.:  Jejunal  brush  border  (BB)  and  intracellular  injury 
in  the  blind  loop  syndrome  (BLS) :  A  light,  histochemical ,  and 
electron  microscopic  study.  Gastroenterol.  64:  733,  1973. 

12.  Nagle,  R.B.,  Kneiser,  M. ,  and  Berkaw,  R.E.:  Induction  of 

smooth  muscle  characteristics  in  renal  interstitial  fibroblasts  during 
obstructive  uropathy.  Lab.  Inv.  2£:  393,  1972. 

13.  Nagle,  R.B.,  Bulger,  R.E.,  Cutler,  R.E.,  Jervis,  H.R.  and 
Benditt,  E.P.:  Unilateral  obstructive  nephropathy  in  the  rabbit. 

I.  Early  morphologic,  physiologic  and  histochemical  changes.  Lab. 

Inv.  28:  456-457,  1973. 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  MWI  ACCIHW# 

DA  OA  6485 

1.  bate  of  summary* 

72  08  01 

NiFStr  oournsM  trmaoL 
DD-DR*E(AR)6J* 

1  bate  »mv  agamy 

72  07  01 

4.  NINO  OF  SUMMARY 

H.  Term. 

A  SUMMARY  SCTY* 

u 

a.  bora  security* 

u 

1.  RSBRAMNB* 

NA 

|A  Mm  MSTR'N 

NL 

•fc  SPECIFIC  BATA* 
CONTRACTOR  ACC  EM 

GJ  VIS  □  MO 

*.  LEVEL  OF  BUM 

A,  BOOK  UNIT 

IB.  NO. /COOES'* 

RROOftAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORM  UNIT  NUMBER 

A.  MMARV 

62UQA 

3A062 1 1 0A822 

OD 

125  

B.  CONTRIBUTING 

e.  cnflCaCIDOMX 

CDOG  114(f) 

l».  UIMNIIIII  000  orbaniiation 


TTitnrf  BiTi -  - 

!  63  07 

14  klTINATt  0  COMPL I  TlON  0 A fl 

72  08 

IS  FUNCNN0  AOENCV 

DA  | 

is.  performance  meThoo 

C.  In-House 

IT.  CON  TRACT/ ORAN  T 

NA 

K  NUMg-Ri* 

C.  TYPE:  A  AMOUNT; 

IS-  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

M  funds (p.  bmm*n; 

fiscal 

YEAR 

PRECTdTN* - 

72 

2 

45 

?URRIUT - 

73 

2 

45 

1 1  TITLE  (puna  wi»  t*+*1*r  CtM •ttl—ilm  €•*•)* 

(U)  Hematology  of  Nutritional  Deficiencies  of  Military  Importance 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


ADORIU.* 


Washington,  D.C,  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 
MAM  Cl 


Buescner,  COLE.  L. 

telephone:  202  576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considere 


ign 

ii.  keyborm  TaTS  wi»  1*5 ntr  7T5m7I*5773!  c56j 

(U)  Diet;  (U)  Intestine;  (U)  Iron;  (U)  Protein;  (U)  Hemoglobin;  (U)  Vitamin  Bi? 


£ 


SO  PtNFOAMNO  organization 


NAME:* 


I 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
aodac Mi*  Division  of  Medicine 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIQATON  (famfh  %$AH  H  V  I.  AM^MtK  inMIittiUn) 


Conrad,  COL  M  .  E . 


TELEPHONE: 


212-576-3358. 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMIIAr 


ASSOCIATE  INVtiTI  0  ATOM 
NAMBl 
NAMCt 


Toskes ,  MAJ  Phillip  P. 


DA 


t.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  ZA  APPROACH,  21  PAOOAf  U  In+vi4u»l  p*i  J«<f»IIH*B  *r  Mil  mt  mmth  ml*  fmturltr  CwN  j 

23.  (U)  The  nutritional  anemias  are  correctable  diseases  that  are  commonplace  in  geo¬ 
graphic  areas  of  military  importance.  These  diseases  markedly  reduce  the  capability  of 
affected  populations  to  perform  work  or  sustain  a  military  effort  and  remain  self-supporting. 

24.  (U)  Establishment  of  standards  and  standard  methods  for  detection  and  quantification 
of  these  diseases.  Studies  of  th^  nutrient  content  of  various  foodstuffs  and  the  availability 
of  these  nutrients  for  absorption  from  these  foodstuffs  in  normal  subjects  and  in  populations 
where  nutritional  deficiencies  and  chronic  infections  are  commonplace. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  72  08  Collaboration  was  continued  with  ICSH  and  WHO  in  the  development 
of  referee  methods  and  standards  for  the  measurement  of  iron  and  iron-binding  protein. 
Exocrine  pancreatic  secretions  were  shown  to  be  a  factor  in  the  absorption  of  vitamin  B12 

in  humans,  and  &12  absorption  was  found  to  be  a  sensitive  method  of  detecting  pancreatic 
insufficiency,  The  characteristics  of  the  blind  loop  syndrome  were  defined  in  collaboration 
with  the  Department  of  Gastroenterology.  This  work  unit  terminated  as  of  1  Aug  72  because 
of  consolidation  into  another  work  unit.  Studies  to  be  continued  under  Project  No, 
3A061102B71R,  Work  Unit  No.  086.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  Jun  73. 


i 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,:r«1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE,  DD  FORMS  U08A 
And  1401-1.  I  MAR  AS  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1040 


uLi  IrmbMI 


IS.  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OROANItATION 


**  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
iWM.,  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INOIVIOUAL 

N»«tBuescher ,  COL  E,  L. 

T.L.rHct:  202-576-3551 


t».  GENERAL  UtC 


It.  CONTRACT/ORAHT 

1  - - 

It.  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRS 

h.  FUNDS  flll 

a  OA  TEf /EFFECTIVE: 

L.  NUMBER;* 

EXPIRATION: 

FISCAL 

MCCI&IM4 

73 

1, 

.5 

35 

C.  TYPE: 

A  KINO  OF  AWARD: 

d  AMOUNT: 

f.  CUM.  AMT. 

YEAR 

CURRENT 

74 

1 

.5 

35 

RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  YORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  HIKT  uciwaT 

DA  OB  6463 

i.  oat.  e.  auiauun* 

73  07  01 

REPORT  CONTROL  ffWJOL 

DD‘DRkB(AK)636 

l  DATE  PREV  IUM*RY 

72  07  01 

4.  KIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

S.  SUMMARY  ICT V® 

u 

4.  WORK  SECURITY® 

u 

t.  RE8RADIN0* 

NA 

|A  ONm  INSTR'N 

NL 

8*  SPECIFIC  OATA- 

CON tractor  ACCESS 

0  VII  n  NO 

S.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A  VOCE  UMT 

to.  NO  .  CODES:* 

PROGRAM  CLEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A.  PRIMARY 

hinoA 

3A062110A822 

126 

t.  CONTRIWUTINO 

CDOC  UAtO 

(U)  Infectious  Hepatitis 


I*.  SCIENTIFIC  AMO  technological  areas* 


is.  star?  6at* 

69  07 


Biology 


0O3500  Clinical  Medicine 


1«  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  CATC 

CONT 


I*.  FUMOINO  A01MCV 

DA  | 


18.  PERFORMANCE METHOD 

C.  In-House 


•0.  PERFORMING  OHOAMI 1 A  TIOM 


"*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
„  Division  of  Medicine 

IRCSS:* 

Washington,  D.C.  2C012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  fpuffWaft  St  Aft  II  US.  AMEMlc 

Conrad  ,  COL  M  .  E  . 

T«LEPMOM«r  202-576-3358 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  /  CCOUN 
AitOCI  AT  E  INVESTIGATORS 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

i*.  KEYWORDS  (pn*«#4«  tACH  S»t»urlh>  Cm4») 

(U)  Liver  Disease;  (U)  Hepatitis;  (U)  Australia  antigen 


m AM(t  Ginsberg,  MAJ  A.  L. 


DA 


1.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  11  APPROACH,  21.  PROQREIt  fPumlMi  tr*divl4u»l  I4*nlltlm4  ky  mm hm  pracatf*  »•»!  *t  •  •cA  with  JtcuH/y  CI—tIHctlltm  C**») 

23.  (U)  Viral  hepatitis  has  been  a  major  cause  of  morbidity  in  military  populations  and  a 
significant  hazard  in  the  military  blood  program.  Investigations  have  been  undertaken  re¬ 
lated  to  the  etiology,  epidemiology,  and  prevention  of  this  group  of  diseases. 

24.  (U)  Methods  for  the  detection  of  Australia  antigen  and  antibody  were  evaluated. 

Studies  are  in  progress  to  ascertain  if  hyperimmune  gamma  globulin  prevents  transfusional 
hepatitis  B . 

25.  (IJ)  72  07  -  73  06.  Sensitive  methods  for  subtyping  Australia  antigen  and  detecting 
Australia  antibody  were  developed.  Significant  increases  in  the  prevalence  of  both  HBAg 
and  HBAb  were  observed  in  soldiers  following  military  service  and  particularly  after  assign¬ 
ment  in  Asia.  HBAg  was  shown  to  be  a  potential  hazard  in  commercial  laboratory  control 
serum  from  multiple  manufacturers  .  A  study  is  in  progress  among  cardiac  surgery  patients 
who  receive  multiple  transfusions  to  ascertain  if  gamma  globulin  containing  a  high  titer  of 
HBAb  is  useful  in  the  prevention  of  hepatitis  B.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army 
Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  Jun  73. 


Srpl/«bfc  to  contrMclait  upon  orijkittoSt  appro**! 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD, 


:°.:BJ498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  1498A  1  NOV  68 

and  1498-1.  i  mar  «e  ifor  army  u»e>  are  obsolete 


1041 


Project  3A06211OA822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Work  Unit  126,  Infectious  Hepatitis 
Investigators 

Principal:  Marcel  E.  Conrad,  COL,  MC 
Associate:  Allen  L.  Ginsberg,  MAJ,  MC 

Description. 

A  double  blind  study  was  initiated  to  determine  whether  prophylactic  in¬ 
jections  of  gamma  globulin  with  a  high  titer  for  Australia  antibody  (HBAb) 
are  useful  in  the  prevention  of  transfusional  hepatitis.  This  study  is  being 
performed  in  collaboration  with  the  National  Heart  and  Lung  Institute  of 
HEW  and  with  Letterman  General  Hospital. 

New  methods  of  testing  serum  specimens  for  Australia  antigen  (HBAg)  and 
HBAb  were  evaluated  to  ascertain  if  they  were  more  reliable  and  practical 
for  use  in  blood  banks.  These  methods  were  used  to  quantify  the  preva¬ 
lence  of  HBAg  and  HBAb  in  various  troop  populations  and  in  biologic  spec¬ 
imens  . 

Biological  specimens  obtained  in  volunteer  studies  of  infectious  hepatitis 
at  Illinois  State  Penitentiary  in  collaboration  with  Dr.  Joseph  D.  Boggs  of 
Northwestern  University  are  maintained  for  distribution  to  investigators 
attempting  to  isolate  the  etiologic  agent  of  hepatitis ,  develop  antibody  tests 
to  identify  patients  with  the  disease,  and  develop  an  animal  model  of  the 
disease  that  would  obviate  the  need  for  human  studies. 

Results . 

In  1946  Grossman  et  al  reported  that  the  parenteral  administration  of  gam¬ 
ma  globulin  significantly  diminished  the  incidence  of  transfusional  hepa¬ 
titis.  Subsequently  these  data  were  confirmed  by  some  investigators  and 
challenged  by  others.  The  discovery  of  Australia  antigen  (HBAg)  per¬ 
mitted  better  identification  of  patients  with  hepatitis  B  and  differentiation 
of  these  patients  from  those  with  hepatitis  A.  There  is  little  doubt  from  a 
number  of  clinical  studies  that  injections  of  immune  serum  gamma  globulin 
provide  protection  against  the  occurrence  of  hepatitis  A.  Recent  informa¬ 
tion  from  our  laboratory  and  others  suggests  that  serum  gamma  globulin 


1042 


Vvith  a  significant  HBAb  titer  may  prevent  the  occurrence  of  clinical 
HBAg  positive  serum  hepatitis .  These  data  provide  evidence  that  HBAg 
positive  hepatitis  can  be  prevented  by  gamma  globulin  prophylaxis  when 
either  soldiers  are  infected  by  the  nonparenteral  route  or  children  are 
exposed  to  a  small  dose  of  hepatitis  B  .  This  information  does  not  provide 
definitive  information  regarding  the  capability  of  gamma  globulin  to  pre¬ 
vent  transfusional  hepatitis  in  which  the  dose  of  virus  may  be  larger 
than  in  either  the  experimental  studies  or  following  nonparenteral  expo¬ 
sure.  Aliquots  of  the  gamma  globulin  used  in  four  transfusion  studies 
were  obtained;  two  of  these  studies  showed  significant  protection  by 
gamma  globulin  whereas  the  others  did  not.  HBAb  was  titered  in  ali¬ 
quots  of  the  gamma  globulin  used  in  these  four  studies  both  in  our  lab¬ 
oratory  and  in  two  other  laboratories ,  and  no  significant  difference  was 
found  between  the  lots  which  were  protective  and  those  which  were  not. 
These  data  can  be  interpreted  in  several  ways.  Interpretations  include: 
(1)  Australia  antibody  (HBAb)  is  not  the  protective  factor  in  gamma  glob¬ 
ulin,  and  we  should  search  for  ~.iother  antibody  such  as  that  against 
Dane  particles;  (2)  There  was  a  significant  incidence  of  hepatitis  A  in 
the  studies  in  which  a  protective  effect  of  gamma  globulin  was  demon¬ 
strated;  (3)  methods  for  testing  for  HBAb  are  crude  and  of  insufficient 
sensitivity:  (4)  different  methods  of  preparing  gamma  globulin  may  pro¬ 
duce  changes  in  the  antibody  protective  effect  disproportionate  to  in 
vitro  observations;  and  (5)  Different  periods  of  storage  (3  to  10  years) 
and  variable  storage  procedures  (4°C  to  -15°C)  may  sufficiently  alter 
antibody  titers  so  that  the  recent  HBAb  testing  does  not  reflect  the  HBAb 
titers  in  the  gamma  globulin  at  the  time  the  human  studies  were  per¬ 
formed  .  Since  the  available  information  is  inconclusive  regarding  the 
efficacy  of  gamma  globulin  for  the  prophylactic  prevention  of  transfu¬ 
sional  hepatitis ,  we  initiated  a  new  study  to  determine  if  gamma  globulin 
with  a  high  HBAb  titer  provides  protection  against  transfusional  hepa¬ 
titis  in  collaboration  with  the  National  Institutes  of  Health  and  Letterman 
General  Hospital. 

During  recent  years  there  has  been  a  high  incidence  of  hepatitis  among 
patients  hospitalized  at  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center  undergoing 
cardiac  bypass  surgery.  Estimates  of  the  incidence  of  hepatitis  in  this 
group  based  upon  the  detection  of  elevated  transaminase  determinations 
three  months  after  surgery  were  20%  of  patients.  It  was  believed  that 
this  was  caused  by  the  requirement  for  use  of  large  volumes  of  blood  and 
blood  products  from  multiple  donors  in  these  patients  during  surgery. 
Since  August  1972  all  volunteers  who  were  undergoing  cardiac  bypass 
surgery  received  a  10  ml  injection  of  either  high  titer  HBAb  gamma 


1043 


globulin,  conventional  gamma  globulin,  or  an  albumin  placebo  solution. 
These  injections  are  administered  double  blind  under  code.  The  blood  is 
drawn  from  the  volunteers  before  gamma  globulin  injection  weekly  aftei 
surgery  while  the  patient  is  hospitalized,  and  three  and  six  months  after 
surgery.  The  blood  specimen  is  tested  for  HBAg,  HBAb,  SGOT,  SGPT, 
and  serum  bilirubin  determinations.  In  addition,  a  history  is  obtained 
from  each  patient  at  intervals  after  surgery.  All  blood  used  lor  transfu¬ 
sion  is  tested  by  radioirr.n-.une  assay  for  HBAg  and  HBAb.  It  is  estimated 
that  a  minimum  of  300  patients  will  be  required  for  completion  of  the  a- 
bove  study.  The  biologic  materials  used  in  this  study  include  a  high 
titer  HBAb  lot  of  gamma  globulin  prepared  by  the  Massachusetts  State 
Laboratories  and  currently  used  under  NHLI  cortract  in  several  national 
studies;  a  lot  of  gamma  globulin  used  in  60,000  soldiers  in  Korea;  and  a 
placebo  solution  used  in  40,000  J  .  S.  soldiers  in  Korea  without  known 
complications.  All  solutions  have  been  tested  in  accordance  with  USP 
and  FDA  regulations. 

During  FY  73,  86  cardiac  patients  were  included  in  this  study  from 
Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center.  During  March  1973,  Letterman  Gen¬ 
eral  Hospital  became  a  collaborator  in  the  study  and  had  entered  16  pa¬ 
tients  undergoing  cardiac  surgery.  There  have  been  no  known  adverse 
reactions  to  the  administration  of  either  the  gamma  globulin  or  placebo 
solution!  .  At  Walter  Reed  Army  Medical  Center,  one-fourth  of  patients 
have  received  blood  which  is  HBAg  positive  by  radioimmune  assay  but 
negative  by  counterimmunoelectrophoresis  in  vhe  blcod  bank.  A  90% 
followup  at  toree  months  has  been  achie  ed  by  mail  and  telephonic  fol¬ 
lowup;  noncompliance  is  largely  in  children  undergoing  cardiac  sur¬ 
gery.  Presently,  40%  of  patients  with  three  to  four  months  followup  have 
abnormal  transaminase  determinations  in  blood  specimens  obtained  90  to 
120  days  after  surgery.  The  finding  of  HBAg  is  unusual  even  in  patients 
who  have  received  HBAg  positive  blood  transfusions .  Despite  the  high 
incidence  of  elevated  transaminase  determinations,  only  two  patients 
have  developed  overt  icteric  hepatitis  requiring  hospitalization.  It  is 
anticipated  that  it  will  take  approximately  three  years  in  order  to  com¬ 
plete  this  study . 

Attempts  were  made  to  improve  and  develop  methods  for  the  detection  of 
HBAg  that  would  be  more  useful  in  blood  banking .  The  currently  avail¬ 
able  method  (counterimmunoelectrophoresis)  which  is  used  ’n  blood 
banks  is  relatively  insensitive.  A  proposed  and  recently  FDA-approved 
solid  phase  radioimmunoassay  method  for  the  detection  of  HBAg  has  been 
shown  to  be  more  sensitive  but  requires  24  hours  for  the  performance  of 
the  test.  Since  the  majority  of  the  time  required  for  testing  is  the 


1044 


1 


double  incubation  of  specimens  #  we  increased  the  incubation  tempera¬ 
tures  from  room  temperature  to  45°C  and  were  able  to  develop  a  three- 
hour  test.  This  shorter  test  was  as  sensitive  as  the  24-hour  test.  Serial 
dilutions  of  Ab  and  Ay  subtypes  of  HBAg  were  tested  simultaneously  by 
both  methods.  At  each  dilution  both  the  counts  per  minute  as  well  as  the 
ratio  of  counts  per  minute  to  the  mean  of  negative  controls  were  higher 
with  the  shorter  test  than  with  the  overnight  test,  and  HBAg  detectabili¬ 
ty  was  comparable  with  both  tests  when  specimens  obtained  from  sol¬ 
diers  returning  from  Vietnam  were  evaluated.  It  is  believed  that  this 
shorter  test  will  be  of  value  for  blood  banking  needs  unless  a  simpler, 
sho:  ter,  and  less  expensive  test  can  be  devised  in  the  interim. 

The  solid  phase  radioimmune  assay  test  was  modified  so  it  could  be  used 
to  subtype  serr  n  specimens  containing  HBAg  as  either  ay  or  ad.  The 
radioimmunoassay  system  permitted  the  correct  identification  of  24  coded 
specimens  that  had  been  previously  subtyped  by  agar  gel  diffusion.  In 
the  series  of  52  sera  from  soldiers  with  HBAg  positive  hepatitis,  only  7 
(13%)  could  be  subtyped  by  agar  gel  diffusion,  whereas  33  (64%)  were 
subtyped  by  radioimmunoassay.  Twenty-eight  (54%)  were  ad  and  five 
(10%)  were  ay.  Thus,  solid  phase  radioimmunoassay  methodology  pro¬ 
vides  a  means  of  subtyping  many  HBAg  positive  specimens  that  cannot 
be  subtyped  by  other  methods. 

A  solid  phase  radioimmunoassay  method  was  developed  to  detect  HBAb, 
This  method  detects  specimens  which  contain  antibody  against  both  ay  or 
ad  subtypes  of  HBAg,  and  seems  more  sensitive  than  other  laboratory 
methods.  Examination  of  serum  specimens  from  military  recruits  showed 
that  5%  had  HBAb  whereas  HBAb  was  found  in  the  serum  of  14%  of  soldiers 
arriving  in  Korea  and  25%  of  soldiers  leaving  Korea  after  one  year  of 
overseas  service.  Quantification  of  the  HBAb  in  lots  of  gamma  globulin 
that  have  been  used  in  experimental  studies  to  protect  soldiers  from  icter¬ 
ic  serum  hepatitis  showed  no  correlation  between  HBAb  titer  and  the  effi¬ 
cacy  of  the  lots  of  the  standard  human  gamma  globulin. 

Many  commercial  firms  provide  serum  control  specimens  for  use  in  the 
standardization  of  routine  laboratory  tests.  We  randomly  selected  ten  of 
these  commercially  available  serum  pools  and  tested  them  for  HBAg  by 
immunoosmoelectrophoresis  and  radioimmunoassay.  Although  none  was 
positive  by  immunoosmoelectrophoresis,  nine  of  the  ten  specimens  con¬ 
tained  HBAg  as  detected  by  radioimmunoassay.  Each  of  the  positive 
specimens  could  be  inhibited  by  prior  incubation  of  the  test  specimen 
with  HBAb.  The  use  of  human  serum  control  specimens  containing  HBAg 
represents  a  laboratory  hazard  that  could  be  avoided  and  should  be  in¬ 
sisted  upon  in  specifications. 


1045 


Conclusions  and  Recommendations. 


The  prophylactic  gamma  globulin  study  using  a  high  liter  preparation 
containing  HBAb  will  take  a  minimum  of  three  years  for  completion.  An 
effort  is  being  made  to  bring  other  military  and  civilian  institutions  into 
the  study  in  order  to  reduce  the  time  required  to  obtain  a  meaningful  con¬ 
clusion  .  There  is  a  requirement  for  the  development  and  availability  of 
appropriate  animal  facilities  for  test  programs  that  would  be  useful  in  the 
development  of  active  and  passive  immunization  for  both  hepatitis  A  and 
B.  Further  studies  of  newer  methods  of  testing  for  HBAg  are  needed  to 
develop  a  sensitive,  reliable,  and  useful  method  for  blood  banks.  Main¬ 
tenance  of  a  bank  of  infectious  materials  for  hepatitis  A  is  required  to 
supply  investigators  attempting  to  culture  the  virus  and  develop  sero¬ 
logical  test  systems  that  will  detect  patients  with  the  disease. 


Project  3A062110A822  MILITARY  INTERNAL  MEDICINE 


Task  00,  Military  Internal  Medicine 
Work  Unit  126,  Infectious  Hepatitis 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications: 

1.  Conrad,  M.  E.  Post  transfusion  hepatitis.  In  "Hepatitis  and  Blood 
Transfusion",  Ed.  Vyas,  G.  N.,  Perkins,  H.  A.,  and  Schmid,  R. 
Grune  and  Stratton,  New  York,  1972,  p.  367. 

2.  Conrad,  M.  E.  and  Ginsberg,  A.  L.  Hepatitis  B  Prevention  and 
Gamma  Globulin.  Ann.  Intern,  Med.  78:  152,  1973. 

3.  Ginsberg,  A.  L.  and  Conrad,  M.  E.  Australia  Antigen  (HB  Ag)  in 
Laboratory  Control  Serum  Solutions:  An  Unnecessary  Hazard.  New 
Engl.  J.  Med.  287:  1097,  1972. 

4.  Ginsberg,  A.  L.,  Conrad,  M.  E.  ,  Bancroft,  W.  H.,  Ling,  C.  M., 
and  Overby,  L.  R.  Hepatitis  B  Antibody:  Prevalence  in  Military 
Populations  and  Quantification  in  Human  Serum  Gamma  Globulin 
Using  a  Direct  RIA.  Gastroenterology  64:  733,  1973. 

5.  Ginsberg,  A.  L.,  Bancroft,  W.  H.,  and  Conrad,  M.  E.  Simplified 
and  Sensitive  Detection  of  Subtypes  of  Austialia  Antigen  (HB  Ag) 
Using  a  Solid  Phase  Radioimmune  Assay .  J,  Lab.  Clin.  Med.  80: 
292,  1972. 


1047 


PROJECT  3A0621 10A823 
MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 

Task  00 

Military  Psychiatry 


/  0  *4  S' 


1 


1.  DATE  NRE  V  SUM*NY 

•  RIND  OF  SUMMARY 

S  SUMMARY  SCTY* 

S  BORA  SECURITY* 

T  riorawno" 

•  a  CHiB*N  INITR'N 

{•4  IRECIFIC  DATA- 

•  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

72  07  01 

D.  Change 

u 

u 

NA 

NL 

[contractor  access 

|63  tit  D  mo 

A.  *0*K  UNIT 

rt|  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORGANIIATlON 


i  irotiuL  oic 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


10  NO  CODE 1  *  PROGRAM  CLEMENT 

62110A - 


b  contributing 
c  contributing  I  CD  OG  1 14  (f 


RROjEC  T  NUMBER 


3A062110A823 


I  titLl  tp r*  «N  mlth  1  tcuflty  CNoNlMll^^wNr 

(U)  Military  Psychiatry 


rTZZTTZTZZr 

DAQAbjm 


^TatTo^umnar^- 

73  Q7  QJ 


Jupour  control  truant 

Dl)  r>HhF.<AH)6J* 


00 


work  unit  number 


030 


11  SCIENTIFIC  AND  T  I  CHNOL  OOIC  A  l  AREAS* 


003500  Clinical  Medicine  013400  Psychology 

TT 


»  START  DATE 

54  09 


H  CONTRACT  GRANT  fa 

A  OATtt/f  MECTIVt 
h  NUMBER  * 

L  TVM 

C.  MINOOE  AWARD 


li  tlTIMATEO  COMPLETION  DATE 

CONT 


4  AMOUNT 
r.  CUM.  AMT. 


L 


».m *  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


IB  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

a  RROFIMIONAL  MAN  YRI 

fc  FUNOB  (In  Nmw««nMW> 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

PREcTBTnB 

73 

14 

220 

CURRENT 

74 

16 

400 

to  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  J  | 

RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

name.  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 


telephone.  202-576-3551 


IS  FUNDING  AGENCY 

DA  I 


IE  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 

C .  In-House 


name*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
adores* •  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  (-P-m/AR  MAW  II  V  S.  ActNlili  /AHihiliM) 

name*  Holloway,  COL  H.  C. 
telephone  202-576-5210, 


SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NJMBER 


ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

AMC:  Bardill ,  MAJ  D.  R. 
Nace,  MAJ  E.  P. 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

Military  Adjustment;  (U)  Psychiatric  Illness; 
(HI  Siress  Periormanc civile vianL B e.h a v i o r 


DA 


1)  TECHNICAL  OBJEC  TIVE,*  1A  APPROACH,  IS  PRO  GRC  SS  ( Fuml  AA  In*  »l  Awl  •  iPmilllu  F  Sr  pr»oA»  Tail  ml  mcA  ml»»  |K«rMy  Cl—tlHftlm  chN  j 

23.  (U)  The  mission  of  this  unit  is  to  identify  psychologic,  sociologic,  organizational  and 
physiologic  factors  which  predispose  the  soldier  to  perform  ineffectively  or  develop 
psychiatric,  psychosomatic  disease  or  drug  addiction,  and  to  develop  appropriate  preven¬ 
tive  and  treatment  techniques . 

24.  (U)  The  research  methods  of  psychology ,  sociology,  clinical  psychiatry,  anthropology, 
social  work,  and  biochemistry  are  used  to  identify  and  modify  factors  that  contribute  to 
ineffective  military  performance. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  The  relationship  between  hypnotizability  and  the  response  to  brief 
psychotherapy  has  been  assessed  in  thirty-two  psychiatric  outpatients  who  received  brief 
psychotherapy  and  had  a  post-therapy  evaluation.  Hypnotizability  was  assessed  by 
standardized  techniques.  Data  analysis  is  in  progress  concerning  pre-  and  post-therapy 
measures  of  complaints  and  functioning.  Pilot  data  collection  concerning  families  of 
adolescents  referred  to  a  Child  Guidance  Service  has  been  completed.  These  data  are  being 
used  to  define  more  precise  measurement  procedures  for  further  work.  The  influence  of 
social  variables  upon  communications  between  soldiers  of  different  races  ai.  an  Army  medical 
lacility  is  under  study.  Utilizing  the  Racial  Perceptions  Inventory  with  a  novel  set  of 
instructional  variables,  data  are  being  collected  concerning  the  ability  of  an  individual 
soldier  to  imagine  himself  in  the  opposite  racial  role.  An  initial  evaluation  of  the  utility  of 
role  reversal  as  a  technique  of  behavioral  modification  is  in  progress.  A  follow-up  study 
of  more  than  100  Vietnam  returnees  is  nearing  completion;  the  extent  of  drug  abuse  and 
other  adaptational  problems  in  this  population  are  being  evaluated.  For  technical  report, 
see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 


' A  YAllAHf  ft.  conl'tl  toft 


DD,:rj498 


Ni  A  lor', 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOl  E  T  F  DD  FORMS  1  40B  A 
AND  I  49S-  I  1  MAR  ««  FOR  ARMY  USEl  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1048  tL 


[Pll  Redacted] 


Project  3A 062 110A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 


Work  Unit  030  Military  Psychiatry 
Investigators . 

Principal:  COL  Harry  C.  Holloway,  MC 

Associate:  LTC  James  L.  Collins,  MC;  MAJ  Donald  R.  Bardill, 

MSC;  MAJ  Edgar  P.  Nace,  MC;  MAJ  Rodney  V. 

Burbach,  MC;  CPT  Larry  H.  Ingraham,  MSC 

Description 

Four  primary  areas  were  emphasized  within  the  Department  of 
Psychiatry.  One  area  of  research  was  the  study  of  101  drug  using  sol¬ 
diers  and  44  mental  hygiene  controls.  Another  area  of  emphasis  was  a 
study  of  the  families  of  adolescents  referred  for  care  at  a  Child  Guid¬ 
ance  Service.  Increasing  preliminary  emphasis  has  been  placed  on 
studies  of  race  perception  inventories  and  race  relations  training. 

Finally,  selected  data  from  a  brief  study  of  the  delivery  of  Mental  Health 
Services  have  been  analyzed  and  a  report  submitted. 

Progress 

1.  Interview  Study  of  101  Drug-using  Soldiers  and  44  Mental 
Hygiene  Controls . 

The  analysis  of  data  from  an  interview  study  of  101  drug-using 
soldiers  and  44  mental  hygiene  controls  has  been  completed. 

This  study  involved  soldiers  who  first  became  addicted  to  heroin 
while  serving  in  Vietnam.  Two  groups  of  these  soldiers  were  compared: 
the  first  group  voluntarily  sought  help  from  medical  facilities  for  prob¬ 
lems  related  to  opiate  dependency  after  they  returned  to  CONUS;  the  sec¬ 
ond  group  had  not  voluntarily  sought  assistance  for  opiate  dependency, 
but  had  been  involuntarily  detected  by  urine  screen  as  they  departed  Viet¬ 
nam,  and  were  sent  to  CONUS  treatment  facilities.  Distinct  differences 
existed  between  these  two  groups  as  the  former  had  (1)  a  greater  degree 
of  civilian  anti-social  behavior,  (2)  more  frequent  psychiatric  contacts 
while  in  the  service,  and  (3)  more  extensive  history  of  drug  abuse. 

Based  on  the  two  groups  of  addicted  Vietnam  returnees  described 
above,  a  prognostic  assessment  of  treatment  potential  for  the  opiate 

1049 


dependent  Vietnam  returnee  was  made.  This  was  done  by  comparing  the 
Vietnam  returnees  with  civilian  addicts  as  reported  in  the  literature  on 
variables  which  have  consistently  reflected  favorable  or  poor  prognoses. 
Generally,  the  Vietnam  returnees  more  closely  resemble  the  civilian 
addicts  who  had  a  favorable  outcome  following  treatment.  The  addicted 
Vietnam  returnees  who  were  detected  by  urine  screen  techniques  had  a 
more  favorable  prognosis  than  did  the  other  group  of  addicted  Vietnam 
returnees,  although  both  groups  resembled  more  closely  successfully 
treated  rather  than  chronically  addicted  civilian  addicts. 

A  detailed  analysis  of  drug  usage  patterns  was  conducted  in  order 
to  determine  whether  or  not  potential  heroin  addicts  could  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  non-addicted  but  multi-drug  using  peers.  On  the  basis  of 
age  of  onset  of  drug  use,  drug  of  initiation,  number  of  drugs  used,  order 
of  use,  rapidity  of  progression  from  one  drug  to  another  and  other 
selected  usage  variables,  no  meaningful  differences  between  the  addicted 
and  non-addicted  drug  users  could  be  determined.  The  non-addicts 
actually  exceeded  the  addicts  on  many  of  the  drug  usage  variables. 
Differences  between  these  two  groups  do  occur  with  regard  to  drug  use 
after  narcotics  are  introduced.  Those  who  were  to  become  opiate 
dependent  rapidly  became  addicted,  while  the  other  group  nearly  as 
quickly  dropped  opiates  from  their  drug-using  repertoire.  Case  illus¬ 
trations  are  presented  and  implications  for  the  so-called  "stepping  stone" 
hypothesis  are  discussed. 

A  study  was  conducted  in  order  to  determine  whether  soldiers  who 
presented  medical  facilities  with  a  problem  of  drug  abuse  could  be  distin¬ 
guished  from  "non-drug  problem  presenting"  mental  hygiene  patients. 

A  step-wise  linear  discriminant  analysis  was  utilized  for  this  problem, 
and  utilized  only  data  available  from  civilian  history  and  the  first  five 
months  of  military  duty,  "i.e.  ,  prior  to  being  defined  as  a  drug  user  or 
other  type  of  patient."  On  the  bases  of  both  historical  and  drug  usage 
variables,  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  between  these  two  groups  of  psy¬ 
chiatric  patients  as  early  as  the  first  five  months  of  military  duty.  These 
results  may  be  of  value  in  any  attempts  at  primary  prevention. 

2 *  Hypnosis  and  Brief  Psychotherapy. 

A  study  assessing  the  relationship  between  hypnotizability  and  the 
response  to  brief  psychotherapy  has  been  completed.  Each  of  the 
thirty-two  psychiatric  outpatients  was  evaluated,  underwent  brief 
psychotherapy  and  had  a  post-therapy  evaluation.  Hypnotizability  was 
assessed  prior  to  the  beginning  of  therapy  by  stand  trdized,  objective 
techniques.  Selected  pre-  and  post-therapy  measures  of  patient  corn- 


1050 


plaints  and  functioning  were  obtained.  The  data  have  been  tabulated  and 
are  presently  undergoing  statistical  analysis.  The  returns  from  a  six- 
month  follow-up  are  also  being  currently  collected  and  entered  into  the 
analysis.  This  project  was  carried  out  with  the  assistance  of  several 
psychiatry  residents  at  Walter  Reed  General  Hospital,  and  a  report  for 
the  Resident  Research  Seminar  is  being  prepared. 

3 .  The  Family  and  Adolescent  Dysfunctioning  . 

The  pilot  data  collection  phase  of  a  study  of  the  families  of  adoles¬ 
cents  referred  for  care  at  a  Child  Guidance  Service  has  been  completed. 

Data  gained  from  the  pilot  phase  are  being  used  to  refine  the  study  pro¬ 
cedure  and  to  develop  new  and  refine  old  data  gathering  instruments. 
Preliminary  work  has  suggested  additional  family  areas  for  investigation. 

4 .  Race  Relations,  Racial  Perceptions  Inventory  and  Race  Relations 
Training . 

Preliminary  work  continues  in  a  study  of  effects  of  race  relations 
training  on  WRAMC  personnel.  Additional  studies  to  further  develop 
race  relations  inventories  continue  to  progress. 

The  Racial  Perceptions  Inventory  (R.P.I.)  will  be  administered  to  7 
biracial  groups  of  10  military  personnel,  to  be  recruited  on  a  voluntary 
basis  in  July  1973.  The  objectives  will  be  to  determine  whether  the 
revised  R.P.I.  will  show  previously  obtained  differences  in  black  and 
white  perceptions  and  to  evaluate  the  influence  of  instructional  factors 
upon  these  differences. 

5  .  Project  Home  . 

Project  HOME  is  a  longitudinal  study  of  a  little  more  than  100  Viet¬ 
nam  veterans.  Drug  use,  and  certain  other  parameters  of  life  style 
are  being  followed.  Ail  subjects  cooperated  in  a  rather  lengthy  initial 
interview.  Those  subjects  who  were  remaining  in  the  Army  (about  1/2) 
were  re-interviewed  every  two  months.  Those  subjects  who  have  sepa¬ 
rated  from  the  Army  are  being  contacted  by  means  of  mailed  questionnaires, 
about  one  year  after  the  initial  contact.  The  study  contains  approx¬ 
imately  equal  numbers  of  each  of  the  following  four  categories;  (1)  urine 
negative,  non-drug  users,  (2)  urine  negative  drug  users,  (3)  urine  pos¬ 
itive  recreational  drug  users,  and  (4)  urine  positive  drug  dependent 
users.  Urine  test  results  refer  to  the  DEROS  screen  from  Vietnam. 


1051 


At  the  present  time,  all  initial  interviews  have  been  completed.  The 
follow-up  interviews  are  complete  for  those  persons  who  remained  in 
the  Army .  In  progress  is  the  mailing  of  the  follow-up  questionnaires  to 
those  persons  who  separated  from  the  £rmy.  Preliminary  pencil-and 
paper  tabulations  have  been  done  on  the  data  from  the  initial  question¬ 
naires  . 


1052 


iMf  i  "i 


.^1  .-^,--^-^4, 


Project  3A062110A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 
Work  Unit  030  Military  Psychiatry 
Literature  Cited. 


Publications: 


1.  Bardill,  D.  R.  and  Vielhaber,  D.  P.:  Social  work  care  in  an  army 
medical  setting .  Military  Medicine  137(7):  270-273,  1972. 

2.  Bardill,  D.R.:  Behavior  contracting  and  group  therapy  with  pre¬ 
adolescent  males  in  a  residential  treatment  setting .  International  Journal 
of  Group  Psychotherapy  220):  333-342,  1972. 

3.  Borus,  J.  F.:  The  primary  physician  and  community  mental  health. 
Current  Medical  Dialogue  39:  735-742,  1972. 

4.  Borus,  J.  F.:  Forgotten  lessons;  stresses  facing  the  Vietnam  vet. 
Roche  Report  Frontier  in  Psychiatry  3(2):  5&8,  1973. 

5.  Borus,  J.F.:  Re-entry;  I.  Adjustment  issue  facing  the  Vietnam 
returnee.  Archives  cf  General  Psychiatry  28_:  501-506,  1973. 

6.  Bradshaw,  W .  H. ,  Borus,  J .  F  . ,  O'Neill ,  P .  H . ,  and 

Mac  Lennan,  B.  W.:  Mental  health  consultants  in  an  educational  charrette. 
Journal  of  Psychiatry  35^  317-335,  1972. 

7.  Freed,  H.  M.,  Borus,  J.  F.,  Gonzales,  J.  A.,  Grant,  J.  D., 
Lightfoot,  0.  B.,  and  Uribe,  V.  M.:  Community  mental  health — second 
class  treatment?  Mental  Hygiene  56:26-29,  1972. 

8.  Ingraham,  L.  H.:  The  social  dimensions  of  drug  use.  Proceedings 
of  the  First  Annual  Ohio  Studies  Institute,  Bureau  of  Drug  Abuse, 

Columbus,  Ohio  1972. 

9.  Ingraham,  L.  II..  The  Vietnam  heroin  epidemic:  a  descriptive 
profile  of  the  army  returnee .  3rd  Ann .  Proc  .  of  Psychology  in  the  Air 
Force,  pp.  199-203.  1972. 


1053 


A  OATS  PREV  SUNDRY 

7L*  S7  SI 

4.  KINO  OK  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

1.  SUMMARY  SC  TV* 

u 

S,  WORK  SECURITY* 

u 

».  MMAMNO* 

NA 

IS  OH 

ICN  INSTR'R 

fcLi 

•4  SPECIFIC  oata* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Dtii  □  mo 

s.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  BOOK  UNIT 

10  NO. /CODES;*  PROORAM ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

A.  PRIMARY 

62 11 BA 

3A0  >21 1BA823 

EM 

fc.  CONTRIBUTING 

C.  CONTRIBUTING 

CP  flfi  mi 

_ 

*7  CON TRACT/ ORAM T 

a  OATii/ir f icrivc: 

bk  NUMHR  * 

c.  TYPE; 

•.  KINO  or  ANARO: 


II.  GENERAL  VI 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I  AHHCV  ACCESSION* 


1.  SAT.  S.  MISMAST* 

MPOJir  oomrmoL  trmaoL 

73  tl  #1 

DD-DK*E(AR)636 

1,  TITLC  (PW4»  mi*  gmt 


Decrements  of  Performance  and  Disease.  (09) 


II  SCICNTIKIC  AND  rtCHNOLOOICAL  ARIAS* 


nW 


Stress 


Physiology.  Psychaj^ogy,^ 


61  11 


CONT 


NA 


4,  AMOUNT 
f.  CUM  AMT. 


II.  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  OROANIIATlON 


«»“«*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
■Doaiu:*  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


PONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 


****  Buescher,  COLE.L. 
TtutPHONf  202- 576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  Considered 

..YW.O. WS* uc. ... .«««. vanrsts KK?  (U)  Electrophysiology;  (U)  Biorhythms;  (U)  Psychophysio- 


DAJ 


1*.  RESOURCES  CITIMATC 


ntCAL 

YEAR 


NANCE  METHOD 


C.  In-House 


A  r  NO  MU) ON  A 


MICIDINI 

73 

3 

165 

cuiifilV 

74 

3 

165 

W.  PE RKORMINO  ORGANIZATION 


¥  FUNM  (IN  Aniia*) 


*****  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

.  Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
ADDN.U*  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


■  RINdPAL  INVESTIGATOR  A  MAW  it  V  t.  t*»H***m) 

««•  Hegge,  F.W.,  Ph.D. 
202-576-5521 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER: 

AUOCiATf  INVESTIGATORS 

««•«■  Jennings,  CPT  J.R. 

Thorne.  D.  Ph.D. 


-DA. 


loqv:  (U)  Operant  Conditioning:  fUl  Stress:  fU1  Performanr.e;  Ml)  Human  VnlnnWr 


II  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  14  APPROACH,  IE  PROOFS tt  fPu mfaA  / r*rt4u*l  I4miltl»4  *r  ~ii>rr  j*r«C«A»  N<<  •<  **«A  ml ft  $ mimitf  Cl—ta*mtlm 

23.  (U)  Stressful  environments,  physiological  conditions  and  performance  demands  likely  t< 
produce  significant  deterioration  in  the  accomplishment  of  a  soldier's  mission  are  studied. 
The  behavioral  and  physiological  functions  that  contribute  to  deteriorated  ps^rformance  are 
identified  and  therapeutic  and  prophylactic  strategies  are  developed. 

24.  (U)  Using  psychophysiological  and  operant  methodology,  time  series  analysis,  and 
computer-based  control  and  analysis  techniques,  behavioral  and  physiological  events  a ro 
isolated,  analyzed,  and  controlled.  Endogenous  and  exogenous  factors  contributing  to 
behavioral  and  physiological  rhythmicity  and  performance  levels  are  studied  under  spficifiec 
normal  and  stressful  conditions. 

25.  (U)  72  07  73  06  Extensive  time  series  analyses  including  complex  demodulation  hav 

demonstrated  ultradian  rhythmicity  within  psychophysiological  activity  during  a  48-hour 
sleep  deprivation  study.  Performance  follow-up  of  Officer  Candidate  School  graduates 
indicates  no  relationship  between  OCS  ratings  and  subsequent  performance.  Maturational 
and  personality  variables  minimally  predicted  post  OCS  performance.  Speeded  information 
storage  and  accompanying  autonomic  reactions  differed  between  obese  and  underweight 
subjects.  Autonomic  reaction  differed  as  a  function  of  type  of  information  processing  and 
information  load.  Development  of  miniature,  field  adaptable,  electrophysiological  recording 
techniques  continues.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Annual  Progress  Report,  1  JUL  72-  30  JUN  73. 


DD.EVJ498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DD  FORMS  14SBA,  1  NOV  •« 

and  1  mar  ea  ifon  army  usei  arc  obsolete. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


1054 


Project  3A0621 10A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  031  Military  performance  and  stress:  Factors  lead;tig  to 
decrements  of  performance  and  disease 

Investigators. 

Principal:  Frederick  W.  Hegge,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  MAJ  Malcolm  C.  Robinson,  MC;  CPT  John  R.  Jennings, 
MSC;  David  Thorne,  Ph.D.;  CPT  John  Varni ,  MSC;  1LT 
Charles  Wood,  MSC;  Paul  Kasper,  B.S.;  James  Struthers, 
B.A.;  Jeanne  Stringfellow,  B.A. 


Descrit 


The  elucidation  of  the  biological  substrates  of  stress  and  performance 
decrements  is  important  to  both  military  psychiatry  and  to  the  performance 
of  normal  military  missions.  The  basic  research  strategy  of  this  work  unit 
is  psychophysiological  in  nature,  i.e.,  concurrent  measures  of  behavioral 
processes  and  physiological  act'v.ty  are  made.  Special  attention  is  paid  to 
stressors  having  their  origin  in  continuous  performance  requirements, 
sleep  deprivation,  and  temporal  disorientation.  Due  recognition  is  given 
to  the  fact  that  performance  is  not  a  unitary  construct,  but  a  continuum  of 
human  activity  ranging  from  simple  motor  behavior  to  the  most  complex 
cognitive  activity.  Research  is  directed  at  the  experimental  delineation  of 
interactions  between  stressors  and  complex  performances  that  are  functional 
analogues  of  militarily  relevant  activities.  These  include  vigilance,  the 
integration  of  multiple  sources  of  information,  and  decision  processes. 

When  necessary  for  scientific  clarity,  complex  performances  are  analyzed 
in  terms  of  more  basic  processes  involving  sensorimotor,  attentional,  and 
mnemonic  components. 


Progress 


1 .  Sleep  Loss,  Sustained  performance,  and  the  Basic  Rest-Activity 
Cycle  (BRAC) . 


A  requirement  for  sustained  performance  under  conditions  of  stress  is 
not  unusual  in  military  settings.  The  stress  levels  involved  range  from 
those  associated  with  combat  to  the  relatively  mild  levels  associated  with 
sleep  deprivation.  Performance  requirements  similarly  range  from  simple 
motor  behavior  to  the  most  complex  reasoning  and  decision  making.  The 


1055 


literature  on  stress  and  sustained  performance  is  confused  concerning  what 
performances  are  affected  by  what  stressors  under  what  conditions.  Part 
of  this  confusion  may  arise  from  the  presence  of  circadian  (circa  24  hours) 
and  ultradian  (circa  90  minutes)  rhythms  in  the  quality  of  performance. 

Rapid  Eye  Movement. (REM)  sleep  has  long  been  known  to  exhibit  a 
rhythm  having  a  period  ranging  from  80  to  120  minutes.  Kleitman  has 
proposed  that  this  REM  cycle  is  a  manifestation  of  a  fundamental  endogenous 
oscillation  of  the  central  nervous  system  that  occurs  throughout  the  day. 
Sterman,  Lucas  &  MacDonald  (1972)  have  recently  presented  evidence  for  a 
REM-related  periodicity  in  the  operant  behavior  of  cats,  and  Kripke  (1972) 
has  presented  related  data  on  electrophysiological  function  in  humans.  The 
presence  of  a  rhythmic  fluctuation  in  performance  and  physiology  could 
serve  as  a  confound’ng  variable  in  studies  that  rely  on  data  sampled  infre¬ 
quently  in  time.  Performance  sampled  at  a  peak  in  a  cycle  would  appear  to 
be  better  than  performance  measured  later  during  a  cycle  minimum.  Thus, 
opposite  conclusions  could  be  drawn  if  the  sampling  were  shifted  slightly 
in  time.  We  have  no  reason  to  believe  that  the  rhythms  of  different  indivi¬ 
duals  would  be  precisely  coordinated  in  time.  Therefore,  at  any  given 
sampling  time,  values  for  one  subject  may  be  high  while  those  for  another 
are  low.  The  operation  of  any  of  these  factors  could  easily  lead  to  inflated 
variance  and  erroneous  conclusions. 

A  study  designed  to  investigate  these  factors  has  been  completed  and 
various  aspects  of  the  data  have  been  reported  at  two  scientific  meetings. 
Twelve  human  volunteers  attempted  ?o  detect  movements  within  a  visual 
display  while  confined  to  an  isolation  chamber  for  periods  potentially  «js 
long  as  48  hours.  Only  limited  and  random  breaks  for  eating  and  elimina¬ 
tion  were  permitted.  The  payment  for  participation  increased  as  time  in 
the  chamber  increased,  but  no  subject  completed  <:  full  48  hour  run.  The 
longest  run  was  44  hours  and  the  shortest  was  22  hours.  On  leaving  the 
chamber,  subjects  uniformly  reported  that  they  had  "had  it"  and  could  not 
continue  under  any  circumstances. 

Heart  rate,  rate  of  observing  the  display,  and  rate  of  signal  detection 
were  collected  continuously  and  summarized  every  fifteen  minutes.  These 
date  formed  time  series  that  were  subjected  to  a  complex  demodulation 
analysis.  Complex  demodulation  is  a  filtering  technique  whereby  the 
amplitude  and  phase  of  selected  narrow  frequency  bands  can  be  estimated 
for  every  data  point  in  a  time  series.  It  is  particularly  useful  where  the 
series  are  nonstationary,  i.e.,  the  statistical  properties  of  the  series  change 
over  time.  Studies  of  continuous  performance  fall  into  this  category. 

The  major  find  ng  of  this  study  was  the  confirmation  of  the  existence  of 


a  90-minute  cycle  in  heart  rate,  observing  behavior,  and  signal  detection. 
Further,  the  amplitude  of  this  rhythm  reliably  increased  with  stress.  In 
the  present  case  the  stressors  are  operationally  defined  as  sleep  deprivation 
and  the  sustained  performance  requirement.  Subjects  refused  to  continue 
in  the  experiment  at,  or  just  below  the  point  of  maximum  rhythm  amplitude. 

In  the  latter  case,  subjects  had  been  persuaded  to  "stay  with  it  just  a  while 
Iona 

.  ,  .'i.idings  have  important  implications  for  the  quantification  of 

stre  s  induced  performance  decrement,  for  the  cross  comparison  oi 
stressors  and  their  interaction  with  different  performance  requirements, 
and  or  the  explication  of  individual  differences  in  response  to  stress. 

They  provide  a  clear  cautionary  note  to  the  interpretation  of  data  gathered 
using  traditional  point  sampling  procedures.  Finally,  the  finding  of  a  short¬ 
term  rhythm  in  performance  suggests  an  experimental  model  for  the  study 
of  potentially  critical  lapses  in  the  quality  of  performance  continuity.  If, 
as  these  findings  suggest  performance  lapses  are  orderly  rather  than 
random,  prophylactic  :..'V  ,  es  can  be  developed  to  protect  the  integrity 
of  critical  performan : 

2.  Measurement  Technology  for  „ie  Assessment  of  Sustained 
Performance. 

The  monitoring  of  behavioral  and  physiological  processes  for  extended 
periods  of  time  places  a  heavy  burden  on  signal  acquisition  and  processing 
equipment.  The  burden  is  partially  due  to  the  large  volume  of  data  ac¬ 
quired,  e.  g. ,  simple  summarization  of  a  variable  once  per  minute  generates 
1440  data  points  per  day.  In  addition,  there  are  severe  requirements  for 
equipment  performance  reliability  and  stability.  Equipment  worn  by  active 
subjects  must  be  unobtrusive  and  non-invasive.  Electrodes  must  adhere 
and  have  low  noise  characterstics  in  the  face  of  extensive  body  movement. 
Amplifiers  and  recorders  mutt  be  insensitive  to  large  muscle  potential 
artifacts  while  retaining  high  sensitivity  for  the  signal  of  interest.  Monitor¬ 
ing  equipment  must  require  an  absolute  minimum  of  intervention  by  inves¬ 
tigators  for  operation  checks,  recording  medium  changes,  or  data  readouts. 
These  problems  have  been  approached  in  two  ways  during  the  past  year. 

The  Bioengineering  Division  of  the  British  Medical  Research  Council 
has  developed  one  electrochemical  and  two  magnetic  tape  recording  systems 
for  the  continuous  monitoring  of  electrophysiological  signals.  Informal 
cooperative  arrangements  with  the  361st  Medical  Laboratory,  USAR,  have 
provided  opportunities  to  evaluate  this  equipment.  Most  promising  is  a 
four  channel  analog  recorder  capable  of  retaining  24  hours  of  data  on  a 
standard  tape  cassette.  Preliminary  tests  involving  continuous  monitoring 
of  EEC  before,  during  and  after  a  transcontinental  flight  were  successful. 

1057 


Further  field  tests  and  operation  in  the  Cardiac  Care  Unit  of  the  Walter  Reed 
General  Hospital  are  planned. 

The  second  approach  involves  the  in-house  development  of  a  fully  digi¬ 
tal  subminiature  recorder  fabricated  from  the  most  advanced  large  scale 
integrated  circuits.  Design  work  is  nearing  completion  and  many  of  the 
component  parts  have  been  acquired  for  a  prototype  unit.  In  concept,  the 
system  involves  the  acquisition  and  conditioning  of  signals  followed  by 
their  conversion  to  digital  format  at  the  lowest  sampling  rate  consonant  with 
maintenance  of  the  information  content  of  the  signal .  Digitized  signals  are 
then  stored  in  a  semiconductor  memory  for  later  readout.  The  virtue  of 
this  system  is  that  readout  can  be  accomplished  at  very  high  speeds.  A 
full  day  of  data  can  be  made  available  for  processing  in  seconds.  Present 
magnetic  tape  systems  are  limited  in  time  compression  capability  to  approxi¬ 
mately  1/1 20th  of  the  record  duration. 

Three  small,  innovative  instrumentation  devices  were  developed  and 
written  up  for  publication  during  the  last  year:  1)  a  device  for  simulating 
waking  and  sleeping  EEC  patterns,  2)  a  general  purpose  microvolt  test 
signal  generator,  and  3)  an  improved  stereotactic  instrument  used  to 
implant  recording  electrodes.  Similar  development  of  small  useful  labora¬ 
tory  devices  is  continuing  through  the  normal  operation  of  our  electronics 
shop. 

3.  Longitudinal  Study  of  Endocrine  Reactions  and  Stress  in  Officer 
Candidate  School . 

This  study  has  been  completed  and  results  have  been  prepared  for 
publication.  As  previously  described  (Kreuz,  Rose,  &  Jennings,  1972), 
the  study  was  conducted  in  three  phases:  1)  acute  stress  phase  during 
the  third  week  of  OCS;  2)  baseline  stress  phase  during  the  23rd  week  -  a 
period  of  minimal  stress;  and  3)  follow-up  phase  after  the  candidates  had 
been  at  their  PCS  six  months.  A  battery  of  endocrine  measures,  interviews, 
and  psychological  tests  were  administered  during  both  phases  1  and  2.  The 
follow-up  phase  consisted  of  a  telephone  interview  assessing  the  former 
candidate's  duty  performance. 

The  major  results  after  complete  statistical  analyses  confirmed  impres¬ 
sions  reported  earlier:  1.  Plasma  testosterone  levels  were  reduced  drama¬ 
tically  during  the  early,  stressful  phase  of  OCS.  2.  Endocrine  measures, 
performance  scores  and  personality  indices  were  minimally  related  if  at 
all.  3.  Psychiatric  interview  assessment  showed  a  moderate  (.4)  correla¬ 
tion  with  final  rank  in  OCS.  4.  Measures  relating  to  first  impression 
formation  by  officers  and  motivational  distortion  by  candidates  were 


1058 


correlated  to  OCS  class  standing.  5.  OCS  class  rank  did  not  predict 
follow-up  performance. 

Additional  analyses  sought  refined  relationships  between  platoon  mem¬ 
bership,  class  standing,  stress,  and  coping  scores.  The  results  of  these 
were  suggestive,  but  could  not  be  supported  scientifically. 

4.  Autonomic  Correlates  of  Information  Processing. 

Autonomic  nervous  system  reactions  have  been  considered  primarily  as 
indices  of  stress.  Evidence  is  emerging  (Lacey  &  Lacey,  in  press;  Hahn, 
1973)  that  suggests,  however,  that  autonomic  reactions  are  involved  in 
relatively  nonstressful  psychological  acts,  such  as  attending  to  the  envir¬ 
onment  and  problem-solving.  If  these  autonomic  reactions  are  an  impor¬ 
tant  part  of  such  psychological  acts,  then  interference  with  the  autonomic 
reactions  might  lead  to  a  decrement  in  performance.  As  stress  exerts 
marked  influence  on  autonomic  reactions,  autonomic  disturbances  may  be 
an  integral  pa^t  of  the  syndrome  of  stress-related  performance  decrements. 

An  investigation  of  the  specific  autonomic  correlates  of  various  types  of 
information  processing  has  been  completed.  In  addition,  the  influence  of 
obesity  was  studied  due  to  a  recent  suggestion  that  the  information  process¬ 
ing  capability  is  related  to  body  weight  (Schachter,  1971) .  The  primary 
dependent  variables  were  cardiac  inter-beat- interval  (IBI)  and  task  perfor¬ 
mance  although  measures  of  skin  conductance,  muscle  potentials,  and 
affective  ratings  of  the  tasks  were  also  collected. 

Episodes  of  shortening  and  lengthening  of  the  cardiac  IBI  were  associa¬ 
ted  with  different  psychologic;!  functions.  Instances  of  shortening  seemed 
more  closely  related  to  affective  involvement  or  arousal.  Lengthening  of 
the  IBI  seemed  a  function  of  the  demand  for  either  attention  to  the  environ¬ 
ment  or  active  memory  processing.  Skin  conductance  related  to  the  arousal 
dimension,  but  muscle  potentials  were  not  influenced  by  the  experimental 
variables. 

Obese  subjects  were  expected  to  show  enhanced  attention  toward  input 
and  more  lengthening  of  the  cardiac  IBI  than  underweight  subjects.  These 
expectations  were  generally  bourne  out  when  the  difficulty  of  the  informa¬ 
tion  processing  was  low.  When  difficulty  was  increased,  the  obese,  in 
comparison  to  the  underweight,  performed  less  well  on  the  memory  tasks 
and  the  cardiac  IBI  was  no  longer  lengthened  beyona  base  level. 

Thus,  the  experiment  demonstrated  the  sensitivity  of  cardiac  IBI  to 
different  types  of  information  processing  across  tasks  and  across  individuals 
of  different  body  weights. 


1059 


Further  work  is  planned  to  validate  the  relation  of  cardiac  IBI  to 
attention  and  memory  under  varying  conditions  of  memory  overload  and 
attentional  salience.  The  role  of  the  autonomic  reactions  in  the  information 
processes  may  be  studied  by  pharmacologically  blocking  certain  autonomic 
reactions . 

5 .  Statistical  Problems  Associated  with  Biological  Measures. 

The  measurement  of  biological  data  characteristically  takes  place  over 
time  within  an  individual.  This  produces  a  series  of  data  points  which  are 
not  statistically  independent,  and  are  therefore  not  readily  dealt  with  by 
classical  statistical  techniques.  Two  approaches  to  this  problem  have  been 
made.  First,  statistical  separation  of  cardiac  components  via  factor  analytic 
techniques  has  been  attempted,  but  the  meaning  of  the  emerging  results  is 
still  unclear.  Second,  specialized  time  series  techniques  are  being  deve¬ 
loped.  Classical  time  series  analyses  are  not  strictly  applicable  to  data, 
such  as  cardiac  inter-beat-interval  (IBI) ,  which  is  not  a  continuous  func¬ 
tion.  Work  is  now  being  initiated  to  the  application  of  point-process  time 
series  analyses  for  the  assessment  of  biorhythms-type  data  as  well  as 
evoked  response-type  data.  These  techniques  may  provide  a  viable  alter¬ 
native  to  current  measurement  techniques. 

In  addition,  certain  traditional  statistical  problems,  such  as  the  nature 
of  the  distribution  of  a  variable,  arise  continually  within  an  ongoing 
research  project.  Work  on  the  distribution  characteristics  of  cardiac  IBI 
has  been  prepared  for  publication.  IBI  was  distributed  more  normally  than 
instantaneous  heart  rate.  Assessment  of  the  IBI  distributions  of  Viet  Nam 
heroin  users  is  underway. 


1060 


Project  3A0621 10A823  MILITARY  PSYCHIATRY 
Task  00  Military  Psychiatry 

Work  Unit  031  Military  performance  and  stress:  Factors  leading  to 
decrements  of  performance  and  disease 

Literature  Cited. 

References: 


1.  Hahn,  W.  W.:  Attention  and  heart  rate:  A  critical  appraisal  of 
the  hypothesis  of  Lacey  and  Lacey.  Psychol.  Buil.  79:  59-70,  1973. 

2.  Kreuz,  L.  E.,  Rose,  R.  M.,  and  Jennings,  J.  R.:  Suppression  of 
plasma  testosterone  levels  and  psychological  stress.  Arch,  of  Gen. 
Psychiat.  26:479  482,  1972. 

3.  Kripke,  D.  F.:  An  ultradian  biological  rhythm  associated  with 
perceptual  deprivation  and  REM  sleep.  Psychosom.  Med.  34:221-234, 
1972. 

4.  Lacey,  B.  C. ,  and  Lacey,  J .  I.:  Studies  of  heart  rate  and  other 
bodily  processes  in  sensorimotor  behavior.  In  P.  A.  Obrist,  A.  Black,  J. 
Brener,  and  L.  DiCara  (Eds.),  Cardiovascular  Psychophysiology  -- 
Current  Issues  in  Response  Mechanisms,  Biofeedback  and  Methodology. 
Aldine-Atherton,  Chicago,  Illinois,  (In  press). 

5.  Schachter,  S.:  Some  extraordinary  facts  about  obese  humans 
and  rats.  Amer.  Psychol.  83:129-144,  1971. 

6.  Sterman,  M.  B.,  Lucas,  E.  A.,  and  MacDonald,  L.  R.:  Periodi¬ 
city  within  sleep  and  operant  performance  in  the  cat.  Brain  Rsch.  38^: 
327-341,  1972. 

Publications: 

1.  Day,  R.  S.,  and  Wood,  C.  C.:  Interactions  between  linguistic 
and  nonlinguistic  processing.  J.  Acous.  Soc.  of  Amer.  51_:  79  (A) ,  1972. 

2  Day,  R.  S.,  and  Wood,  C.  C.:  Mutual  interference  between  two 
linguistic  dimensions  of  the  same  stimuli .  J.  Acous.  Soc.  of  Amer.  52: 
175(A),  1972.  — 


1061 


3.  Jennings,  J  .  R.:  The  characterization  and  analysis  of  complex 
biological  responses.  Proceedings  of  the  Seventeenth  Conference  on  the 
Design  of  Experiments  in  Army  Research  Development  and  Testing, 

ARO-D  Report  72-2:  19-31,  1972. 

4.  Sheatz,  C.  C.:  Simulating  the  waking  and  sleeping  EEC. 
Psychophysiol.  9:657,  1972. 

5.  Sheatz,  C.  C.:  A  differential  microvolt  test  signal  adjustable  to 
given  laboratory  requirements.  Psychophysiol.  9:658,  1972. 

6.  Sheatz,  C.  C.:  A  H  stereotactic  instrument.  Behav.  Rsch.  Meth. 
6  Instru.  5:  313,  1973. 

7.  Tahmoush,  A.  J .,  Brooks,  J .  E. ,  and  Keltner,  J.  L.:  Palatal 
myoclonus  associated  with  abnormal  ocular  and  extremity  movements. 
Arch.  Neurol.  27:431-440,  1972. 


1062 


T 


|.  DAT  k  ARE  V  SUM* RT 

72  07  01 

4  KINO  or  SUMMARY 

H  .  Terminatic 

•  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

n  U 

•  BORN  SECURITY* 

u 

T  RtORAWNO* 

NA 

14  M 

I 

SB'N  INITA'N  TU  IRECiriC  DATA 

■CONTRACTOR  ACCEII 

VL  p,„  □«, 

•  LEVEL  or  SUM 

A.  WORK  UNIT 

10  NO  coots  * 

PROGRAM  CLEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

621 10A 

3A0621 10A823 

 00  ..... 

032 

b  CONTRIBUTING 

(  CONTRIBUTING 

cdog  nW) 

•2  scientific  and  technological  areas*  002300  Biochemistry;  012900  Physiology;  013400  Psychology; 

003500  Clinical  Medicine;  0168Q0  Toxicology 

1]  START  DATE  14  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATt 

71  07  72  08 

IS  rUNOING  AGENCY 

DA  | 

IS  ACRrORMANCE  HEtHOO 

C.  In-House 

H  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A  OATCl/CMECTIVC  t  a  Al  RA  T  ION 

!»■  NUMBC  N  * 

C  » • PE  d  AMOUNT 

t.  AIND  or  AWARD  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

14  RESOURCES  CSTIMA  TE 

d  PRO  SESSION  A L  MAN  YR| 

b  ruNM  f tn  iNuiaoN) 

rise  AL 

YEAR 

ARECIDIN# 

72 

20 

600 

TURilUT - 

73 

100 

3000 

It  RESPONSIBLE  DOO  ORGANI  tATlON  j  t 

10  ACRfORMING  ORGANISATION  |  | 

r  general  use 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


i"T««Zc^Jce«Mio!^ 

DA  OB  6485 


•  OATS  Of  SUMMARY* 


*mpo*t  Cournot  trmmoL 

DD  DR*E(AH)t>Jt 


N*«r*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
address  'Washington ,  D,  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAME.  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
TELEPHONE  202-576-3551 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
**  Washington ,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  *SA*  II  V  S.  4M<Wli  JA«IMwU«nj 

Holloway,  COL  H.  C. 

til iahomc  202-576-3556^^^^^^ 

SOCIAL  SECurit  y  account  number 
A  HOC  I  A  T  E  INVESTIGATORS 

AMt:  Angel,  LTC  C.  R. 

n ami :  Lamson,  COL  T.  H. 


Foreign  Intelligence  No;  Considered 

n  kcy.qam  rr'.c*  *ach  -j*  c— )  (U )  Drug  Abuse;  (U)  epidemiology;  (0)  Biochemistry 

(U)  Treatment/Rehabilitation;  (U)  Prevention;  (U)  Toxicology 


DA 


II  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.  24  AA  ABO  AC  M,  21  PROGRESS  fAuwi  UA  Ay  i»i*N>  Nil  ,1  ,t<A  *l»  CImiIIciUm  C«N  | 

23.  (U)  To  develop  and  assess  screening  techniques  for  military  settings;  to  determine 
the  extent,  prevalence,  and  incidence  of  drug  abuse  by  soldiers,  to  devise  methodologies 
for  the  identification,  treatment  and  prevention  of  drug  abu^e  by  soldiers,  and  to  assess 
the  effects  of  drug  usage  upon  military  performance. 

24.  (U)  All  systems  purported  to  be  useful  for  screening  are  evaluated  in  the  laboratory 
and,  if  indicated,  tested  in  the  field;  developmental  changes  in  these  systems  are  made. 
Studies  assessing  drug  usage  are  conducted  in  military  populations;  intervention  pro¬ 
grams  are  evaluated,  using  epidemiological,  social,  and  psychological  methods;  effects 

of  drugs  upon  performance  investigated,  and  the  laboratory  assessment  of  the  toxicological, 
biochemical  and  psychological  basis  of  illicit  drug  use  are  examined. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  72  08  Terminated;  to  be  reported  under  833  WU  102. 


in  <  unlrgt.  lor*  mi 


DD,'„°'“  1498 


'c:x 


son 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  of  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I  48  A  A  I  NOV  66 
AND  1488  I  1  MAR  68  FOR  ARMV  USE  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1063 


[Pll  Redacted] 


wm 


PROJECT  3A062110A824 

IONIZING  RADIATION  INJURY,  PREVENTION  AND  TREATMENT 

Task  00 

Ionizing  Radiation  Injury,  Prevention  and  Treatment 


I.  TITLE  (P»fC4i  S.cm tUf  ClMtittMlin  C*MR|* 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  AECRCY  ACCESSION* 

DA  OA  6471 

S.  DATE  OF  SUMMARY* 

73  07  01 

MFo«r  cow  mot  ffwbol 

DD-DH*E(AR)636 

1  DATE  RRIV  lUM’RY 

72  07  01 

4.  NINO  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  CHANCH 

I.  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

u 

1.  WORK  SECURITY* 

u 

T  REORAMNO"  II  ORm  INITITN  Ilk  SPECIFIC  DATA-  1.  LEVEL  OF  BUM 

■CONTRACTOR  ACCtU 

NA  NL  iBr.i  Dm 

10  NO .  t COOES:  * 

rrooram  element 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TAIN  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A.  PRIMARY 

62111 0A 

3A  06211 0A  824 

00 

„  055  . 

b.  CONTRIBUTING 

C.  CONTRIBUTING 

1 212 B  (21) 

(IJ)  Chemical  Protection  Against  It  radiation  (09) 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

|.i. ««»«»« Actjvity;  (U)  Chemical;  (U)  Compound;  (U)  Dose; 

(l  )  Protection;  (!')  Radiation  Injury;  (U)  Human  Volunteers 


l«  SCIENTIFIC  AN  D  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 

DM  1)00  Radio  and  Radiation 


1»  START  (JAft 

SO  05 


1?  CONTRACT  grant 

a  oatii/effectivi: 

b.  NUHIIH  * 

c.  TYPE. 

«.  KINO  OK  ARARO’ 


T5  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  0a7* 

CONT 


EXPIRATION: 


d  AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


t  DOO  ORGANIZATION 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

*00",“  *  Waahi  igton,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONIIBl  E  INDIVIDUAL 


h»c.  HUUSCHLR,  IJ.  L.  t  COL 
tti-iPHONt  202/576 -35 SI 


II  GENERA  Ult 


II  FUNOlNO  A0ENCY 

DA  I 


<•  RESOURCE*  ESTIMATE 


fiscal 

YEAR 


««.  PERFORMANCE  MltHOO 

C.  In  -House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRI  d  F UNO*  ffn 


TEfTrBTg^ - 

73 

6 

150 

CURRENT 

74 

1.  85 

130 

20  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 


name:* Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicinal  Giemistry 
^Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVEITIGA  TON  'fxtmlah  it  AM  II  (J  t.  AuRnll  f  n.rlhJflMi) 

Sweeney,  T.  R. ,  Ph.  D. 
r.L.PHONt  202/576-3731 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMICR 
AUOCIATE  IN  VI  IT  I  G  A  TORI 
N  AMI: 

NANC 


'  Rothe,  William  E.  ,  COL 


UA 


tl  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  14  APPROACH,  IS  PROOREIS  'fumlrnh  InittvtdumI  p.r.,r«pA.  JF«ftll/J.<>  I**-  nunNi  Rr*C»t/»  fat  nt  ««rA  with  S*CuHty  £/•*  *  Iftc.  l/cvi  C>4»  ) 

23.  (U)  'Hie  objective  of  this  research  is  to  develop  a  militarily  useful  pill  to  protect  per¬ 

sonnel  against  lethal  effects  of  ionizing  radiation.  Such  a  drug  would  reduce  the  initial  effeci 
oi  nuclear  radiation  as  well  as  provide  a  margin  of  safety  for  personnel  operating  in  a  con¬ 
taminated  terrain.  An  efficient  anti  radiation  compound  would  also  be  useful  to  the  Army 
from  a  clinical  standpoint. 

2  1.  (U)  Approach  to  the  objectives  is  through  accepted  drug  development  protocols.  Synthe¬ 

sis  and  testi  ig  of  potential  agents  is  being  carried  out.  'lest  results  are  analyzed  for 
structure  activity  relationships  and  fed  back  into  the  synthesis  program.  Promising  com¬ 
pounds  are  carried  forward  to  testing  in  large  animals  and  the  pharmacology  of  these  com¬ 
pounds  investigated.  In  addition,  chrome  roxicity  studies,  dose  reduction  factor  studies  and 
drug  antagonism  studies  are  being  carried  out. 

25.  (U >  72  ()7  -  73  06  'ihe  synthesis  effort  was  phased  out;  emphasis  was  on  the  synthesis 
of  important  disulfides  desired  for  biological  testing.  Screening  of  new  compounds  was 
resumed  after  a  10-month  delay  for  purchase  and  installation  of  a  cesium -(3)  radiation 
sourci.  Large  animal  studies  were  continued  with  a  shift  in  emphasis  from  pa  rotten  1  studies 
in  dogs  to  oral  studies  in  monkeys.  While  aminoalkylphosphorothioates  continue  to  be  the 
most  active  class  of  drugs,  promising  new  thiazolidines  and  disulfides  have  been  identified. 

A  Phase  I  human  tolerance  test  has  been  completed  on  WR  2721.  For  technical  report  see 
Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  July  72  -  30  June  73. 


(Pll  Redacted] 


DD  1498 


1004  CL 


Project  3A062110A824  IONIZING  RADIATION  INJURY ,  PREVENTION  AND  TREATMENT 
Task  00  Ionizing  Radiation  Injury,  Prevention  and  Treatment 
Work  Unit  055  Chemical  Protection  Against  Radiation 


Investigators. 

Principal:  Thomas  R.  Sweeney,  Ph.D. 

Associates:  COL  William  E.  Rothe,  VC;  1LT  Blair  T.  Atherton,  MSC; 
Miss  Mprie  Grenan;  1LT  T.  Scott  Griffin,  OrdC; 

Melvin  H.  Heiffer,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Kenneth  E.  Kinnamon,  VC; 
Daniel  L.  Klayman,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Peter  S.  Loizeaux,  VC; 
Robert  S.  Rozman,  Ph.D.;  Mrs.  June  A.  Schafer; 

2LT  Thomas  S.  Woods,  CmlC 


Problem 


The  possible  use  of  nuclear  weapons  in  future  warfare  in  both  strategic 
and  tactical  situations  poses  a  significant  hazard  for  troops  which 
must  operate  in  the  resulting  radioactive  environment.  Measures  to 
decrease  the  radiation  hazard  and  thereby  increase  the  soldier's 
effectiveness  are  required. 

Background 

Almost  25  years  ago  a  new  field  of  research  was  opened  when  it  was 
found  that  certain  chemicals  administered  before  radiation  with  x-rays 
brought  about  a  substantial  reduction  of  radiation  injury  in  rats.  The 
possibility  was  thus  made  evident  of  the  development  o  a  drug  which 
could  provide  for  the  soldier  a  significant  degree  of  protection  from 
various  radiation  hazards  associated  with  nuclear  warfare.  As  a 
consequence  the  program  to  develop  useful  antiradiation  drugs  was 
established  at  WRAIR  in  1959.  The  goal  was  the  development  of  an 
orally  effective  drug  with  a  dose  reduction  factor  (DRF)  of  3  when  taken 
24  hours  or  more  prior  to  radiation  exposure  and  having  a  wide  margin  of 
safety.  Steady  progress  has  been  made.  Seven  drugs  have  been  effective 
enough  to  have  received  an  investigational  exemption  for  the  development 
of  a  new  drug  application.  Four  of  the  seven  are  still  being  actively 
pursued.  The  leading  single  drug  developed  has  a  dose  reduction  factor 
of  2.3  when  administered  parenterally  to  mice  and  a  duration  of  effect 
on  the  order  of  5  hours.  Interest  in  the  development  of  an  antiradia¬ 
tion  drug  has  decreased  since  the  signing  of  the  Nuclear  Test  Band 
Treaty.  The  project  is  currently  in  a  period  of  an  orderly  phase-out 
of  several  years  duration. 

Approach 

The  approach  to  the  development  of  an  antiradiation  agent  has 
the  medicinal  chemical  research  patterns  used  successfully  by 
ceutical  companies  and  their  development  of  new  drugs.  Based 

1065 


followed 

pharma- 

upon 


feedback  from  the  biological  test  system  and  the  biochemical  literature, 
structure-activity  relationships  are  established  which  served  as  a 
basis  for  the  synthesis  of  more  effective  compounds.  Those  compounds 
considered  particularly  effective  are  resynthesized  in  larger  quantities 
for  cesting  in  dogs  and/or  monkeys.  Those  compounds  that  survived  the 
large  animal  studies  are  then  subjected  to  toxicity,  pharmacokinetic, 
and  a  pharmacodynamic  studies  in  order  to  determine  the  suitability  of 
the  compound  for  clinical  studies  and  to  compile  the  data  necessary  to 
claim  a n  investigational  exemption. 

Results  and  Discussion 


General  progress  during  FY-73  reflected  the  effects  of  the  phase-out  of 
the  Drug  Development  Program.  The  rate  of  the  introduction  of  new 
compounds  was  reduced  because  of  the  diminished  synthesis  program.  In 
addition  testing  has  been  delayed  because  of  necessary  changes  in  the 
physical  facilities. 

Additional  studies  (COL  Ray  Olsen,  MC,  Principle  Investigator)  on 
WR-2721  have  been  carried  out.  The  drug  has  been  administered  orally 
to  human  volunteers  up  to  5  grams  per  day.  The  data  are  in  the  process 
of  being  analyzed. 

Chemistry:  Contract  Synthesis  Program.  The  three  chemical 
synthesis  contracts  that  were  active  during  FY-73  were  in  a  phase-out 
period.  Two  of  the  contracts  that  will  enter  FY-74  will  expire 
relatively  soon  after  the  new  year.  The  Preparations  Laboratory  con¬ 
tinued  to  synthesize  compounds  in  larger  amounts  for  large  animal 
studies. 

In  view  of  the  imminent  termination  of  the  synthesis  program,  the 
decision  was  made  that  the  thrust  of  the  synthesis  should  be  in  the 
area  of  disulfides  which  were  needed  t n  complete  several  series  of 
active  compounds.  The  disulfides  were  particularly  indicated  because 
of  their  stability  and  likelihood  of  high  activity.  In  addition  there 
was  synthesized  a  number  of  the  active  aminoalkylaminoethylphosphoro- 
thioate  class,  a  number  of  compounds  with  novel  sulfur-blocking  group, 
and  three  difficultly  synthesized  cyclobutane  aminothiols;  the  latter 
are  of  considerable  theoretical  interest  because  of  the  stereo 
chemistry  involved.  A  total  of  83  new  compounds  were  submitted  by  the 
synthesis  laboratories  and  four  submitted  in  large  quantities  from  the 
Preparations  Laboratories. 

Chemistry:  Organic  Chemistry  Laboratories.  Investigations  have 
been  continued  on  the  synthesis  of  new  and  effective  antiradiation 
agents. 

The  sodium  borohydride  reduction  of  organic  thiosulfates  has  until 
recently  eluded  efforts  to  produce  thiols  directly  in  both  protic  and 
non-protic  solvents.  The  reaction  has  produced  for  the  most  part 
organic  disulfides  which  have  resistel  cleavage  in  situ  due,  apparently, 

1066 


to  the  presence  of  borohydride  by-products .  It  has  now  been  found  that 
when  the  reaction  is  performed  and  dimethylsulfoxide  at  80-100°,  an 
acceptable  yield  of  thiol  is  obtained.  Studies  which  are  anticipated 
to  lead  to  improve  yields  of  thiols  and  purer  products  are  still  in 
progress. 

In  the  investigation  of  the  effect  of  thiobenzoate  ion  on  organic 
thiosulfates,  which  was  completed  this  year,  it  was  found  that  the 
course  of  the  reaction  is  influenced  by  the  degree  of  substitution  of 
any  amino  group  present  in  the  substrate  molecule.  This  finding  is  in 
harmony  with  the  earlier  observation  that  aminoalkylthiosulfuric  acids 
react  with  inorganic  sulfide  ion  in  a  manner  dependent  upon  the  nature 
of  the  amino  group  present.  Compounds  derived  from  this  study  are 
undergoing  evaluation  for  antiradiation  activity. 

A  method  has  been  developed  for  the  rapid  detection  of  organic  poly¬ 
sulfides  in  the  presence  of  disulfides.  The  method  depends  upon  the 
selective  cleavage  of  polysulfides  with  sodium  borohydride  in  aqueous 
or  aqueous  ethanol  solution  followed  by  an  acidification  which  results 
in  a  copious  evolution  of  hydrogen  sulfide.  This  technique  has  been 
utilized  in  confirming  compound  identity  in  instances  of  questionable 
labeling  of  containers  of  di-  and  polysulfides. 

A  number  of  potential  antiradiation  agents,  active  intraperitoneal 1 
has  been  resynthesized  in  larger  quantities  for  oral  testing. 

Biology;  Rodent  Testing  Program.  No  radiation  studies  were  per¬ 
formed  in  mice  for  the  first  8  months  of  FY-73  as  a  consequence  of  the 
removal  of  an  obsolete  cobalt  60  small  animal  irradiator  and  the  pur¬ 
chase,  installation,  loading  and  calibration  of  a  gamma  cell  40  cesium- 
137  source.  During  the  final  four  months  of  the  year,  drug  screening 
was  resumed  but  only  on  a  reduced  basis  because  of  the  remodeling  of 
the  animal  room  with  the  resulting  reduction  of  animal  holding 
facilities.  A  total  of  220  tests  were  performed  on  118  drugs.  Addi¬ 
tional  N-substituted  amidines  were  tested  to  complete  the  studies  on 
the  structure-activity  relationship  in  the  active  amidine  series.  Addi¬ 
tional  analogs  of  the  highly  active  WR-2721  and  WR  3689  are  being 
studied.  The  eight  months  suspension  in  testing  has  resulted  in  a 
buildup  of  a  backlog  of  500  compounds  for  testing,  of  which  350  are 
new  drugs. 

Biology:  Large  Animal  Testing  Program.  Emphasis  during  the  past 
year  has  been  placed  upon  oral  administration  of  drugs,  utilizing  the 
rhesus  monkey  as  the  model.  Eight  compounds  were  tested,  three  of 
which  showed  activity.  WR  151,331,  a  disulfide,  protected  2  of  5 
monkeys  when  administered  orally  at  75  mg/kg  two  hours  prior  to 
irradiation. 


1067 


NH 


NH 


ch2nhcch2ss-ch2cnhch 


WR  151,331 


Oral  studies  continued  to  be  discouraging;  the  compounds  tested  do 

not  approach  the  protective  activity  that  is  obtained  following  intra¬ 
venous  administration.  It  seems  possible  that  the  high  gastric  acidity 
of  the  monkey  riay  result  in  the  breakdown  of  certain  classes  of  radio- 
protective  drugs,  e.g.  phosphorothioates,  although  the  use  of  a  variety 
of  buffers  in  conjunction  with  test  drugs  was  tried  without  success. 
WR-3689,  a  highly  active  phosphorothioate  when  administered  intra¬ 
venously,  has  been  prepared  in  enteric-coated  tablets  but  not  yet 
evaluated . 

Three  drugs  WR  108,503,  WR  168,643,  and  WR  50,909  were  tested  by 
intravenous  administration  to  dogs;  none  showed  remarkable  activity. 

The  total  number  of  antiradiation  drug  evaluations  was  significantly 
reduced  as  a  result  of  reactor  down-time  for  refueling  and  equipment 
calibration. 

A  system  for  visually  monitoring  the  radiation  dose  in  the  exposure  room 
of  the  Diamond  Ordnance  Radiation  Facility  TRIGA  reactor  was  developed. 
The  system  uses  small  on  line  ionization  chambers  constructed  of  mag¬ 
nesium  and  polystyrene  and  filled  with  C02  connected  via  coaxial  cables 
to  a  control  room  amplifier  and  strip  chart  recorder.  The  system 
enables  the  reactor  operator  to  precisely  control  the  total  radiation 
dose  delivered  to  the  experiment. 

Biology:  Liver  Perfusion  Studies.  In  general,  hepatic  neoplasia 
is  still  considered  to  be  an  inoperable  condition.  The  classic  treat¬ 
ment  is  to  perfuse  the  liver  with  nitrogen  mustard  by  intra-arterial 
catheterization.  However,  it  has  been  shown  that  malignant  neoplasms 
growing  in  the  liver  tend  to  acquire  an  exclusively  arterial  blood 
supply,  regardless  of  the  route  by  which  tumor  emboli  reach  the  liver. 

In  contrast  the  normal  parenchyma  receive  blood  primarily  via  the 
portal  circulation. 

One  can  be  selective  in  the  perfusion  of  the  liver  due  to  the  two 
distinctive  circulatory  patterns  of  the  neoplastic  organ.  Mustargen 
introduced  via  the  arterial  (hepatic)  route  should  go  primarily  to  the 
neoplasms  and  hepatic  tissue  immediately  adjacent  to  them.  Introduc¬ 
tion  of  a  mustargen  antagonist  through  the  venous  (inferior  mesenteric) 
system  has  shown  to  protect  the  normal  parenchyma  in  pilot  studies 
previously  conducted  in  dogs.  It  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  mustar¬ 
gen  doses  sufficient  to  eliminate  hepatomas,  although  ordinarily  lethal 
when  injected  into  the  systemic  circulation  can  be  successfully  counter- 

1068 


acted  by  concurrent  administration  of  a  suitable  nitrogen  mustard 
antagonist. 


Baseline  studies  have  been  run  in  normal  Macaca  mulatta  monkeys .  In 
three  monkeys  of  the  same  species  which  had  confirmed  hepatomas 
(monkeys  with  hepatomas  supplied  by  Dr.  Richard  H.  Adamson,  National 
Cancer  Institute)  the  dose  regimens  employed  seemed  to  enhance  rather 
than  impede  tumor  growth. 

Biology:  Therapy  of  Radiation  Injury  by  Hematopoietic  Tissue 
Grafting:  A  Study  of  Graft  Elimination.  This  work  is  being  accom¬ 
plished  in  collaboration  with  the  Armed  Forces  Radiobiology  Research 
Institute,  Bethesda,  Maryland. 

Radiation-exposed  individuals  that  would  die  from  damage  to  the  hemato¬ 
poietic  system  may  be  saved  by  grafting  bone  marrow  from  a  suitable 
donor.  However,  unless  the  donor  and  recipient  are  identical  with 
respect  to  histocompatlbile  antigens,  individuals  that  overcome  the 
radiation  death  may  succumb  to  a  serious  immunological  malady.  Any 
measure  that  reduces  the  immunologic  reaction  increases  the  chances  for 
successful  therapy.  This  reduced  immunologic  reaction  may  be  accom¬ 
plished  by  either  increasing  the  graft-host  compatibility  or  eliminat¬ 
ing  the  foreign  graft  after  it  is  no  longer  required  for  survival.  The 
former  approach  is  the  one  roost  commonly  employed  and  is  the  one  of 
choice  when  the  subject  being  treated  has  an  abnormal  hematopoietic 
system.  However,  when  the  subject  had,  before  the  radiation  exposure, 
a  normal  hematopoietic  system  the  latter  approach,  i.e.  eliminating 
the  foreign  graft,  may  be  preferable.  Data  presented  here  and  the 
evidence  reported  by  others  is  reason  to  believe  that  marrow  graft 
elimination  is  feasible  and  may  be  preferable  to  the  more  popular 
method  of  promoting  graft-host  compatibility. 


Initial  experiments  are  being  conducted  to  establish  the  relationship 
between  the  time  after  radiation  and  the  minimum  size  of  a  C57B1 
6  mouse  narrow  graft  which  will  permit  CBA  mice  exposed  to  a  lethal 
dose  of  whole-body  radiation  to  survive  the  radiation  crisis.  After 
administration  of  20- ,  40- ,  100- ,  and  300  x  10^  viable  cells  on 
days  1,  2,  5,  7,  10,  and  14  after  radiation  exposure  it  has  been  shown 
that  1)  bone  marrow  administration  at  12  or  14  days,  regardless  of 
cell  levgl,  does  not  prevent  a  radiation  death;  2)  cell  doses  of 
300  x  10°  are  excessive  and  cause  death  earlier  than  in  control  mice; 
3)  the  maximum  time  allowable  after  radiation  exposure  in  which  to 
prevent  a  radiation  death  may  be  as  great  as  10  days;  4)  the  optimum 
cell  dose  is  40-  to  100  x  10®  cells.  Studies  are  continuing. 


Conclusions 


Significant  protection  against  the  effects  of  ionizing  irradiation  can 
be  provided  by  drugs  if  they  are  administered  prior  to  radiation 
exposure.  Species  variability,  toxicity,  and  the  variability  in 
response  with  route  of  administration  for  various  classes  of  compounds 

1069 


will  continue  to  pose  serious  testing  difficulties.  Parenteral  adminis¬ 
tration  is  the  most  suitable  route  for  screening  purposes  to  determine 
if  a  drug  has  radioprotective  properties.  Oral  administration  poses  a 
variety  of  difficulties  not  encountered  with  the  parenteral  route  but 
is  the  route  of  choice  for  the  soldier  in  the  field  and  therefore 
should  be  vigorously  pursued.  The  synthesis  of  increasingly  active 
antiradiation  drugs,  as  demonstrated  by  DRF  and  duration  of  effect, 
supports  the  approach  adopted.  The  original  criteria,  that  is,  oral 
administration,  a  DRF  of  3,  a  24  hour  duration  of  action  and  a  wide 
margin  of  safety  are  realistic  goals. 

* 

Recommendations 


The  orderly  phase  out  of  the  antiradiation  drug  development  program 
that  is  now  underway  should  be  continued  until  all  synthesized  com¬ 
pounds  have  been  adequately  tested.  A  preparations  laboratory  should 
be  maintained  in  order  to  provide  a  resynthesis  and  purification 
capability  for  interesting  compounds  uncovered  during  the  final  testing 
period.  The  synthesis  contracts  shouxd  be  brought  to  an  orderly  ter¬ 
mination.  Emphasis  in  the  biology  should  be  placed  on  oral  administra¬ 
tion  of  drugs  and  on  techniques  to  prevent  premature  destruction  and 
enhance  absorption  in  the  gastrointestinal  tract. 


1070 


Project  3A062110A824  IONIZING  RADIATION  INJURY,  PREVENTION  AND  TREATMENT 
Task  00  Ionizing  Radiation  Injury,  Prevention  and  Treatment 
Work  Unit  055  Chemical  Protection  Against  Radiation 
Literature  Cited. 


References : 


1.  Klayman,  D.L.  and  Woods,  T.S.;  The  effect  of  Thiobenzoate 
Anion  on  Organic  Thiosulfates,  International  J.  Sulfur  Chem.,  in  press 
(1973). 


2.  Klayman,  D.L.,  Griffin,  T.S.,  and  Woods,  T.S.;  The  Use  of 
Sodium  Borohydride  to  Distinguish  Organic  Polysulfides  from  Disulfides, 
International  J.  of  Sulfur  Chem. ,  in  press  (1973) . 


Publication: 

1.  Klayman,  D.L.  and  Griffin,  T.S.;  Reaction  of  Selenium  with 
Sodium  Borohydride  in  Protic  Solvents.  A  Facile  Method  for  the  Intro¬ 
duction  of  Selenium  into  Organic  Molecules,  J.  Amer.  Chem.  Soc.,  95, 
197  (1973).  — 


1071 


n 


1 


(U)  Biological  Effects  and  Hazards  of  Microwave  Radiation 


if  iciimtific  and  ticmnolooical  aneas* 

013400  Psychology ; 016208  Stress  Physiology; 005700  Electronic  &  Electrical  Engineering 

t>  (TART  0AT|  M  ESTIMATED  COMFlETiOr  DAT! 

71  07  Cont 

IS  FUNDINO  AOINCT 

DA  | 

IS.  performance  method 

C  In  House 

a  OATei/t ffictive  NA  urination 

k  nuuk m  * 

c  TVRt  A  AMOUNT: 

AKINOOF  AIARO:  r. CUM.  AMT. 

ts  RESOURCES  ISTIMATI 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAR  VRS 

k  FUNDS  ff*  Nw**) 

FISCAL 

VI AR 

73 

4 

380 

74 

5 

550 

it  RESPONSIBLE  ooo  ORGANISATION  j 

SO  RCRFONM4NC  OAOANIlA' 

,w*  i  i 

!'  oiniral  use 


RESEARCH  AMD  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


•  otTi  MivtuiraT  4  kino  or  summary 


72  Q7  fli 


10  NO  /coot*  • 


Ha  Change 


«.  MIMAMT 


b.  CON  i  ■  ISUTINO 


C.  CON  T  HI  MU  T  IN  0 


62110 


FD0G1212B (21M 


•  IUMMAHV  KTV*  S.  MORN  BCCURIT 


i  MMMjir 


project  hummer 


3A062 110A824 


7*7ZZ7ZZZSF 

DA  OB  648< 


1 


rrSTBTBESr 

73  07  01 


otm  MtrrN 

JSk. 


TASK  ARIA  NUMOER 


00 


umr  co#fwot  •  iwaol 
DDDRkE(AR)6  J* 


•kiRicinc  DATA • 

CON TN ACTON  ACCUI 

D  wo 


E 


VI 


I.  civic  Or  IUH 
A.  VOIR  UWT 


WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 


ML 


*****  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
"f“  Washington,  DC  20012 


N(lRON*IMLt  INDIVIDUAL 

HAUL  Buescher,  COL  E.L. 
TICCA NONt:  202-576-3651 


Foreign  Intelligence  considered 

- 2 - - 


IT  nFRXm  (?*•<•* i  tJtCH  •/»  I •mtrttw 


"•“‘‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Researcn 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
'MU  Washington,  DC  20012 


RINCiRAL  INVCSTIOATON  (F»»W*A  If  AN  If  V  *.  4uAMi  /MKlfwUMj 

Sharp,  J.C.,  Ph.D. 

▼cccamoni  202-576-5126 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMMIR 
ASSOCIATE  INVEST-  Q  A  TORI 

•“■"Grove,  H.M. 

"^Hawkins ,  T.D.  DA 


(U) Microwave  Hazards;  (U) Nonionizing  Radiation? 


(U) Dosimetry;  (U) Behavioral  Effects;  (U) Neurophysiology;  (U)Militarv  Medicine 


t)  TCCNNICAL  OMJtCTIVI,*  i  4.  ARFROACH.  2t  NNOOAt U  ( r*r*t+  if"*  W  A**/  INanf  tUm4  *  ««N«  PNH*  Mil  •»  M«A  Nt»  |A«t#Ur  CfMFlM«4Mf«l  C«A*  j 

23.  (U)  To  establish  meaningful  criteria  to  delimit  human  operations  in  an  electro- 
magentic  environment  to  support  maximum  combat  effectiveness  at  minimum  personnel  risk 
from  the  environment.  Delineate  the  interaction  of  radiofrequency  and  microwave  radi¬ 
ation  (100  MHz  to  100  GHz)  with  biological  systems.  Survey  and  evaluate  all  known 
meJiods  and  techniques  of  microwave  dosimetry  and  develop  improved  techniques  and 
instrumentation  where  appropriate  and  necessary. 

24.  (U)  Investigate  each  major  organ  system  and  biological  process  whe  e  there  is 
reason  to  believe  microwave  effects  may  occur  at  reasonable  power  intensities.  Where 
indicated,  determine  the  military  significance  of  the  effects  and  the  mea  ;ures  nec¬ 
essary  to  obviate  them.  A  data  bank  of  the  world  literature  on  the  biolot  ical  effects 
and  hazards  of  electromagnetic  radiation  is  to  be  maintained.  InitiaJ  sci  ntifi-; 
efforts  will  use  evaluative  methods  from  experimental  psychology,  electroph  siology 
and  ophthalmology.  Exposure  parameters  will  be  chosen  for  relevance  to  Army  radiating 
equipment  and  operational  requirements. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06.  During  the  reporting  periods  effort  has  been  concentrated  on 

the  behavioral  assessment  of  the  effects  of  power  levels  up  to  150  mW/sq.  cm  at  various 
wavelengths;  a  series  of  lethality  studies  in  rodents  have  been  completed;  and  a  rep¬ 
lication  of  an  experiment  involving  turnover  of  brain  serotonin  completed.  With  work 
stoppage  as  an  end  point  a  definite  effect  of  the  wavelength  of  radiation  has  been 
observed  with  a  maximum  effect  at  1700  MHz.  A  survey  of  the  literature  on  microwave 
cataractogenesis  has  been  conducted  and  a  series  of  studies  initiated.  A  major 
conference  was  organized  dealing  with  the  biological  effects  of  microwaves,  the 
proceedings  are  in  the  process  of  publication.  For  technical  report  see  Walter 

Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  July  72  -  30  June  73. 


DD,’"“  1490 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  O  F  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  I  ASIA,  1  NOV  SS 
AND  1  4SS-  I  ,  t  MAR  «|  (FOR  A  RM  V  USE!  ARE  OSSOLITI 

1072 


[Pll  Redacted] 


i 


Project  3A062110A824  IONIZING  RADIATION  INJURY,  PREVENTION  AND 

TREATMENT 

Task  00  Ionizing  Radiation  Injury,  Prevention  and  Treatment 

Work  Unit  057  Biological  effects  and  hazards  of  microwave  radiation 

Invertigators. 

Principal:  Joseph  C.  Sharp,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  H.  Mark  Grove,  M.Sc.;  Sandra  H.  Githens,  B.S.; 

T.  Daryl  Hawkins,  M.A.;  MAJ  Stuart  E.  Hirsch,  MC; 

MAJ  Lawrence  E.  Larsen,  MC;  John  F.  Schrot,  M.A.; 
Peter  Brown,  B.S. 

During  FY  73,  the  second  year  of  funding,  several  studies  have  been 
completed  and  a  relatively  large  and  comprehensive  program  has  been 
initiated.  This  Annual  Report  summarizes  the  salient  points  of 
progress  in  five  general  areas. 

I.  BEHAVIORAL  BIOLOGY  STUDIES  OF  MICROWAVE  EFFECTS. 

In  the  past  year,  substantial  gains  have  been  obtained  in  our 
attempts  to  develop  a  systematic  framework  within  which  the  orderly 
study  of  behavioral  and  biological  effects  of  microwave  irradiation 
can  be  conducted.  Three  major  studies  have  been  completed,  along 
with  several  pilot  investigations,  which  have  led  to  observations  of 
the  potentially  important  consequences  of  exposure  to  microwaves. 

Lethal  effects  of  3.0  GHz  exposure  of  rats. 

In  a  first  study  of  letnality,  an  elliptical  focusing  antenna 
was  employed  to  provide  high  density  levels.  One  hundred  and 
seventy-four  male  rats  were  exposed  for  durations  of  30  to  240 
seconds  at  a  frequency  of  3.0  GHz  (i.e.,  10  cm  wavelength).  At 
each  exposure  duration,  the  percent  mortality  increased  with  in¬ 
creases  in  incident  energy  density  (power  x  duration)  .  The  LD,.. 
proved  to  be  a  monotonic  function  of  exposure  duration,  at  least 
within  the  ranges  investigated.  This  relationship  seems  to  have 
considerable  generality  since  similar  functions  were  later  found 
in  behavioral  studies  and  in  a  lethality  study  utilizing  the  free- 
field,  anechoic  exposure  space.  Within  a  relatively  narrow  range 
(180  to  210  grams) ,  it  was  found  that  body  weight  is  an  important 
determiner  of  lethality,  i.e.,  heavier  animals  are  more  susceptible 
than  the  lighter  animals. 

Lethal  effects  of  2.45  GHz  exposure  of  rats. 

Utilizing  a  free-field  technique,  and  observing  rats  with  closed 
circuit  television,  it  was  possible  to  determine  the  relationship  of 

1073 


seizures  and  death  to  exposure  variables.  As  in  the  3.0  GHz  study, 
a  monotonic  relation  was  found  as  a  function  of  energy  density.  It 
was  also  found  that  the  higher  the  power  level,  the  shorter  the 
time  to  convulsion.  Within-subject  comparisons  demonstrated  that 
death  followed  convulsions  by  about  60  seconds  and  was  independent 
of  the  exposure  duration  required  to  produce  the  convulsion.  The 
utility  of  further  investigations  into  this  hyperthermic  convulsion 
may  be  dependent  upon  the  need  for,  and  interest  in,  hyperthermia 
research  and/or  pharmacological  intervention  into  "fever"  states. 

Frequency  dependent  effects  on  rat  performance. 

A  study  was  completed  which  assessed  the  performance  of  rats  in 
a  far- fie  Id  exposure  environment  as  a  function  of  both  frequency 
(wavelength)  and  power  density.  The  rats  were  trained  to  perform  a 
simple  task  requiring  ten  lever  presses  to  produce  a  food  pellet; 
they  could  obtain  their  daily  food  ration  in  a  15-minute  session. 

At  each  exposure  frequency  (0.75,  1.7,  2.45  and  3.0  GHz),  the 
animals  were  exposed  t^  five  different  power  levels  (25,  50, 

75,  100,  and  150  mW/cni  ) .  The  highest  power  levels  resulted 
in  the  termination  of  performance.  The  ei  *-  of  varying 

frequency,  however,  was  more  complex  in  th  .  "U-shaped"  function 

was  generated.  It  appears  that  1.7  GHz  has  the  greatest  effect 
upon  performance  when  power  levels  are  kept  constant.  Both  the 
higher  and  lower  frequencies  had  progressively  less  impact  upon 
the  performance  than  did  1.7  GHz.  It  is  extremely  important  that 
the  generality  of  this  frequency  sensitivity  be  confirmed.  This 
generality  should  be  investigated  across  both  dependent  variables 
(lethality,  convulsions,  behavioral  assessments,  and  physiological 
variables)  and  independent  variables  (species,  body  weights  and 
geometry,  wavelength  and  energy  levels). 

Species  comparisons  of  lethality. 

Now  that  considerable  information  has  been  developed  on  the 
rat  in  both  lethality  and  behavioral  studies,  it  is  necessary  to 
develop  comparisons  with  other,  different  species.  Preliminary 
observations  indicate  the  mouse  is  more  vulnerable  to  2.54  GHz 
exposure  £han  is  the  laboratory  rat.  At  a  power  density  of 
200  mW/cm  ,  the  time  to  convulsion  and  time  to  death  were  found  to 
be  approximately  50-percent  shorter  in  the  mouse  than  in  the  rat. 

By  contrast,  at  the  same  power  densities,  the  New  Zealand  rabbit 
is  less  sensitive  than  the  rat,  with  times  to  convulsion  and  death 
approximately  twice  those  of  the  rat.  These  species  differences 
suggest  that  body  size  is  an  important  determiner  of  the  animals' 
response  to  exposure.  Different  physiological  mechanisms,  or 
efficiency  of  similar  mechanisms  in  different  species,  may  be  as 
important  as  the  size  of  the  organism.  Work  on  the  interrelation¬ 
ship  between  such  variables  and  wavelength  clearly  must  be  pursued 
to  a  logical  conclusion. 


1074 


II.  CENTRAL  NERVOUS  SYSTEM  ELECTROPHYSIOLOGY. 


Since  it  is  a  central  hypothesis  of  this  laboratory  that  elec- 
trophysiological  effects  coincident  with  microwave  exposure  may  be 
a  result  of  thermoregularity  dysfunction  or  inadequacy,  considerable 
effort  has  been  devoted  to  the  development  of  a  system  to  measure 
brain  temperatures  during  microwave  exposure.  Such  a  system, 
coupled  with  a  means  to  measure  electrophysiological  activity,  will 
allow  us  to  follow  the  time-course  of  thermoregulatory  responses, 
electrical  activity  and  local  brain  temperature  gradients.  After 
fabricating  many  different  probe  designs  and  testing  them  for  both 
radio- frequency  (RF)  and  electrical  decoupling,  it  was  found  that  a 
probe  using  microcircuitry  techniques  was  very  promising.  The  final 
probe  has  the  following  characteristics :  The  thermistor  lead 
"wires"  consist  of  balanced  lines  2  ym  wide,  2000  &  thick,  and  2  ym 
apart,  this  l  ■  minimize  loop  area  and  thereby  power  extraction. 

Long  term  RF  neating  of  the  mount,  due  to  microwave  dipole  currents 
is  suppressed  through  the  action  of  current  limiting  flip-chip 
resistors  and  series  resistors.  This  microwave  integrated  circuit 
(MIC)  is  connected  to  an  external  full  bridge  and  detector  by  means 
of  high-impedance,  conductive  monofilament.  By  using  infra-red 
thermography  it  was  demonstrated  that  long-term  heating  due  to  RF 
power  absorption  was  eliminated.  This  finding  showed  that  the 
combination  of  microcircuitry,  current-limiting  series  resistance 
and  thermal  isolation  makes  possible  continuous  temperature  measure¬ 
ments  in  animals  in  the  presence  of  microwave  radiation. 

The  development  of  an  electrode  which  is  decoupled  from  the  RF 
fields  is  technically  and  conceptually  simpler  than  the  development 
of  a  temperature  sensing  probe.  Such  electrodes  have  now  been  made 
and  are  in  the  process  of  being  validated  and  calibrated.  After 
these  necessary  and  time-consuming  preliminary  steps  are  completed, 
the  probes  and  electrodes  will  be  implanted  in  rabbits  and  the 
animals  then  exposed  to  various  microwave  environments.  All  of 
the  peripheral  and  ancillary  equipment  and  programs  have  been 
d  *'eloped  rnd  are  ready  to  be  used. 

II x.  OCULAR  EFFECTS. 

Daring  the  reporting  period,  the  study  of  microwave  ocular 
effects  has  continued  on  two  major  fronts:  The  clinical  examination 
of  occupationally  exposed  personnel  and  laboratory  studies  of  rabbits 
exposed  to  various  wavelengths. 

Clinical  investigation. 

Various  military  installations  which  employ  relatively  large 
numbers  of  individuals  who  work  with  microwave  generating  equipment 
are  periodically  visited  by  a  team  of  clinical  and  reseer^h  ophthal¬ 
mologists.  A  complete  ophthalmic  examination  is  made  of  these 

1075 


individuals  as  well  as  a  cohort  of  non-occupationally  exposed  people. 
To  date,  some  2,000  examinations  have  been  made  by  the  visiting 
team.  While  some  lens  pathologies  have  been  observed,  the  distri¬ 
bution  of  these  abnormalities  between  the  exposed  and  non-exposed 
workers  has  tended  to  be  nearly  the  same.  There  may  be  some  slight 
tendency  for  the  older  (>50  years  old)  workers,  who  are  occupation- 
ally  at  risk,  to  have  a  slightly  higher  incidence  and  prevalence 
of  lens  changes.  This  project  is  continuing,  and  the  data  are  not 
yet  fully  collected  or  analyzed. 

Laboratory  microwave  ocular  research  on  rabbits. 

Work  has  been  completed  during  the  past  year  on  the  establish¬ 
ment  of  parameters  necessary  for  the  production  of  lenticular 
opacification  development  in  albino  New  Zealand  rabbits.  In  an 
initial  study,  single  exposures  t^  3.0  GHz  CW  irradiation  at  varying 
power  densities  from  25-500  mW/cm  ,  utilizing  the  elliptical  focusing 
antenna  were  performed  with  follow-up  of  animals  for  one  year.  In 
no  case  was  the  single  sub-lethal  exposure  noted  to  cause  lenticular 
opacifications  for  this  period  of  follow-up  and  with  the  power  levels 
employed. 

Microwave  cataracts  have  been  produced  in  this  strain  of  rabbits, 
however,  by  utilizing  the  focusing  antenna  at  power  levels  greater 
than  400  mW/cm  ,  following  eleven  daily  15-minute  exposures.  Serial 
slit-lamp  biomicroscopic  photographs  have  been  taken  to  document  the 
morphology  and  progression  of  the  lenticular  changes.  Selected 
animals  have  been  sacrificed  at  various  stages  of  opacification  and 
both  light  and  electron  microscopic  histologic  examination  of  the 
tissues  performed.  This  will  provide  for  a  more  complete  under¬ 
standing  of*  relations  between  slit-lamp  appearance  of  posterior 
subcapsular  irridescence  and  the  microscopic  morphology. 

Utilizing  the  far-field,  anechoic  chambers,  and  operating  at 
either  2.45  or  1.7  GH^,  it  has  been  demonstrated  that  whole-body 
exposures  to  50  mW/cm  for  two  hours  are  lethal.  A  stu^y  was 
designed  in  which  nine  rabbits  were  exposed  to  25  mW/cm  for  two 
hours  daily  for  a  total  of  27  days,  5  days  per  week.  Serial 
observations  of  the  eyes  of  each  rabbit  were  performed  after  each 
exposure  and,  to  date,  the  animals  have  been  followed  for  two  months 
post  exposure.  No  lenticular  changes  have  been  noted  in  the  animals 
still  alive.  Four  animals,  however,  died  of  respiratory  infections. 

Presently,  work  is  being  completed  which  will  provide  a  dose- 
response  curve  for  lenticular  changes  in  rabbits  exposed  daily  to 
3.0  GHz.  Similar  data  will  be  generated  at  different  frequencies 
(i.e.,  1.7  and  2.45  GHz,  at  least)  and,  later,  in  a  different 
species  (e.g. ,  dogs). 


1076 


IV.  CELLULAR  RESPONSES  TO  2.45  GHz  EXPOSURE. 


Two  types  of  studies  have  been  designed  and  completed  which  were 
a  first  attempt  to  identify  the  effects  of  relatively  low-level  micro- 
wave  exposure  (<  33  mW/cm  )  on  cell  activity.  The  first  series  of 
studies  starred  with  the  hypothesis  that  cellular  activity,  as  re¬ 
flected  by  H  -thymidine  uptake,  may  be  altered  in  a  microwave  field. 
Using  a  highly  proliferative  tissue,  intestinal  mucosa  of  rats,  and 
measuring  H  -thymidine  uptake  per  mg  of  tissue,  there  was  fouijd  to 
be  an  increase  in  uptake  following  exposure  to  16  and  8  mW/cm  when 
the  whole  animal  was  exposed  in  a  multi-modal  cavity.  In  ^  free- 
space  situation  the  increased  uptake  was  found  at  16  mW/cm  ,  but  not 
at  8  mW/cm  .  These  findings  were  interpreted  to  cast  doubt  on  the 
dosimetry  of  the  multi-modal  cavity  vis-a-vis  the  far-field  dosimetry. 
The  findings  are  at  power  levels  slightly  below  and  above  the  current 
acceptable  level  of  10  mW/cm  ;  the  observation  of  an  effect  at  this 
power  level  should  in  no  way  be  construed  to  have  an  impact  on  hazard 
determinations.  By  use  of  radioautographic  techniques,  we  have  dem¬ 
onstrated  that  the  tritium  is  in  the  cells  of  the  mucosa  and  not  in 
the  smooth  muscles  or  facia  which  strongly  suggested  an  increase  in 
mitotic  activity. 

Because  of  the  importance  of  a  mechanism  which  might  be  useful 
in  stimulating  cellular  mitotic  activity,  as  well  as  the  exquisite 
experimental  controls  necessary  to  demonstrate  the  effect,  it  was 
felt  important  to  look  directly  at  mitotic  figures  and  count  their 
occurrence.  Since  mitotic  activity  had  been  shown  to  vary  markedly 
over  a  24-hour  period  with  a  maxima  during  mid-morning  for  rodents, 
a  study  using  mice  entrained  to  a  day/night  cycle  was  designed.  The 
animals  were  exposed,  and  later  sacrificed,  either  in  the  morning 
or  evening.  The  corneal  epithelium  was  removed  and  stained  to 
facilitate  mitotic  spindle  counting.  The  results  of  this  study 
clearly  demonstrated  the  rhythmic  nature  of  the  mitotic  activity 
and  showed  the  time  of  maximal  sensitivity  to  microwave  exposure 
to  be  in  the  evening.  That  is,  more  spindles  per  1000  were  found 
3  to  6  hours  after  the  exposure  if  the  exposure  occurred  during 
the  time  when  there  would  normally  be  little  such  activity.  The 
implications  of  this  observation  for  the  design  of  future  experi¬ 
ments  are  important  since  it  is  obvious  that  to  "control”  for 
rhythmic  phenomena  by  rigidly  adhering  to  a  fixed  time-of-day 
for  making  observations  may  obscure  important  biological  events. 

This  becomes  especially  true  when  the  dependent  variables  are 
subtle  and  apparently  ephemeral. 

The  next  series  of  studies  in  this  area  will  deal  with  other 
tissue  systems  and  will  attempt  to  integrate  the  finding  that  there 
may  be  wavelength  specific  effects.  The  frequency  of  2.45  GHz  was 
initially  chosen  because  it  is  the  frequency  of  nearly  all  "radar" 
ovens,  and  the  ability  to  directly  go  from  a  multi-modal  to  a 


1077 


far- field  environment  was  theoretically  important.  The  finding  that 
performance  decrements  show  a  frequency-dependent  effect,  with  the 
maximum  being  at  1.7  GHz,  demands  an  investigation  of  lethality, 
time  to  convulsions,  and  cellular  activity  at  this  frequency  as  well. 

V.  LITERATURE  DATA  BASE. 

Efforts  have  continued  to  build  an  automated  data  base  of  the 
world  literature  related  to  the  biological  effects  of  electromag¬ 
netic  radiation.  This  work  is  under  contract  to  Mead  Technology 
Laboratories.  During  FY  73,  approximately  300  papers  have  been 
acquired  which  have  been  published  during  the  period  January  1971 
through  April  1973.  The  base  is  currently  being  jointly  evaluated 
by  agencies  active  in  this  research  area,  namely  the  Army,  the 
U.S.  Environmental  Protection  Agency,  and  the  U.S.  Public  Health 
Service,  Bureau  of  Radiological  Health.  Depending  upon  the  results 
of  this  evaluation  and  upon  current  analysis  of  the  legal  problems 
concerned  with  the  inclusions  of  copyrighted  material  in  the  base, 
a  decision  will  be  made  toward  the  end  of  FY  74  as  to  the  future 
of  this  operation. 


* 


PROJECT  3A663713D829 
MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 

Task  00 

Malaria  Investigations 


ionq 


e*27.H2fi 


0  -  74  2f, 


Ti  START  DATE 

65,  07 

a  imam odKthim  urn — 

72  08 

IE  F  UN  CUN  0  ADENCV 

DA  | 

16.  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 

C.  IN-House 

IT.  CONTRACT/ ORAN  T 

t  NUMBER  * 

*  TYPE:  A  AMOUNT: 

16.  REfOURCII  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

B  FUNDS  (M  RmnmR) 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

PNICIOIN4 

72 

-3.  

100 

CUNNEHT 

13 

3 

100 

ffTKsPONSIBLE  DOO  OROANI ZATION  | 

M.  PERFORMING  OROANI  IA” 

^  1 _ 1 _ 

II.  TITLE  mtm  fmittty  clwJN— 111  c5y 

till  Ant.iflftnic-Er^t.inPAti 

II.  SCIENTIFIC  ANO  TECNNOl  JOICAL  AREAS* 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  AGENCY  AC  CE  SGI  ON* 

DA  QA  6517 

ft.  OATf  OP  SUMMARY* 

72  08  01 

JUPORT  00#  root  SYMBOL 

DO’DR*E(AR)i3t 

ft.  BATE  PRCV  SUM*RY 

72  07  m 

4.  KINO  CF  SUMMARY 

^  TF.PMTNATIC 

S.  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

N  U 

S.  PORK  IKCURITV* 

n 

I.  NIBAAMNB* 

_ 

IB  D« 

NT 

•O’N  INSTR*N 

SB  SPECIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCISS 

GO  VIS  □  MO 

1  LCYIL  OF  SUM 

B  VMU  UNIT 

(0.  NO  /COOKS;* 

PROONAM  I4.IMINT 

PNOJICT  NUMBER 

TASR  ARIA  NUMOIR 

PORK  UNIT  NUMOIR 

B  PRIMARY 

r^7i^A 

^Afi(337i^n829   .  

00 

106 

B  CONTRIBUTING 

«.  CONTRIBUTING 

CDQG  11U  (V) 

nnj  Rprnlngy  Qf  Jkkrlfl^ 


namci*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
aoomcui*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAMfc  BUESCHER,  COL.  E.  L. 
TELEPHONE)  202-576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 
H  kivdoaoa bach  c+m)  [(j J  Malaria ;  nH  Plasmodium ;  (,U )  Immunity ; 

(U)  Erythrophagocytosis ;  (U)  Autoimmunity;  (U)  Diagnosis 


name*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  CD&I 
""“'Vashington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL.  INVESTIGATOR  (’PumlaA  it  Aft  U  VI  AmMmiIc  /mHNiUmv 

«*«•  EADUN,  E.  H.,  Sc.D. 

202-576-3308_ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER: 

AltOCIATC  INVC  STIOATORS 


n amc!  MOON,  A.  P. 

NAME* 


DA 


il.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  24.  APPROACH.  II  PROOREtt  fP»PPl*A  ImATWAmI  p*f»«r«pA*  *,  nuM»«  Pra«»Pt  Ini  N  ••(A  wim  fpeur Ity  Cl—ltUmtlm  C*F*> 

23  (U)  To  isolate,  purify  and  characterize  various  antigens  from  malarial  parasites  in 
order  to  improve  diagnostic  specificity  and  to  induce  immunoprophylaxis  or  immuno¬ 
suppression  in  military  personnel. 

24  (U)  Separate  parasite  proteins  by  physical  and  chemical  means.  Determine  the 
presence  and  activity  of  metabolic  antigens  in  the  plasma  of  acutely  infected  animals 
and  human  patients.  Analyze  the  fraccionated  proteins  by  both  classical  and  new 
methods , 

25  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Work  unit  is  being  combined  with  work  unit  number  129,  13-ne 
item  ?A6^717DR29. 


“f°"  suuisa  assat 


[Pll  Redacted] 


Hr*  FORM  lAOfi  PREVIOU*  EDITION*  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE 

UL/|  mar  ylHJO  AND  14  06-1  1  MAR  «•  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETI 

1079  CL 


DO  FORMS  1  496  A  1  NOV  6S 


i 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  AMMCV  ftceiwwtf” 

DA  OA  6506 

i.  mi  if  wimn* 

73  07  01 

•A  PORT  COR  FROL  SFWBOL 
DDD*hK(AK)t3i 

E  BATE  PREV  SUM'ET 

72  07  01 

4  NINO  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

B.  SUMMARY  SC  TV* 

U 

L  NORM  SECURITY* 

u 

t.  M.aAOIMf* 

NA 

14  MEETS  N»STR*N 

 NL 

AS,  SPECIFIC  BATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

DCtii  □  m 

I.  LEVEL  OF  SUN 

A  BOOK  UNIT 

10  NO. /CODES:*  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A  PRIMARY 

63713A 

346657131*  29 

nn  

ma  n  -- 

h.  COMTRIBUTINO 

am  mifi 

11.  TITLE  *1*  itmtrttf  CIm.IMmiIm  (Ml 

(U)  Biochemical  Effects 

— 

and  Mechanism  of  Act 

ion  of  Chemoth 

lerapeutic  Agents 

ii  scientific  ano  technological  areas* 

002300  Biochemistry  0 

02900  Biology 

liiAirnii  * 

64  07 

14.  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  DATE 

Cont 

II.  FUNOtNS  AtENCV 

DA  1 

w.  mthoo 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTRACT/ORANT 

4  DATES/E FFECTIVIi  EXPIRATIONi 

E  NUMOCR:* 

C  TYPE:  4  AMOUNT) 

1  RESOURCE!  KITINATA 

E  FUNM  |)*  PmmmA) 

fiscal 

TEAR 

75 

13 

245 

EUIRIEV 

74 

5 

200 

IS  RESPONSIOLE  OOO  ORGANISATION 

SB.  PERFORMING  ORSANII A' 

r~  1 _ i 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 


RKtPONSIOLt  INDIVIDUAL 

NAME;  Buescher,  COL  E.L. 

tclemhomei  202-576-3551 


Division  of  Biochemistry 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

ie  key  *4  noe  7WB53S  mac m  HI  TSSSnrttSSSf^Sff* 


gag? 


PRINCIPAL  INVtITISATON  fP*—  MAM  II  OS.  4nMH  fMtltaltoig 

«*■«•  Beach,  LTC  D.J. 

I.........  202-576-2211^^^^^ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  HUM  DEN'  J 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOATONS 

Demaree,  LTC  G.E. .Lofberg,  R.T.  Ph.D. 
■-«:  Siu.  P.M.L..  PhTP.:  Kazvat.  L.BS  DA 


'  J[U)  Malaria  Chemoprophylaxis 

fU)  Malaria  Chemotherapy*  fill  Drug  Action:  fill  Drug  Analysis:  TUI  Plasmodium 


IS.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  IE  APPROACH,  IE  PROGRESS  ffUMiaA  tntl  HA«I  ty  « 


'  HIM*  l»il  •/  IH*  HE  —  wily  ClMtiliiMM  CM*.| 


23.  (U)  To  define  toxicity,  mechanisms  of  action,  and  pharmacokinetics  of  experimental 
antimalarial  drugs. 

24.  (U)  1)  To  use  malaria  in  animal  models  to  define  interactions  of  chemotherapeutic 
agents  with  host  and  parasite.  2)  To  develop  new  analytical  techniques  to  study  levels 
of  experimental  drugs  in  biological  materials. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Incubation  of  P.  berghei  with  iron  and  chloroquine  prior  to  in¬ 
oculation  into  mice  delayed  onset  of  parasitemia  which  was  proportional  to  the  concen¬ 
tration  of  iron  indicating  a  direct  effect  of  iron  on  the  parasite  to  potentiate  chlo¬ 
roquine.  Dapsone  given  orally  to  rats  causes  adrenal  dystrophy  which  is  not  reversible 
upon  withdrawal  of  the  drug,  Dapsone  produces  reversibly  lowered  blood  levels  of  thy¬ 
roxin  and  TSH.  P.  berghei  infection  in  hamsters  causes  1-131  retention  associated 
with  reduced  1-131  excretion.  A  gas  liquid  chromatographic  method  using  electron 
capture  detection  was  developed  for  determination  of  WR  30,090  in  biological  mate¬ 
rials.  Clinical  serum  samples  were  analyzed  quantitatively  to  determine  blood  levels 
for  correlation  with  the  clinical  observations.  WR  30,090  is  concentrated  mainly  in 
the  plasma  fraction  with  only  very  low  levels  of  drug  in  the  erythrocytes.  For  techni¬ 
cal  report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Julv- 
30  June  73. 


»A  yaffeM.  to  cfitrtctort  ugm  arrtswrI 


DD.2r.1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OP  THIS  FORM  ARC  OBSOLETE.  DD  FORMS  I  ASS  A ,  I  NOV 
AND  MSB-1  I  MAR  El  (FOR  A RM V  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1080 


[Pll  Redacted] 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  108  Biochemical  effects  and  mechanism  of  action  of  chemo¬ 
therapeutic  agents 


Investigators. 

Principal:  LTC  Douglas  J.  Beach,  MSC 

Associate:  Nesbitt  D.  Brown,  B.S. ;  Larissa  deBaare,  M.D. ; 

LTC  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC;  John  W.  Diggs,  Fh.D.; 

Seymour  Garson,  Fh.D. ;  Leo  Kazyak,  B.S.; 

Robert  T.  Lofberg,  Ph.D.;  Benjamin  Mehlman,  M.S. ; 

*  Robert  C.  Permisohn,  B.S.;  Nell  R.  Pendleton,  B.S.; 
Patrick  M.  L.  Siu,  Ph.D.;  H.  Kenneth  Sleeman,  Ph.D.; 

SP4  Jaroslaw  Slusarenko,  B.S. 

The  objective  of  this  work  unit  is  to  apply  biochemical  principles  for 
the  definition  of  the  toxicity,  mechanisms  of  action  and  pharmaco¬ 
kinetics  of  experimental  antimalarial  drugs  in  animal  models  and  to 
apply  this  knowledge  to  the  study  of  clinical  materials. 

Specifically  the  following  studies  were  accomplished  during  this  report¬ 
ing  period. 

1.  Effects  of  ferrous  iron  on  the  action  of  chloroquine. 

2.  Dapsonf  toxicity  in  rats. 

3.  Experimental  malaria  in  the  golden  hamster. 

4.  Analysis  of  WR  30090. 

1.  Effects  of  ferrous  iron  on  the  action  of  chloroquine. 

Previous  reports  from  this  laboratory  described  the  administration 
of  ferrous  iron  to  potentiate  the  effect  of  chloroquine  to  suppress  P. 
berghei  in  mice.  Experiments  were  conducted  to  separate  the  effects  of 
iron  on  the  host  mechanisms  from  the  effects  of  iron  on  the  parasite. 

In  these  latter  experiments,  paiasitized  erythrocytes  were  incubated 
with  mixtures  of  iron  and  chloroquine  prior  to  injection  into  the  mice. 
There  was  a  delay  in  the  development  of  parasitemia  which  was  related 
to  the  concentration  of  ferrous  iron  in  the  incubation  mixture.  These 
findings  indicate  that  the  action  of  iron  to  potentiate  the  effects  of 
chloroquine  to  suppress  malaria  in  mice  are  due  to  the  action  of  iron 
directly  on  the  parasite.  Attempts  to  extend  similar  studies  of  the 
interaction  of  iron  and  chloroquine  to  P.  falciparum  in  Aotus  triver- 
gatus  failed  for  technical  reasons. 


1081 


2.  Dapsone  toxicity  in  rats. 

Previous  reports  from  this  laboratory  described  the  adrenal  and 
thyroid  abnormalities  associated  with  ingestion  of  dapsone  by  rats. 

The  present  studies  were  conducted  to  describe  the  mechanisms  of  these 
endocrine  aberrations. 

Purified  dapsone  was  administered  orally  to  groups  of  rats  in 
increasing  dosage  and  increasing  duration.  Administration  of  dapsone 
was  withdrawn  from  subgroups  of  each  above  group  for  varying  periods  of 
time.  This  treatment  revealed  a  gradation  of  the  extent  of  adrenal 
morphologic  changes  that  were  related  to  the  total  dosage  of  dapsone 
administered.  There  was  a  concomitant  decrease  in  plasma  cortico¬ 
sterone  levels.  Withdrawal  of  dapsone  for  up  to  30  days  showed  only 
partial  reversibility  of  the  adrenal  toxicity  of  the  drug.  No  morpho¬ 
logic  changes  were  noted  in  thyroid  tissues  in  these  experiments;  but 
plasma  thyroxine  levels  were  decreased  and  plasma  thyroid  simulating 
hormone  levels  were  increased  in  a  dose -related  manner.  These  thyroid- 
related  abnormalities  were  conpletely  reversible  within  30  days  follow¬ 
ing  withdrawal  of  dapsone.  These  findings  indicate  that  the  mechanisms 
of  adrenal  and  thyroid  toxicity  of  dapsone  are  different  and  may  not 
share  a  common  biochemical  patliway. 

3.  Experimental  malaria  in  the  golden  hamster. 

Studies  designed  to  describe  the  biochemical  parameters  of  experi¬ 
mental  P.  berghei  infections  in  the  golden  hamster  were  concluded  with 
the  description  of  the  effects  of  malaria  infection  on  the  handling  of 
parenteral  1-131  iodide  by  the  hamster.  The  infected  animals  retained 
1-131  in  proportion  to  the  severity  of  the  disease;  the  levels  of  1-131 
accumulation  in  the  thyroid  increased  in  proportion  to  the  severity  of 
the  disease.  Total  serum  1-131  increased  in  malaria  but  serum  PBI 
levels  decreased  and  malaria -infected  animals  excreted  less  1-131  than 
non- infected  animals.  Histopathologic  studies  of  the  thyroid  tissues 
from  these  animals  are  in  progress  by  the  Division  of  Pathology.  No 
other  mechanism  studies  are  in  progress  or  contemplated.  Observation 
of  long-term  surviving  hamsters  following  P.  berghei  infections  revealed 
an  immune-like  response.  Parasitemia  and  signs  of  malaria  began  between 
3-4  weeks  post-infection  and  blood  smears  became  negative  for  parasites 
at  about  6  weeks;  persistence  of  infection  could  be  demonstrated  through 
7  weeks  by  subinoculation  into  mice.  Eradication  of  parasites  was 
suggested  in  several  cases  where  subinoculation  into  mice  failed  to 
elicit  an  infection.  Hamsters  were  also  noted  to  be  refractory  to 
to  homologous  super  infection.  These  findings  suggest  that  the  hamster 
has  merit  as  a  model  to  study  certain  aspects  of  acquired  immunity  to 
malaria. 


1082 


4.  WR  30090  analysis. 


To  support  clinical  evaluations  of  WR  30090,  a  dependable  procedure 
for  the  determination  of  the  antimalarial  in  red  cells  and  plasma  was 
required.  A  procedure  was  developed  whereby  the  drug  could  be 
recovered  adequately,  and  reproducibly  with  a  single  extraction  of  bio¬ 
logical  fluid.  At  least  90%  of  the  available  antimalarial  can  be 
recovered.  Available  antimalarial  is  that  amount  of  the  drug  that  can 
be  consistently  released  from  the  total  protein-bound  portion.  Data 
acquired  to  date  indicate  that  less  than  40%  of  the  total  protein-bound 
drug  is  released  and  therefore  available  for  analysis. 

The  procedure  involves  denaturing  the  specimen  with  methanol  to 
release  the  protein-bound  drug  followed  by  chloroform  extraction.  The 
solvent  was  evaporated,  re-dissolved  in  dimethylformamide  and  derivatized 
with  n,o-bis-(trimethylsilyl) -acetamide  (BSA).  An  aliquot  was 
chromatographed  on  an  OV-1  column  in  a  gas  chromatograph  equipped  with 
a  Ni-63  electron  capture  detector. 

The  major  part  of  the  WR  30090  is  found  in  the  plasma.  With  those 
specimens  exhibiting  higher  concentrations  in  the  plasma  (above  0.2  mg 
WR  30090/liter),  small  amounts  of  the  drug  appear  in  che  red  cells. 

The  presence  of  the  drug  in  serum  has  not  yet  been  determined,  but 
these  tests  are  in  progress. 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  108  Biochemical  effects  and  mechanism  of  action  of  chemo¬ 
therapeutic  agents 

Literature  Cited. 

Publications: 

1,  Sleeman,  H.  K. ,  Diggs,  J.  W. ,  and  Angel,  C.  R. :  Hie  effects  of 
4,4,-diaminodiphenylsulfone  on  selected  physiological  parameters. 
Abstract,  164th  Annual  Meeting,  American  Chemical  Society,  1972. 


1084 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

«.  ABENCV  ACCESSION* 

DA  OB  6471 

l  (ATI  Of  MUMMY* 

73  07  01 

REPORT  00*1*04  ffVOOl 
DDDK*K(AK)i3i 

1  BATE  BAEV  IUM*RY 

72  07  01 

4.  RIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 

».  SUMMARY  SCTY* 

U 

I  BOAR  SECURITY* 

U 

1  REAR  AWNS* 

NA 

IA  OMf'N  MITR*N 

NL 

•t  SPICIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Cm  □  mb 

».  LEVEL  OF  EUB 

A.  MM  UNIT 

10  NO  /CODES!* 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

BORN  UNIT  NUMBER 

A  PRIMARY 

63713A 

3A66371 

3DB29 

00 

112 

b.  CONTRIBUTING 

c.xwnuutxof 

CDOd;  iiJ4(f) 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  DC  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
T,L,'H0"‘:  202-576-3551 


II.  GENERAL  USE 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


muffim -  - 

69  07 

irninnn  omlitm  nn - 

CONT 

IS  FunCh«9  aoInCy 

DA  | 

T  H«,6~.»ci  WtMD - 

C.  In-House 

IT.  CONTRACT  ORANf 

b.  NUMBER:* 

t  TYPE:  4  AMOUNT 

IS.  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

b  FUNM(RIMn«R) 

fiscal 

YEAR 

RRIC4DINR 

73 

6.3 

260 

eUHIHT - 

74 

6.0 

330 

19.  REIPONIIRLC  OOO  ORGANISATION  *  j 

ms  1  1  ~ 

I.  TITLE  mtm  fMt Hty  ClMiHtstlm  C  **) 

(U)  Field  Studies  on  drug  Resistant  Malaria 


l«.  SCIENTIFIC  and  technological  areas* 


US  Army  Medical  Component,  SEATO 
*“*•»'  Bangkok,  Thailand 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  (Fumi* A  MAM  II  V  t  iMtthtHmQ 

name:*  Hall,  LTC  A.  P. 

telephone:  984*4523 
social  security  account  number- 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOATORI 

NAMEi  Segal ,  MAJ  H.  E. 

*»*«<  Pearl  man,  MAJ  E.  J.  DA 


Tnsmats «-<(u)Drug  Resistant  Malaria;  (u)Chloroqulne;  (U)Human 

Volunteer;  (U) In  vitro  models;  (U)Tetracvcl ine;  (U)Glucose-6-Phosphate  Dehydrogenase 


II.  technical  OBJECTIVE.*  14  APPROACH,  IS  RROOREtt  (Fv*nt*A  JmR  vIELal  p*  ******  tPmUUmA  by  *****  F«c«R  NllHwtl  ct***lltc»Um  C***> 

23.  (U)  To  determine  the  clinical  picture  o*  malaria  in  hospital  populations  in 
Thailand.  To  define  entomologic  variables  which  influence  the  prevalence  of  chloroqulm 
resistant  falciparum  malaria.  To  evaluate  antlmalarlal  agents  as  prophylactics  against 
malaria.  To  determine  the  antimalarial  efficacy  of  drugs  both  old  and  new. 

24.  (U)  Surveys  were  conducted  of  the  patients  with  malaria  in  hospitals  in  Central 
and  Southeastern  Thailand.  Longitudinal  entomologic  studies  of  malaria  transmission 
were  conducted  In  Central  Thailand.  Studies  of  prophylaxis  with  antlmalarlal  drugs 
were  conducted  on  rural  populations.  U.S.  Army  Investigational  antlmalarlal  drugs 
were  compared  with  standard  drugs  for  the  treatment  of  falciparum  malaria. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Malaria  was  highly  prevalent  year  round  at  a  hospital  In  South¬ 
eastern  Thailand  but  was  less  prevalent  and  was  chiefly  confined  to  the  rainy  season 
at  a  hospital  in  Central  Thailand.  During  the  dry  season  the  life  cycle  of  A. 
balabacensis  is  maintained  in  the  forest  as  opposed  to  village  sites.  Chloroqulne 
treatment  did  not  enhance  the  infectlvity  of  chloroquine  resistant  strains  of 

P.  falciparum.  Both  WR33063  and  WR30090  proved  to  be  effective  antimalarial  drugs 
and  less  toxic  than  quinine.  A  combination  of  pyrimethamine  and  DDS  proved  to  be  an 
effective  prophylactic  against  malaria. 

For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report, 
1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,r;j498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  1 491 A  1  NOV  6B 
AND  1491-1.  1  MAR  «•  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1085 


/ 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 


Task  00,  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  112,  Field  studies  on  drug  resistant  malaria 
Investigators . 

Principal:  LTC  Anthony  P.  Hall,  MC;  MAJ  Walter  W.  Noll, 

MC;  MAJ  Eliot  J.  Pearlman,  MC;  MAJ  Herbert  E. 
Segal,  MC;  Douglas  J.  Gould,  Ph.  D. 

Associate:  MG  Pung  Phintuyothin,  MC,  RTA  (Ret.);  LTC 

Bunharn  Laixuthai,  MC ,  RTA;  CPT  Bruce  A. 
Harrison,  MSC;  CPT  John  S.  Jewell,  MSC; 

CPT  Roland  N.  Wilkinson,  MSC;  Sanong  Kosakal, 
M.D.;  Chalard  Tirabutana,  M.D.;  Y.M.  Huang, 
Ph.  D.;  John  E.  Scanlon,  Ph.  D.;  SFC  Ben  F. 
Castaneda;  SP4  Carl  W.  Ames;  Sumroeng 
Bumnetphund;  Dumrong  Charoendhum;  Suvath 
Hanchalay;  Vichentr  Mettaprakong;  Amporn 
Nanakorn;  E.L.  Peyton;  Prachar  Pooyindee; 

Rampa  Rattanarithikul;  Sunthorn  Sirithanakarn; 
Withoon  Thiemanun;  Kosol  Vetbutanapibul. 


Hospital  Survey  of  Malaria  in  Prachinburi.  Central  Thailand. 


A  survey  was  performed  to  determine  how  much  malaria  is  seen 
at  the  Prachinburi  Hospital,  the  severity  of  the  disease,  and  what 
drugs  are  used  for  treatment.  The  hospital  keeps  records  of  the 
number  of  patients  with  malaria  and  these  are  presented. 
Therapeutic  studies  were  performed  at  the  hospital  between  July 
1972  and  January  1973.  (See  reports  by  MAJ  Segal).  The  survey 
was  conducted  on  all  patients  admitted  with  malaria  to  the  adult 
wards.  The  pediatric  ward  was  not  included.  The  SMRL  team 
performed  quantitative  parasite  counts  on  the  majority  of  patients 
who  were  admitted. 


Between  1960  and  1971  the  hospital  diagnosed  malaria  in 
between  500  and  900  individuals  annually.  Deaths  from  malaria 
ranged  from  27  to  58  (Figure  1).  It  is  not  clear  whether  all  these 
diagnoses  were  confirmed  by  microscopy.  The  seasonal  variation 
in  the  malaria  rate  is  shown  in  Figure  2 .  Peaks  occurred  in  July 

1086 


TABLE  la 


PRACHINBURI  HOSPITAL  1971.  MONTHLY  INCIDENCE  OF  MALARIA 
AND  AREAS  WHERE  PATIENTS  LIVED 


Jan 

Feb 

Mar 

Apr 

May 

Jun 

Sep 

Oct 

■ 

Dec 

Percent 

Malarial  Cases 

43 

B 

28 

B 

47 

98 

136 

103 

117 

95 

60 

862 

13.37 

P.  falciparum 

43 

28 

B 

I 

98 

134 

100 

78 

115 

95 

60 

852 

98.84 

P.  vivax 

- 

- 

B 

B 

2 

3 

3 

2 

- 

- 

10 

1.16 

Deaths 

2 

1 

2 

1 

2 

8 

10 

6 

7 

8 

6 

5 

58 

6.73 

TABLE  lb. 


LOCATION 

TOTAL 

% 

Kabin  Buri 

224 

25.99 

Other  Province 

187 

21.69 

Sa  Kaeo 

125 

14.50 

Si  Mahaphot 

124 

14.39 

Prachinburi  City 

93 

10.80 

Prachantakham 

67 

7.77 

Wat  Thananakhon 

29 

3.36 

Aranya  Prathet 

9 

1.04 

Ban  Sang 

3 

0.35 

Ta  Phraya 

1 

0.12 

Incidence  of  complications 

Cerebral 

17 

Jaundice 

15 

Recrudescence 

29 

1087 


TABLE  2. 


PRACHINBURI  HOSPITAL  SURVEY  NOVEMBER  1972 
SEXUAL  DISTRIBUTION  OF  COUNTS  OF  P.  FALCIPARUM 


1 

Pansite  Count 

- 1 

Total 

Patients 

Male 

Female 

%  Female 

<  1,000 

13 

7 

6 

46% 

1,000-100,000 

44 

30 

14 

32% 

>  100,000 

19 

14 

5 

26% 

TOTAL 

76 

:  si 

25 

Asexual  parasites  per  cmm 


TABLE  3. 

PRACHINBURI  HOSPITAL  NOVEMBER  1972.  FREQUENCY  OF 
ADMINISTRATION  OF  EACH  TYPE  OF  ANTI MALA  RIAL  THERAPY 


Intravenous 

Quinine 

Fansidar 

Oral 

Chloro- 

quine 

Primaquine 

Oral 

Quinine 

Bactrim 

Tetracy¬ 

cline 

60 

44 

34 

24 

6 

2 

2 

Table  4. 


MALARIA  DIAGNOSES  IN  THE  SMRL  OUTPATIENT  CLINIC, 


PRACHINBURI  HOSPITAL 

1972 

MONTH 

PATIENTS  SCREENED* 

FALCIPARUM 

VIVAX 

SEPTEMBER 

63 

17 

2 

OCTOBER 

74 

23 

6 

NOVEMBER 

97 

41 

7 

DECEMBER 

88 

36 

8 

*  These  figures  do  not  include  patients  examined  for  the 
first  time  after  admission  to  a  ward. 


PRACHINBURI  HOSPITAL.  ANNUAL  CASES  OF 
MALARIA  AND  DEATHS.  1968-1971 

900n 


YEAR 

[3  MALARIA  CASES  PER  YEAR 


DEATHS  PER  YEAR 


and  November.  There  was  little  malaria  between  January  and  June. 
Further  details  for  1971  are  shown  in  Table  la.  and  b. 

Between  20  November  and  19  December  1972  SMRL  diagnosed  76 
patients  as  having  falciparum  malaria  and  8  as  having  vivax  malaria. 
Twelve  other  individuals  diagnosed  as  having  malaria  did  not  pass 
through  the  SMRL  Laboratory.  Thus  malaria  was  the  working  diag¬ 
nosis  in  96  people. 

The  distribution  of  the  parasite  counts  of  P.  falciparum  inpatients 
are  shown  in  Figure  3.  The  largest  group  had  counts  between 
10,000  and  100,000/cmm  (same  as  at  Trad).  There  was  a  tendency 
for  women  to  have  lower  parasite  counts  (Table  2).  Ninety-six 
individuals  were  given  antimalarial  therapy  and  the  frequency  of 
each  type  of  medication  is  shown  in  Table  3.  (Patients  in  the  SMRL 
therapeutic  study  are  not  included) .  The  SMRL  team  screened  most 
of  the  outpatients  suspected  of  having  malaria  and  the  results  are 
shown  in  Table  4 . 

It  is  concluded  that: 

1.  Malaria  is  much  less  prevalent  at  the  Prachinburi  Hospital 
(fever  than  900  cases  annually)  than  at  the  Trad  Hospital 
(about  3000  cases  annually) . 

2.  Intravenous  quinine  is  the  most  popular  form  of  therapy 
and  Fansidar  is  next. 

2 .  Evaluation  of  WR  33063  in  the  Treatment  of  Acute  Falciparum 

Malaria 

The  therapeutic  efficacy  of  an  investigational  phenanthreneme- 
thanol  antimalarial,  WR  33063,  has  been  studied.  This  study  was 
carried  out  at  the  Prachinburi  Provincial  Hospital,  in  Northeast 
Thailand,  during  a  four-month  period  in  mid- 197 2.  Male  patients 
presenting  with  acute,  uncomplicated  falciparum  malaria  with 
between  1,000  and  100,000  asexual  parasites  per  cub.c  millimeter 
of  blood  were  selected  for  study  and  hospitalized  six  days.  Sub¬ 
jects  were  randomly  assigned  to  either  the  "Study  Group"  or  the 
"Control  Group".  The  "Study  Group"  received  WR  33063,  600 
milligrams  every  eight  hours  for  six  days.  The  control  group  was 
treated  with  quinine  sulfate,  625  milligrams  every  eight  hours  for 


1093 


T 


T 


1 


six  days.  Twice  daily  during  hospitaiization  each  subject  was 
examined’ and  capillary  blood  taken  for  quantitative  parasite 
counts.  Subjects  were  followed  after  discharge  and  capillary 
blood  was  collected  for  quantitative  pan  site  counts  on  days  14, 

21  and  28. 

Fifty-one  patients  met  the  criteria  for  admission  and  were 
treated,  25  with  WR  33063  (Study  Group)  and  26  w'th  quinine 
sulfate  (Control  Group).  The  mean  ages  for  the  Study  and  Control 
Group  were  28.1  and  25.5  years  and  the  mean  admission  asexual 
parasite  counts  29,492  and  25,272  parasites  per  cubic  millimeter 
of  blood  respectively.  All  patients  admitted  to  the  study  com¬ 
pleted  the  specified  period  of  hospitalization.  The  mean  asexual 
parasite  clearance  time  for  the  Study  Group  was  66.4  hours,  com¬ 
pared  with  65. 1  hours  for  the  Control  Group  (t=0.21,  0.90>p> 
0.80).  The  mean  fever  defervescence  times  were  58.5  and  59.7 
hours  for  tne  Study  and  Control  Groups,  respectively  (t=0. 12, 
0.95>p>0.90). 

Symptoms  of  fever,  insomnia,  nausea  and  vomiting,  abdomi¬ 
nal  pain,  constipation,  and  myalgia  were  expressed  slightly  more 
often  by  Study  Group  subjects.  Control  Group  subjects  complained 
of  headache  slightly  more  often,  and  of  tinnitus,  blurred  vision, 
chest  pain,  and  diarrhea  much  more  commonly.  Complaints  of 
dizziness  and  anorexia  were  equally  distributed  in  both  groups. 
Complaints  voiced  during  the  day  of  admission  were  not  included 
(Table  1).  Several  subjects  had  biochemical  evidence  of  hepatic 
dysfunction  on  admission.  In  no  subject  in  the  Study  or  Control  ** 
Groups  did  serum  bilirubin,  alkaline  phosphatase,  creatinine,  or 
transaminase  values  either  become  abnormal  during  therapy  or  rise 
to  levels  greatly  in  excess  of  admission  values  (Table  2). 

Twenty-two  of  25  Study  Group  subjects  (88%)  completed  the 
followup  period.  The  three  who  did  not  were  re-treated  for  vivax 
malaria  on  day  21  (two  subjects)  and  day  23  (one  subject).  All 
had  been  falciparum  negative  by  smear  to  that  time.  Of  the  22 
subjects  completing  follow-up,  20(90%)  remained  smear  negative 
through  day  28  and  were  considered  cured.  Of  the  two  patients 
not  cured,  one  infection  was  unresponsive  (R3  pattern)  and  was 
successfully  treated  with  intravenous  followed  by  oral  quinine. 

The  other  subject  was  not  parasitemic  until  the  day  28  follow-up 
(Rl)  and  was  admitted  to  a  later  SMRL  study. 

1094 


k 


TABLE  1 


REPORTED  SYMPTOMS,  WR  33063  AND 
QUININE  SULFATE-TREATED  PATIENTS 


Symptom 


WR  33063  Quinine  Sulfate 

(25  Patients) _ (2  6  Patients) 


Headache 
Fever 
Dizziness 
Tinnitus 
Insomnia 
Blurred  Vision 
Chest  Pain 
Anorexia 

Nausea ,  Vomiting 
Abdominal  Pain 
Diarrhea 
Constipation 
Myalgia 


8 

6 

2 

4 

4 

0 

0 

4 

3 

4 
1 
1 
2 


11 

5 

2 

12 

2 

3 
2 

4 
2 
2 
4 
0 
0 


TABLE  2 

BIOCHEMICAL  STUDIES,  WR  33063  -  AND 
QUININE  SULFATE  -  TREATED  PATIENTS 


Serum  Specimens 

Bllirub 

Direct 

I  me; 

in1 

Total 

W  (RANGE)  SERU 
Alkaline  2 
Phosphatase 

M  VALUES 

3 

Creatinine 

3GOT4 

WR33Q63  day  0 
day  3 

day  6 

day  28 

0.56(0.1-3.0) 

0.44(0.0-1.2) 

0.32(0.0-0.9) 

0.25(0.0-0.9) 

1.29(0.3-3.8) 

0.78(0.1-1.7) 

0.78(0.1-1.2) 

0.57(0.1-1.5) 

2.53(0.8-6.1) 

2.46(1.1-5.1) 

2.38(1.1-4.7) 

2.87(1,3-7.0) 

1.30(0.6-6.5) 

1.18(0.6-8.5) 

0.96(0.5-5.5) 

0.79(0.5-1.3) 

39.1(15- 17) 
30.2(11-72) 

31.9(11-106) 

26.1(13-59) 

QUININE  day  0 

day  3 

day  6 

day  28 

0.69(0.1-5.1) 

0.64(0.1-4.2) 

0.46(0.0-3.4) 

0.23(0.0-0.6) 

1.34(0.3-6.1) 

0.91(0.2-4.9) 

0.68(0.1-3.7) 

0.50(0.1-1.1) 

2.07(1.0-4.7) 

1.90(0.8-4.2) 

1.86(0.9-3.9) 

2.53(1.4-5.7) 

1.39(0. 5-6.8) 

1.22(0.5-5.3) 

1.04(0.6-3.2) 

0.78(0.5-1.2) 

29.1(14-75) 

24.9(3-38) 

23.8(14-55) 

25.9(17-41) 

1  Milligrams  percent 

2  Sigma  units 

3  Milligrams  percent 

4  Sigma- Frankel  units 


1096 


Twenty-one  of  the  26  Control  Group  subjects  (81%)  completed 
follow-up.  One  of  those  who  did  not  was  re-treated  for  vivax 
malaria  (day  20);  four  others  changed  their  residence  and  were  lost 
at  day  17  (one  subject),  at  day  21  (one  subject),  and  at  day  28  ;i 
(two  subjects).  All  five  had  remained  falciparum  negative  until 
their  loss  to  the  study.  Of  subjects  completing  follow-up, 

20(95%)  were  cured.  The  single  infection  not  cured  responded 
partially  (R2  pattern);  this  patient  was  re-treated  with  chloroquine- 
primaquine  but  did  not  return  for  follow-up. 

Thj  circumstances  of  follow-up  do  not  exclude  the  possibility 
of  reinfo  tion.  It  is.  possible  that  the  falciparum  parasitemia  found 
in  one  Study  Group  subject  on  day  28  represents  a  new  infection. 

A  more  likely  explanation  for  the  vivax  parasitemias  found  is  that 
they  represent  relapsing  infections  suppressed  by  drug  treatment. 

The  investigational  drug  employed  in  this  study  appears 
comparable  in  its  therapeutic  efficacy  to  quinine  sulfate  and 
somewhat  better  tolerated  by  the  study  subjects. 

3 .  Comparison  of  Daps one-Pyrimethamine  and  Sulfadoxine- 

Pyrimethamine  Combination  in  the  Treatment  of  Acute  Falciparum 

Malaria . 


Combinations  of  diaminodiphenylsulfone  (dapsone)  and 
pyrimethamine  have  been  shown  effective  in  the  therapy  of 
chloroquine-sensitive  falciparum  infections.  In  the  one  reported, 
preliminary  study  of  the  treatment  of  presumably  chloroquine- 
resistant  infections,  results  were  disappointing.  Because 
information  on  dapsone-pyrimethamine  therapy  of  chloroquine- 
resistant  infections  is  scantly  and  because  of  its  potential 
therapeutic  usefulness,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Health  expressed 
interest  in  a  controlled  evaluation. 

The  objective  was  to  study  the  therapeutic  efficacy  of  a 
combination  of  dapsone,  200  milligrams,  with  pyrimethamine, 

25  milligrams  (D-P),  in  comparison  with  that  of  sulfadoxine,  1000 
milligrams  with  pyrimethamine  50  milligrams  (S-P),  both  given  as 
a  single  dose.  The  latter  regimen  is  the  standard  single-dose 
antimalarial  treatment  administered  at  Prachinburi  Hospital,  the 
study  site. 

This  study  was  carried  out  over  a  five-month  period,  at  the 
Provincial  Hospital,  Prachinburi  Province,  Northeast  Thailand. 

1097 


Patients  (both  male  and  female)  presenting  with  acute  uncompli¬ 
cated  falciparum  malaria  wi.h  between  1,000  and  100,000  asexual 
parasites  per  cubic  millimeter  of  blood  were  selected  for  study  and 
hospitalized  for  6  days.  Subjects  were  randomly  assigned  to 
either  the  dapsone-pyrimethamine  (D-P)  or  sulfadoxine-pyrimetha- 
mine  (S-P)  groups  and  treated.  Twice  daily  during  hospitalization, 
each  subject  was  examined  and  capillary  blood  taken  for  quantita¬ 
tive  parasite  counts.  Subjects  were  followed  after  discharge  and 
capillary  blood  for  quantitative  parasite  counts  was  collected  on 
days  14,  21  and  28. 

Forty-four  patients  met  admission  criteria  and  were  admitted 
to  the  study.  Twenty-two  (16  males,  6  females)  were  treated  with 
dapsone-pyrimethamine  (D-P)  and  a  like  number  (18  males,  4  fe¬ 
males)  with  sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine  (S-P) .  The  mean  ages  for 
the  D-P  Group  were  25.2  years  and  22.0  years  and,  for  the  S-P 
Group,  27.4  years  and  28.3  years  for  males  and  females  respective¬ 
ly.  The  mean  admission  asexual  parasite  counts  (parasites  per 
cubic  millimeter  of  blood)  for  the  D-P  Group  were  22,573  and 
26,373  and,  for  the  S-P  Group,  29,  834  and  22,  290  for  males  and 
females  respectively. 

Forty-three  of  the  44  patients  admitted  to  the  study  completed 
the  specified  period  of  hospitalization.  The  mean  parasite  clear¬ 
ance  time  for  the  D-P  Group  was  65  hours  (range:  36-109)  and  for 
the  S-P  Group  was  62  hours  (range:  33-84) .  The  mean  fever  defer¬ 
vescence  time  for  the  D-P  Group  was  64  hours  (range:  14-112)  and 
for  the  S-P  Group  was  56  hours  (range:  18-106).  Neither  the  mean 
parasite  clearance  times  (t=0.684,  0.50>p>  0.40)  nor  mean  fever 
deferverscence  times  (t=1.0l3,  0.40>p>0.30)  of  the  D-P  and  S-P 
Groups  were  significantly  different.  There  were  no  sex  differences 
in  eithei  of  these  variables. 

Both  drug  regimens  were  well  tolerated,  with  similar  symptoma¬ 
tic  complaints  reported  by  the  study  subjects  (Table  1).  Symptoms 
of  tinnitus  and  gastrointestinal  irritation  were  reported  somewhat 
more  often  by  patients  receiving  D-P  than  by  those  receiving  S-P. 

Follow-up  was  completed  on  38  of  the  44  subjects  selected 
for  study  (86%).  Four  of  21  D-P  Group  subjects  were  cured  (19%), 
compared  with  14  of  17  S-P  Group  subjects  (82%).  This  difference 
is  statistically  significant  (X  -12.6,  p<0.0001).  All  17  drug 
failures  in  the  D-P  Group  were  of  the  R1  type.  In  the  S-P  Group, 


one  R1  and  two  R2  failures  were  noted. 


The  dapsone-pyrimethamine  combination  employed  in  this 
study  does  not  appear  sufficiently  efficacious  to  warrant  its  use 
in  the  treatment  of  acute  falciparum  malaria.  Conversely,  the 
efficacy  of  the  standard  sulfadoxine-pyrimethamine  regimen  in  the 
treatment  of  acute  falciparum  malaria  is  confirmed. 

4 .  Hospital  Survey  of  Malaria  in  Trad,  Southeast  Thailand. 

The  objectives  of  these  studies  are: 

1 .  To  determine  the  clinical  picture  of  malaria  at  Trad  Hospi¬ 
tal. 

2.  To  perform  parasite  counts  on  patients  suspected  of 
malaria,  as  a  service  for  the  Trad  Hospital. 

3 .  To  screen  patients  with  falciparum  malaria  suitable  for  a 
SMRL  study. 

SMRL  studies  were  resumed  at  the  Trad  Provincial  Hospital 
on  11th  January  1973.  The  SMRL  malaria  unit  occupies  an  unused 
ward  located  above  the  Male  Medical  Ward,  by  courtesy  of 
Dr.  Sanong  Kosakal  the  Medical  Director  of  the  Hospital.  Half 
the  area  has  been  converted  into  a  spacious  laboratory  and  the 
remainder  into  living  quarters  for  the  technicians  and  drivers .  The 
clinic  is  open  0600  to  2200  daily.  Anybody  may  walk  in  and  have 
a  malaria  smear  done.  Other  patients  are  referred  from  the 
Hospital  outpatient  clinic. 

Patients  with  a  positive  smear  are  interviewed  (current 
symptoms,  history  of  previous  malaria),  examined  (fever  and 
splenomegaly  as  a  minimum)  and  a  quantitative  parasite  count  is 
made.  In  consultation  with  the  Trad  physicians,  the  patients  are 
admitted  to  the  hospital  or  treated  as  outpatients. 

Up  to  31  March  1973,  the  clinic  had  been  open  for  80  days 
and  had  examined  1101  patients,  of  whom  461  were  infected  with 
Plasmodium  falciparum  and  7 1  with  P .  vivax  (Table  1) .  The 
largest  group  of  patients  with  falciparum  malaria  had  a  parasite 
count  between  10,000  and  100,000  per  cmm.  The  distribution  of 


TABLE  1. 


MALARIA  DIAGNOSES  IN  THE  SMRL  OUTPATIENT  CLINIC# 
TRAD  HOSPITAL  1973 


PATIENTS 

SCREENED 

FALCIPARUM 

VIVAX* 

JANUARY ( 1 1th- 31st ) 

167 

74 

11 

FEBRUARY 

317 

109 

19 

MARCH 

617 

278 

41 

TOTAL 

1,101 

461 

71 

* 


P. 


vivax 


comprised  13%  of  all  malaria  cases. 


TABLE  2. 


SMRL  MALARIA  CLINIC  AT  TRAD.  DISTRIBUTION  OP  PARASITE 
COUNTS  OF  P.  FALCIPARUM  IN  MALES  AND  FEMALES 


Parasite 
Count /cmm 

0-100 

100-1000 

1000-10000 

10,000-100, OOC 

100,000+ 

TOTAL 

No.  Males 

35(8%) 

70(16%) 

131(34%) 

164(38%) 

34(8%) 

434 

Average 

Age 

31 

29 

25 

27 

24 

28 

No.  Females 

3(10%) 

9(33%) 

10(36%) 

5(18%) 

1(3%) 

* 

28 

Average 

Age 

42 

26 

18 

25 

- 

24 

Many  females  with  malaria  were  not  seen  in  the  clinic. 


1101 


wr,, 


parasite  counts  was  similar  to  that  seen  in  the  Prachinburi  Hospi¬ 
tal  in  Central  Thailand.  There  was  a  tendency  for  parasitemia  to 
be  lower  in  women  and  in  older  people  (Table  2). 

Splenomegaly  was  present  in  31%  (54/172)  of  patients  with 
falciparum  malaria  and  in  45%  (13/29)  of  patients  with  vivax 
malaria  (not  all  patients  were  examined) . 

By  doing  parasite  counts  before  admission  and  when  requested 
afterwards,  the  SMRL  clinic  greatly  assists  in  the  management  of 
the  patients  with  malaria. 

5 .  Gastrointestinal  Absorptive  Function,  Quinine  Absorption,  and 

Parasite  Response  in  Acute  Falciparum  Malaria . 

Persons  ill  with  acute  falciparum  malaria  sometimes  present 
with  gastrointestinal  symptoms,  of  which  anorexia ,  nausea,  and 
vomiting  are  the  most  common.  Gastrointestinal  absorptive 
function  has  been  shown  to  be  abnormal  in  patients  with  acute 
falciparum  malaria.  Olsson  and  Johnston  found  impaired  d-xylose 
absorption  and  histopathologic  changes  in  intestinal  biopsy  speci¬ 
mens  taken  from  malarious  American  soldiers.  These  observations 
were  extended  by  Karney  and  Tong  using  additional  indicators  of 
absorptive  function.  In  neither  of  the  above  studies  were  levels 
of  orally-administered  antimalarial  drugs  and  parasite  responses 
measured  or  correlated  with  absorptive  function. 

We  plan  to  measure  concurrently  and  correlate  gastrointesti¬ 
nal  absorptive  function,  antimalarial  drug  levels,  and  parasite 
responses  in  patients  ill  with  acute  falciparum  malaria,  to  deter¬ 
mine  whether  rr.  a  lab  sorption  in  malaria  has  any  clinical  significance. 
Two  groups  of  patients  will  be  included,  a  falciparum  infected 
Study  Group  and  an  uninfected  Control  Group. 

Study  Group:  Twenty  male  patients  admitted  to  Trad  Provincial 
Hospital  and  assigned  to  the  Quinine  Group  of  the  WR  30090 
protocol  will  be  studied.  The  course  of  hospitalization  and  pro¬ 
cedure  sequence  will  be  modified  to  include  the  d-xylose  absorp¬ 
tion  studies  and  collection  of  specimens  for  serum  quinine  and 
serum  carotene  determinations.  The  d-xylose  test  will  be  performed 
on  each  Study  Group  subject  twice  during  hospitalization,  on  days 
1  and  6.  A  serum  specimen  for  serum  carotene  determination  will 


1102 


also  be  collected  on  day  28.  A  single  stool  specimen  collected 
during  hospitalization  will  be  studied  for  ova  and  parasites. 

Control  Group:  Twenty  male  patients  admitted  to  Trad  Provincial 
Hospital  with  diagnoses  other  than  malaria  or  those  involving  the 
gastrointestinal  or  urinary  tracts  will  be  studied.  Demographic 
data  on  these  subjects  will  be  taken  and  they  will  be  administered 
the  d-xylose  test  once,  on  day  1  of  hospitalization.  The  subject 
selected  will  be  the  next  acceptable,  willing  admission  following 
the  admission  of  the  "Study  Group"  patient.  A  single  stool  speci¬ 
men  collected  during  hospitalization  will  be  studied  for  ova  and 
parasites. 

To  date,  sixteen  patients  ill  with  acute  falciparum  malaria 
treated  with  quinine  sulfate  (Study  Group)  and  twelve  patients 
with  diagnoses  other  than  malaria  (Control  Group)  have  been 
studied.  When  twenty  patients  in  each  group  have  been  studied, 
the  similarity  of  the  Study  and  Control  Groups  will  be  tested  by 
comparing  the  median  ages ,  and  by  comparing  other  demographic 
variables  of  interest  such  as  marital  status  and  place  of  residence. 
Days  1  and  6  d-xylose  and  serum  carotene  test  results  in  the  Study 
Group  will  be  compared  and  contrasted  to  those  of  the  Control 
Group.  The  degree  of  relationship  of  d-xylose  absorption,  serum 
carotene  levels,  plasma  quinine  levels,  and  parasite  responses 
will  be  measured  by  calculation  of  correlation  coefficients. 

6.  Comparison  of  WR  30090,  WR  33063  and  Quinine  for  Falciparum 

Malaria  in  Southeast  Thailand. 

The  objective  of  these  studies  is  to  compare  the  action  against 
P.  falciparum  and  the  toxicity  of  WR  33063,  WR30090  and  Quinine 
in  Southeast  Thailand. 

The  studies  were  performed  at  the  Trad  Provincial  Hospital. 
Chloroquine  resistant  falciparum  malaria  is  highly  prevalent  in 
Trad  (Colwell,  S.E.  Asia  J.  Trop.  Med.  Pub.  Hlth.  ^190,  1372). 
Male  patients  with  falciparum  parasitemia  of  between  1,000  and 
100,000  per  cmm  gave  their  informed  consent.  Quantitative  para¬ 
site  counts  were  performed  in  the  hospital  from  day  0  to  day  6  and 
at  follow-up  on  days  14,  21  and  28.  Blood  counts  and  serum  bio¬ 
chemistries  were  done  on  day  0,  3,  6  and  28.  The  patients  were 
randomly  assigned  to  one  of  three  treatment  regimens.  The  follow¬ 
ing  doses  were  given  orally  every  8  hours  for  6  days:  WR33063, 

1103 


INITIAL  RESPONSE  OF  FEVER  AND  PARASITEMIA  TO  THERAPY 


Em  O 

<u  an 


<N 

00 

if) 

in 

<0 

<D 

U 

4J  D 

C  W  4J 

03  0)  03 

4 

1 

8 

a>  x:  u 

t  i  • 

T  tP  <D 

<N  (N  pH 

*h  a 

O  O  O 

ac  g 

rH  pH  pH 

a) 

H 

<*> 

dP 

dP 

<T» 

00 

<T> 

00 

<D 

C  c  W 
10  fl  « 
O  03  u  5 

5;  ^  o 

rtj  (p 

cm  ph  N 

u 


| 

0)  u 

4J  \ 

•H  v“” 

o  o  o 

C  1ft  4J 

o  o  o 

03  03  C 
<u  mi  3 

o  o  o 

*  ^  » 

Z  03  0 

VO  pH  ui 

a  o 

<N  CM  (N 

up 

0> 

1 

4J 

4J 

<1> 

0 

0 

pH 

rH 

c 

a 

H 

g 

0 

0 

a 

o 

o  o 


o  o 


ro 

o 

w 

2 

o 

o 

M 

ro 

o 

2 

m 

ro 

M 

a 

a 

D 

2 

O 

1 


TABLE  3 

NUMBER  OF  PATIENTS  ON  EACH  DRUG  WHO 
DEVELOPED  THE  SYMPTOMS  LISTED* 


WR33063 

36  Patients 

WR30090 

39  Patients 

QUININE 
38  Patients 

ANOREXIA 

2 

l 

4 

BACKACHE 

8 

8 

4 

BLURRED  VISION 

0 

0 

2 

HEADACHE 

15 

23 

18 

MEDICATION 

0 

1 

5 

INTERRUPTED 

POSTURAL 

0 

0 

4 

HYPOTENSION 

TINNITUS 

0 

2 

16 

WEAKNESS 

8 

2 

7 

TOTAL 

33 

37 

60 

*  Only  those  symptoms  are  listed  which  showed  a  difference 
between  the  groups. 


1 105 


r 


T 


rrrrr 


600  mg;  WR  30090,  250  mg;  and  Quinine  Sulfate,540  mg. 

WR33063  is  3-bromo-10  (a-hydroxy-B-(N,  N-diheptylamino) 
ethyl)  phenanthrene  hydrochloride,  and  WR30090  is  6,  8-dichloro- 
a(dibutyl-aminomethyl)-2-(3'-4,-dichlorophenyl)-4  quinoline- 
methanol  hydrochloride. 

The  project  was  begun  on  11  January  1973.  By  18  April  114 
patients  had  been  studied.  In  hospital  all  3  drugs  were  effective 
in  controlling  the  disease  (Table  1)  .  WR33063  was  the  most 
effective  with  respect  to  the  control  of  fever  but  was  slower  in 
clearing  parasitemia.  The  cure  rates  with  each  drug  were  about 
90%  (Table  2).  Unfortunately  about  40?'  of  the  patients  developed 
P.  vivax  parasitemia  during  follow-up.  Toxicity  was  greater  with 
Quinine  (Table  3) . 

In  general  the  patients  were  fit  for  discnarge  on  day  3,  so 
that  the  extra  3  days  in  the  hospital  for  the  six  day  course  of 
therapy  was  an  inconvenience.  WR30090,  requiring  only  1 
capsule  per  dose,  is  more  acceptable  than  WR33063  which 
necessitates  the  swallowing  of  3  capsules. 

The  results  of  these  studies  to  date  may  be  summarized  as 
follows: 

1.  WR33063  has  so  far  proved  effective  and  non-toxic. 

2.  WR30090  also  proved  effective  and  non-toxic. 

3.  Quinine  was  effective  but  more  toxic. 

4.  All  3  drugs  were  inconvenient  in  having  to  be  administered 
for  6  days .  The  ideal  antimalarial  should  take  3  days  or 
less  for  administration  of  the  full  dosage. 

7 .  Intravenous  Quinine  for  Falciparum  Malaria . 

The  objective  of  these  studies  was  to  determine  the  optimum 
dose  of  quinine  when  intravenously  infused  for  severe  falciparum 
malaria. 

In  a  recent  study,  quinine  by  intravenous  infusion  proved 
more  effective  than  oral  quinine  in  the  radical  cure  of  recrudescent 
ialciparum  malaria  }  Intravenous  quinine  is  often  used  in  the 
management  of  severe  acute  falciparum  malaria  but  many  physicians 
are  deterred  by  the  well-known  toxicity  of  the  drug.  Chloroquine 

1106 


L 


by  intravenous  infusion  is  often  preferred  therapy.  Therefore  it  is 
important  to  evaluate  the  role  of  intravenous  quinine  in  this  situa¬ 
tion.  The  study  was  begun  at  Trad  on  17  January  1973.  Patients 
with  falciparum  malaria  are  considered  for  study.  Criteria  for 
selection  are  a  parasite  count  over  100,000  per  cmm  or  clinically 
severe  illness.  24  patients  have  so  far  been  studied  in  detail  and 
the  response  of  other  patients  also  noted.  Quantitative  parasite 
counts  are  performed  twice  daily. 

Initially  most  adult  patients  received  20  grains  quinine  in  the 
first  liter  of  intravenous  fluid.  Toxicity  (e.g.  tinnitus)  occurred  in 
some  patients  on  this  dosage  but  was  absent  when  the  initial  liter 
contained  only  10  grains  quinine.  This  is  now  the.  standard  dose 
for  patients  not  in  coma,  whereas  patients  with  evidence  of  cere¬ 
bral  malaria  initially  receive  20  grains  quinine  in  the  first  liter. 
Clinical  and  parasitemic  response  to  the  lower  dose  is  usually 
excellent  and  further  intravenous  therapy  is  usually  unnecessary. 
The  first  liter  is  infused  in  anything  from  30  minutes  to  6  hours 
depending  on  the  clinical  picture.  Oral  therapy  is  then  given, 
which  is  usually  quinine  with  or  without  tetracycline.  (At  Prachin- 
buri  Hospital  Fansidar  is  often  the  drug  com oination  used  follow¬ 
ing  the  intravenous  quinine). 

Likewise  in  infants  and  small  children,  intravenous  quinine 
has  proved  very  successful,  in  fact  lifesaving.  Infants  usually 
receive  about  2.5  grains  in  250  ml  fluid  and  small  children  about 
5  grains  in  500  ml. 

In  comatose  patients  shots  of  4  mg  Decadron  (dexamethasone) 
are  injected  into  the  drip  tubing  about  every  6  hours. 

Since  intravenous  quinine  has  proved  so  effective  in  reducing 
both  symptoms  and  parasitemia,  this  mode  of  therapy  is  now  being 
increasingly  used  in  patients  who  are  moderately  but  not  seriously 
ill.  Intravenous  quinine  appears  less  toxic  than  oral  quinine. 

The  majority  of  patients  with  severe  falciparum  malaria  respond 
rapidly  to  an  intravenous  infusion  of  1  liter  of  saline  to  which  is 
added  10  grains  quinine  dihydrochloride.  The  average  time  of 
infusion  is  3  hours.  Further  doses  more  slowly  infused  are  occa¬ 
sionally  required.  Normal  saline  is  the  preferred  solution  because 
hyponatremia  has  been  detected  in  75%  of  patients  with  malaria  in 


1 107 


Thailand.  ^ 

8 .  Comparison  of  Amodiagulne  and  Chloroauine  for  Falciparum 

Malaria  in  Thailand. 

Studies  are  in  progress  to  compare  the  antimalarial  efficacy 
and  toxicity  of  amodiaquine  and  chloroquine.  Both  these  anti- 
;  Inalarial  drugs  are  4-aminoquinolines  and  Rieckmann  (J.  Am.  Med. 
Assoc.  217:573.  1971)  has  claimed  that  a  strain  of  P.  falciparum 
from  Vietnam  was  more  susceptible  to  amodiaquine  than  to  chloro¬ 
quine. 

The  studies  were  conducted  at  Trad  Provincial  Hospital. 

Colwell  and  associates,  using  an  in  vitro  test,  have  found  that 
chloroquine  resistant  strains  are  highly  endemic  in  Trad.  The  medi¬ 
cal  community  in  Trad  frequently  uses  chloroquine  by  the  oral  or 
parenteral  route  for  the  treatment  of  falciparum  malaria.  Therefore 
it  seemed  appropriate  to  evaluate  these  2  agents  under  controlled 
hospital  conditions. 

The  study  was  begun  on  13  March  1973.  Patients  with  mild  to 
moderate  falciparum  malaria  were  selected  for  study.  Quantitative 
parasite  counts  wee  performed  before  therapy  and  twice  daily 
during  the  hospitaJ  course.  A  hematocrit  and  WBC  were  determined 
on  days  0,3  and  6.  brines  for  drug  level  determinations  were 
obtained  before  therapy  and  daily  during  drug  administration. 

Antimalarials  were  administered  by  a  study  physician.  The 
patient  was  observed  swallowing  the  drug  and  then  water  afterwards. 
The  dosage  of  amodiaquine  and  chloroquine  were  the  same.  On  day 
0  the  initial  dose  was  600  mg  base  followed  by  300  mg  6  hours 
later.  Both  on  day  1  and  day  2,  a  300  mg  dose  was  administered  in 
the  morning.  The  total  dose  for  both  drugs  was  1,500  mg  in 
accordance  with  W.H.O.  criteria.  Also  both  preparations  were  not 
enteric  coated.  The  "Nivaquine"  brand  of  chloroquine  and  the 
"Camoquin"brand  of  amodiaquine  were  used. 

Twelve  patients  have  so  far  been  admitted  to  the  study.  5 
have  received  chloroquine  and  7  amodiaquine.  The  results  are 
shown  in  Table  1 .  Chloroquine  has  proved  slightly  more  effective 
than  had  been  expected.  Complete  clearance  of  parasitemia 
occurred  in  2  patients  but  in  the  other  3  the  effect  was  only  partial 

1108 


4. 


The  term  S  or  RI  refers  to  the  situation  where  parasitemia  has  been 
cleared  in  hospital  but  follow-up  has  not  been  achieved.  Thus  the 
final  result  in  these  patients  would  have  been  a  radical  cure  or  a 
recrudescence.  Complete  clearance  of  parasitemia  was  achieved 
in  5  patients  treated  with  amodiaquine.  The  other  2  patients,  treat¬ 
ed  with  amodiaquine,  left  the  hospital  before  the  parasitemia  had 
completely  cleared.  Of  special  interest  was  a  patient  who  did  not 
respond  to  chloroquine  (RIII  response)  and  had  to  be  treated  with 
intravenous  quinine.  Twenty-one  days  after  discharge  he  developed 
a  recurrent  attack  (probably  a  recrudescence).  There  was  a  satis¬ 
factory  initial  response  (S  or  RI)  when  this  attack  was  treated  with 
amodiaquine. 

Our  results  to  date  indicate  that: 

1.  Falciparum  malaria  in  Southeast  Thailand  continues  to  be 

highly  resistant  to  chloroquine.  This  confirms  previous  work. 

2.  Amodiaquine  may  prove  to  be  more  effective  than  chloroquine. 

TABLE  1. 

FALCIPARUM  MALARIA  IN  THAILAND 
RESPONSE  TO  AMODIAQUINE  OR  CHLOROQUINE 


S  or  RI* 

RII 

RIII 

Unknown 

CHLOROQUINE 

2 

2 

1 

- 

(1.5g) 

AMODIAQUINE 

5 

0 

0 

1 

2 

(1.5g) 

*  Initial  complete  clearance  of  parasitemia  occurred 
but  follow-up  was  not  achieved. 


9 .  Pyrimethamine  Resistant  Falciparum  Malaria  in  Thailand. 

The  pyrimethamine  response  of  naturally  acquired  falciparum 
malaria  in  Thailand  has  not  been  studied.  Because  it  is  a  widely 
used  antimalarial  drug  either  alone  or  in  combination,  its 

1109 


i 


tj».  i »  .1 


therapeutic  efficacy  was  tested. 

The  studies  were  conducted  at  the  Trad  Provincial  Hospital  in 
February  1973.  The  patients  were  first  seen  at  the  SMRL  Malaria 
Clinic  and  quantitative  parasite  counts  performed.  Mild  cases  of 
falciparum  malaria  were  selected  for  study.  Informed  consent 
was  obtained  in  all  patients. 

Three  patients  have  been  treated: 

1.  The  first  patient  was  seen  on  6  February  1973.  He  was  a 
40  year  old  farmer  with  fever,  headache  and  weakness  for  a 
few  days.  Thu  only  therapy  was  2  unidentified  tablets  2  days 
previously.  He  said  that  he  had  had  an  attack  of  malaria  1 
month  earlier.  His  temperature  was  98.6°F  on  admission. 
Splenomegaly  was  present  throughout  the  6  days  in  the  hospi¬ 
tal.  His  asexual  count  of  P.  falciparum  was  810/cmm  (Table 
1).  50  mg  pyrimethamine  was  given  daily  for  3  days  (total 
dose  150  mg).  The  parasitemia  decreased  but  rose  again  on 
the  6th  day  at  which  time  quinine  was  administered  on  an  out¬ 
patient  basis  for  6  days.  Parasitemia  was  absent  at  follow-up 
examinations  on  days  14,  21  and  28. 

2.  This  32  year  old  man  gave  a  history  of  fever  and  headache 
for  one  month.  He  had  taken  no  antimalarials  for  6  days.  His 
asexual  count  was  8580/cmm  and  there  was  a  partial  response 
to  the  standard  150  mg  course  of  pyrimethamine  (Table  2); 
however,  on  day  4  his  count  rose  sharply  to  1377/cmm  and 
quinine  was  administered.  The  patient  did  not  attend  follow-up. 

3.  This  19  year  old  man  gave  a  3  day  history  of  fever,  weak¬ 
ness  and  myalgia.  His  parasite  count  of  950/cmm  was 
decreased  by  pyrimethamine  therapy  but  a  resurgence  of  para¬ 
sitemia  on  day  6  responded  to  quinine  therapy  (Table  3). 

In  all  3  patients,  the  falciparum  parasitemia  made  only  a  tem¬ 
porary  response  to  pyrimethamine.  This  is  an  RII  response  under 
W.H.O.  criteria.  Pyrimethamine  resistance  has  been  previously 
shown  in  artificially  induced  infections  in  the  USA  using  a  strain 
isolated  from  a  white  man  in  Thailand  (See  references  3,  4,  5). 

This  report  confirms  that  pyrimethamine  resistance  is  found  in 
natural  infections  in  Thailand. 


hid 


TABLE  1 


THE  PARASITEMIA  OF  P.  FALCIPARUM  IN  CASE  1 
ONLY  PARTIALLY  RESPONDED  TO  PYRIMETHAMINE( RI I  RESPONSE) 


DATE 

DAY 

TIME 

ASEXUAL 

COUNT 

GAMS 

THERAPY 

COMMENT 

b  FEB  1973 

0 

1000 

810 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

RII  Response 

1400 

3812 

72 

1 

0800 

200 

Rare 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

1400 

20 

20 

2 

0800 

40 

20 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

1400 

100 

20 

1 E 

0800 

Rare 

20 

EH 

1400 

Rare 

20 

0800 

Rare 

20 

1400 

Rare 

20 

0800 

Rare 

20 

1400 

Rare 

20 

0800 

40 

20 

£uinine(6  Days) 

S  Response 

14 

0 

4  o 

21 

0 

Rare 

28 

0 

0 

1111 


TABLE  2 


CASE  2 .  PYRIMETHAMINE  THERAPY  OF  FALCIPARUM  MALARIA 
FOLLOWED  BY  RII  RESPONSE 


DATE 

DAY 

ASEXUAL 

COUNT 

GAMS 

THERAPY 

COMMENT 

7  FEB  1973 

0 

8580 

H 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

RI I  Response 

7007 

mm 

1 

3160 

0 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

1720 

mm 

2 

1140 

.1 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

660 

U 

3 

960 

1 

580 

Bfl 

4  ! 

80 

0 

1377 

81 

5 

3185 

Quinine  (6  Days) 

TABLE  3 


CASE  3.  RII  RESPONSE  OF  FALCIPARUM  MALARIA  TO  PYRIMETHAMINE 


DATE 


DAY 

ASEXUAL 

COUNT 

/cmm 

GAMS 

THERAPY 

0 

940 

40 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

1 

1296 

162 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

20 

20 

2 

20 

20 

Pyrimethamine  50  mg 

Rare 

20 

3 

Rare 

72 

Rare 

48 

4 

Rare 

20 

192 

24 

5 

40 

i 

20 

40 

I  40 

6 

1512 

0 

Quinine  (6  Lays) 

1080 

40 

COMMENT 


19  FEB  1973 


RII  Respons 


10.  The  Suppression  of  Plasrnodlujp  Falciparum  and  Plasmodium 
Vivax  Parasitemias  by  a  Dapsone-Pyrimethamlne  Combination. 

Combinations  of  sulfones  with  pyrimethamine  have  been  shown 
not  to  be  effective  in  the  treatment  of  persons  clinically  ill  with 
chloroquine-resistant  falciparum  parasitemias .  There  is  little 
information  about  trie  performance  of  these  combinations  in  the 
long-term  suppression  of  such  parasitemias.  Therefore  we  studied 
the  effectiveness  of  a  combination  of  dapsone  100  milligrams  and 
pyrimethamine  12.5  milligrams  in  suppressing  parasitemias  in  an 
area  endemic  for  chloroquine-resistant _P .  falciparum  and  for  P. 
vivax  malaria. 

This  study  was  carried  out  over  a  seven-month  period  in  two 
villages  in  Prachinburi  Province,  Northeast  Thailand.  Four  hundred 
and  fifty  randomly  selected  villagers  10  years  of  age  or  older  were 
assigned  to  one  of  three  medication  groups.  These  groups  were 
comparable  in  number,  median  age,  proportion  of  males  (Table  1), 
and  later,  in  number  and  type  of  study  dropouts  (Table  2).  Sub¬ 
jects  received  weekly,  under  a  double-blind  design,  either  dap¬ 
sone,  100  milligrams,  and  pyrimethamine,  12.5  milligrams,  or 
dapsone-pyrimethamine  plus  chloroquine,  300  milligrams  of  base, 
or  chloroquine  alone.  Each  subject  was  visited  weekly,  at  which 
time  medication  was  administered,  capillary  blood  for  thick -thin 
malaria  smears  obtained,  and  a  history  of  illness  since  the  previous 
visit  taken. 

Four  hundred  and  ten  subjects  (91%)  completed  the  250week 
course  of  medication.  Preliminary  data  compilation  (Table  3) 
suggests  that  falciparum  attack  rates  of  the  groups  receiving  dap¬ 
sone-pyrimethamine,  with  or  without  chloroquine,  were  three-to 
four  fold  less  than  the  attack  rate  of  the  group  receiving  chloroquine 
alone.  The  number  of  weekly  positive  smears  in  the  former  groups 
was  six-to  eight-fold  lower  than  in  the  group  receiving  chloroquine 
alone.  When  slide  reading  is  complete,  weekly  infection  rates  will 
be  studied  to  determine  patterns  of  breakthrough.  Further  data  ana¬ 
lysis  will  also  reveal  whether  the  parasite  densities  and/or  illness 
experienced  b*’  the  three  study  groups  were  different.  Vivax  infection 
rates  were  O.C%  in  Group  1,  2.8%  in  Group  2,  and  0.7%  in  Group  3. 


1114 


TABLE  1 


INITIAL  COMPARABILITY  OF  STUDY  CROUPS 


Croup 

Number 

Subjects 

Median  Age 
(Years) 

Proportion 

Males 

l(dapsone- 

py rimethamine , 
chloroquine) 

156 

24.0 

0.48 

2 (dapsone- 

pyrimethamine) 

152 

27.0 

0.56 

3(chloroquine) 

142 

28.0 

0.49 

TABLE  2 

COMPARABILITY  OF  STUDY  DROPOUTS 


roup 

N umb  e  r 
beginning 

Number 

Dropouts 

Number 

Completing 

Reason  for 
Dropout 

1  i 

156 

14 

142 

Moved  11, 
Refused  3 

2 

152 

14 

138 

Moved  11, 
Refused  3 

3 

142 

12 

130 

Moved  11, 
Refused  1 

1115 


1 


1 


TABLE  3 

FALCIPARUM  ATTACK  RATES  AND  NUMBER  OF  PARASITE! ;IC 
EPISODES  IN  SUBJECTS  COMPLETING  STUDY,  BY  GROUP 


Croup 

Number 

Sub j  ects 

Number(%) 

Infected 

Number  Episodes  * 
Parasitemia  (Avg.) 

1 

142 

25(17.6) 

68(2.7) 

2 

138 

20(14.5) 

49(2.  5) 

3 

^  —  J 

130 

71(54.6) 

393(5.7) 

*  Based  on  26  blood  films  from  each  subject 

¥ 


1116 


We  conclude  that  weekly  dapsone-pyrimethamine,  with  or 
without  chloroquine,  appears  to  effectively  suppress  falciparum 
infections  in  an  area  endemic  for  chloroquine-resistant  strains  of 
the  parasite. 


of  Malaria  Vectors 


The  objective  of  these  studies  is  to  investigate  the  bionomics 
and  population  dynamics  of  known  and  potential  vectors  of  human 
malaria  in  Southeast  Asia  and  their  relationship  to  the  dissemina¬ 
tion  of  chloroquine  resistant  strains  of  P.  falciparum. 


Specific  factors  being  studied  in  the  process  of  defining 
actual  and  potential  vector  species  in  Thailand  include  the  follow¬ 
ing:  incidence  of  malarial  oocysts  and  sporozoites  in  wild  anophe- 
line  populations ,  susceptibility  of  colonized  strains  of  Anopheles 
to  infection  with  P.  falciparum ,  patterns  of  biting  activity  of  vector 
species,  ovipositional  habits  of  anopheline  mosquitoes  and  the 
viability  of  their  eggs  under  various  environmental  conditions . 


Malaria  field  studies  in  Prac-hinburi  province.  Entomological 
field  studies  were  continued  in  Prachinburi  Province  in  support  of 
a  longitudinal  study  of  the  epidemiology  of  malaria  in  the  area . 
Results  of  studies  described  in  the  previous  Annual  Report  ^  indi¬ 
cated  that  the  risk  of  malaria  was  greater  in  the  forest  than  in  the 
village  setting.  Anopheles  balabacensis  was  shown  to  be  the  pre¬ 
dominant  malaria  vector  in  the  area.  Between  April  and  November, 
1972  anopheline  collections  from  human-bait  and  vegetation  were 
made  simultaneously  on  nine  nights  in  forest  and  village  locations 
to  compare  vector  densities  in  the  respective  areas.  Except  for 
one  night,  these  collections  were  made  between  dusk  and  dawn.  In 
these  collections,  a  total  of  403  A.  balabacensis  were  collected, 
biting  humans  and  resting  on  vegetation  in  vicinity  of  collectors  in 
the  forest,  as  opposed  to  only  30  in  the  village  site.  The  number 
collected  biting  per  man  per  night  is  shown  in  Table  1  for  both  loca¬ 
tions.  In  addition,  421  A.  balabacensis  were  collected  biting  or 
resting  in  the  forest  on  seven  separate  nights,  while  in  the  village 
only  55  A.  balabacensis  were  collected  on  ten  nights.  The  break¬ 
down  of  the  number  of  these  mosquitoes  collected  biting  per  man 
per  night  is  shown  in  Table  2.  The  only  A.  balabacensis  found 
infected  with  either  occysts  or  sporozoites  were  collected  in  the 
forest  during  the  dry  season  in  January  and  February  1973.  In 
January  four  of  92  collected  biting  contained  either  oocysts  and/or 


1117 


sporozoites  while  one  additional  A.  balabacensis  collected  resting 
also  was  found  to  contain  oocysts.  Two  of  47  A,  balabacensis 
collected  biting  on  one  night  in  February  contained  oocysts. 

Blood  films  were  obtained  from  five  people  living  in  a  nearby  hut 
and  trophozoites  of  P.  falciparum  were  demonstrated  in  the  blood 
from  four  of  these  individuals.  One  slide  had  falciparum  gameto- 
cytes  as  well  as  asexual  stages. 

Efforts  were  made  during  this  period  to  determine  how  A.  bala¬ 
bacensis  populations  survive  the  extended  dry  season.  Previous 
studies  had  shown  that  eggs  were  not  important  in  over-dry  season 
survival,  and  larvae  were  not  found  at  the  time  either  in  Ban  Bu 
Phram  valley  or  at  the  edge  of  the  forest.  During  the  dry  season 
•covered  by  this  report,  A.  balabacensis  larvae  were  found  in  rock 
pools  alongside  partially  dry  stream  beds  on  the  steep  slopes  of 
surrounding  hills  and  in  shallow  pits  dug  at  stream  margins  by 
villagers  as  a  source  of  water  in  the  forest.  Identical  pools  were 
dug  out  by  SMRL  personnel  and  A.  balabacensis  larvae  were 
collected  from  these  new  pools  within  10  days.  Thus,  it  appears 
that  during  the  dry  season  the  life  cycle  of  A.  balabacensis  is 
maintained  in  the  forest  and  that  breeding  extends  into  the  central 
portion  of  the  valley  during  the  rainy  season  as  breeding  sites 
become  available  there. 

Susceptibility  of  A.  balabacensis  and  A.  minimus  to  infection 
with  P.  falcijaarum  prior  to  and  after  standard  chloroquine  therapy. 
The  suggestion  has  been  made  that  the  wide-spread  use  of  chloro¬ 
quine  may  have  contributed  to  the  rise  of  chloroquine  resistant 
strains  of  P .  falciparum .  ^  Romkaran  &  Peters®  have  shown  that 
the  infectivity  of  a  chloroquine-resistant  strain  of  P .  berghei  for 
A.  stephensi  is  enhanced  after  treatment  with  chloroquine.  No 
differences  were  observed  in  the  infectivity  of  drug  sensitive 
strains  after  treatment  with  chloroquine.  A  study  was  undertaken 
to  determine  if  chloroquine  enhanced  the  infectivity  of  P.  falcipa¬ 
rum  for  A.  balabacensis  and  A.  minimus .  Laboratory  reared  strains 
of  these  two  species  were  fed  simultaneously  on  29  human  sub¬ 
jects  with_P.  falciparum  infections  in  which  gametocyte  densities 
were  at  least  25  per  cmm.  Mosquitoes  were  fed  on  these  subjects 
immediately  prior  to  administration  of  1500  mg  chloroquine  base 
(day  0)  and  on  days  2  and  7  when  treatment  was  completed.  All 
patients  were  admitted  to  the  district  hospital  in  Phra  Phutthabat 
for  the  first  7  days  of  study.  During  this  period  blood  films  were 


1118 


Table  1.  A.  balabacensis  collected  biting  man  or  simultaneous 
nights  in  the  forest  and  village  settings. 


Month 

No.  nights 

Forest 

Village 

No.  Coll. 

No. /man  night 

No.  Coll. 

No. /man  night 

Apr 

1 

100 

16.6 

3 

0.6 

May 

4 

60 

5.0 

7 

Jun 

2 

30 

3.0 

1 

0.1 

Aug* 

1 

4 

2.0 

1 

0.5 

Oct 

1 

7 

3.5 

2 

0.5 

Nov 

1 

8 

4.0 

5 

1.3 

Totals 

10 

209 

6.15 

19 

0.48 

+ 


‘Collection  between  1800-2400  hrs. 

Table  2.  A.  balabacensis  collected  biting  man  on  different 
nights  in  the  forest  and  village  settings 


Month 

No . 

nights 

Forest 

Village 

Forest 

Village 

No. Coll. 

No . /man 

No.  Coll. 

No. /man 

night 

night 

Apr. 

- 

- 

4 

0.4 

Jun 

90 

5.6 

18 

0.9 

Jul 

- 

- 

6 

1.4 

Aug* 

1 

1 

26 

6.5 

15 

3.8 

Jan* 

1 

- 

92 

30.6 

- 

- 

Feb* 

2 

1 

81 

5.8 

0 

0 

Totals 

m 

10 

289 

7.8 

43 

1.2 

‘Collections  between  1800-2400  hrs. 


9 


fed  on  these  subjects  immediately  prior  to  administration  of  1500 
mg  chloroquine  base  (day  0)  and  on  days  2  and  7  when  treatment 
was  completed.  All  patients  were  admitted  to  the  district  hospital 
in  Phra  Phutthabat  for  the  first  7  days  of  study.  During  this  period 
blood  films  were  taken  daily  and  examined  for  parasites.  After  the 
subjects  were  discharged  from  the  hospital,  follow-up  blood  films 
were  taken  on  days  14,  21  and  28  to  determine  the  status  of  chlo¬ 
roquine  resistance,  using  WHO  criteria.  Mosquitoes  which  fed  on 
these  subjects  were  dissected  8  to  10  days  later  and  the  oocysts 
in  their  guts  counted.  The  proportions  of  mosquitoes  with  oocysts 
(per  cent  positive)  and  the  mean  number  of  oocysts  per  infected 
mosquito  (oocyst  index)  were  used  to  compare  the  susceptibility 
of  the  two  mosquito  species  to  untreated  and  treated  falciparum 
malaria . 

Seventeen  of  the  subjects  were  infectious  to  at  least  one  mos¬ 
quito  species  on  either  the  pre-  or  one  of  the  post-treatment  feed¬ 
ings.  Two  of  the  subjects  were  not  infectious  on  the  pre-treatment 
feed  but  one  of  these  was  infective  on  the  second  day  and  the 
other  was  infective  on  day  7 .  A  twenty-eight  day  follow-up  was 
completed  on  13  of  17  subjects.  Ten  of  these  exhibited  an  RI 
response  and  3  were  R1X.  Three  subjects  could  not  be  followed 
after  discharge  and  an  additional  subject  was  switched  to  quinine 
and  tetracycline  therapy  prior  to  discharge.  The  results  of  the  dis¬ 
section  of  the  groups  of  mosquitoes  which  fed  on  these  subjects 
are  shown  in  Table  3 .  There  was  a  decrease  in  the  median  percent 
infected  for  both  mosquito  species  after  chloroquine  treatment. 
These  results  suggest  that  chloroquine  treatment  did  not  enhance 
the  infectivity  of  chloroquine  resistant  strains  of  P.  falciparum; 
however,  no  RIII  level  resistant  strains  were  studied. 

In  this  study,  there  was  little  difference  in  the  susceptibility 
of  the  two  mosquito  species  to  infection  with  falciparum  gameto- 
cytes,  although  previous  studies  indicated  that  A.  balabacensis 
were  more  susceptible  than  A.  minimus .  Techniques  used  were  the 
same  in  both  studies;  however,  in  the  present  investigation  higher 
proportions  of  A.  minimus  fed  and  more  were  dissected  than  pre¬ 
viously.  In  addition,  the  larval  diet  in  the  A.  minimus  colony  was 
changed  between  studies.  This  change  resulted  in  greater  longevi¬ 
ty  in  the  A.  minimus  colony. 


Irritability  of  A .  balabacensls  to  DDT .  Tests  to  determine  the 
irritability  of  A.  balabacensls  to  DDT  have  been  initiated,  using 
the  procedures  recommended  by  the  WHO.  Initial  results  are 
inconclusive  and  further  studies  are  planned. 

Table  3.  Results  of  dissections  of  A.  balabacensis  and  A.  minimus 
which  were  infected  when  fed  simultaneously  on  17  sub¬ 
jects  either  prior  to  or  on  day  2  or  7  after  starting  chloro- 
quine  treatment. 


Percent  F 

ositive 

Oocyst  Index 

Species 

Day 

Median 

Range 

Median 

Range 

A.  balabacensis 

0* 

48 

0-100 

4.1 

0-100 

2** 

40 

0-78 

8.0 

0-74 

7  *** 

23 

0-74 

6.7 

0-82 

A.  minimus 

0* 

49 

1.0-120  2 

2.6 

1.0-25.0 

2** 

38 

1.0-29.2 

2.2 

1.0-9. 5 

7  *** 

26 

2.1-46.7 

3.5 

2.5-32.9 

*  Day  0-29  subjects 
**  Day  2-23  subjects 
***Day  7-19  subjects 


12.  Mosquito  Fauna  of  Thailand 

Work  is  in  progress  to  collect,  identify,  catalogue  and  redes¬ 
cribe  the  mosquito  species  of  Thailand.  Information  is  also  gather¬ 
ed  on  the  distribution,  larval  habitats  and  other  aspects  of  the 
bionomics  of  various  species.  The  eventual  goal  is  the  production 
of  monographs  on  the  mosquitoes  of  the  area,  together  with  keys, 
handbooks  and  other  identification  aids,  for  use  of  workers  in 
public  health  and  associated  fields. 

Mosquitoes  are  collected  from  many  areas  of  Thailand  in 
connection  with  various  studies  on  malaria  and  other  arthropod 
borne  diseases.  Additional  collections  of  a  specialized  nature  are 
made  to  obtain  a  correlated  series  of  larvae,  pupae  and  adults  for 
illustration  and  taxonomic  studies.  The  majority  of  this  material 
is  shipped  to  the  Smithsonian  Institution  for  study  by  specialists 
in  the  Southeast  Asia  Mosquito  Project  (SEAMP) . 


1121 


During  this  year  173  mosquito  collections  were  made  in  3 
provinces  of  Thailand.  The  majority  of  the  collections  were  made 
in  Chiangmai  province.  These  collections  resulted  in  1035  pinned 
adults,  1490  slide  mounts  of  larvae,  larval  and  pupal  skins  and  50 
slide  mounts  of  terminalia.  An  additional  410  collections  of 
mosquito  larvae  were  received  for  identification,  560  larvae  with 
parasites  were  mounted  for  further  study  and  1172  slides  of 
Culicoides  from  light  trap  collections  were  made. 

1)  .  Anopheles:  During  this  period  adult  female  An.  (An.) 
campestris  were  collected  in  an  effort  to  establish  a  laboratory 
colony  for  experimental  studies.  This  species  is  the  most 
important  species  in  the  barbirostris  group  and  is  a  vector  of 
human  malaria  in  western  Malaysia.  Adults  of  An.  campestris 
resemble  those  of An.  barbirostris,  and  identifications  based 
on  adult  characters  alone  should  be  confirmed  by  examination 
of  the  immature  stages,  particularly  the  pupae.  Larvae  of  this 
species  were  found  in  ground  water  habitats  of  various  types 
including  marshes,  wells,  hoof  prints,  ditches  and  swamps. 
Larvae  of  An.  (An.)  hodgkini.  an  uncommon  species  in 
barbirostris  group,  were  collected  from  stream  and  rock  pools 
in  association  with  barbumbrosus,  bengalensis  and  balabacensi 
larvae  at  the  malaria  study  site  in  Prachinburi  province. 

2) .  Culex:  Studies  of  Subgenus  Culex  were  continued. 

Species  of  Culex  vishnui  subgroup  were  collected  in  an  effort 
to  obtain  female  Culex  pseudovishnui  for  sibling  rearings. 

3)  .  Aedes:  Bamboo  cup  collections  were  made  in  an  attempt  to 
obtain  rarer  species  of  the  Subgenus  Stegomvia .  A  coxony  of 
Aedes  craggi  was  established  with  material  collected  in 
Chiangmai  province.  Collections  of  Aedes  albopictus.  one  of 
the  commonest  species  in  Thailand,  were  checked  in  an  effort 
to  find  specimens  of  Aedes  Patricia  and  A.  novalbopictus . 
species  which  closely  resemble  A.  albopictus .  All  species  in 
this  subgenus  can  be  distinguished  by  characters  of  the  male 
terminalia . 

13.  Plasmodium  Falciparum  Infection  Rates  in  Normal  and  Enzyme- 

Deficient  Erythrocytes  of  Glucose-6-Phosphate  Dehydrogenase 
Deficient  Heterozygous  Thai  Women. 

P.  falciparum  infection  rates  in  normal  and  enzyme-deficient 

1122 


erythrocytes  of  Thai  women,  heterozygous  for  glucose-6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase  (G-6-PD)  deficiency  are  being  determined  and  com¬ 
pared. 

Women,  heterozygous  for  G-6-PD  deficiency  (an  X-chromosome- 
linked  trait),  are  mosaics:  approximately  half  of  their  red  blood 
cells  are  normal,  the  other  half  are  G-6-PD  deficient.  The  two 
cell  populations  can  be  distinguished  histochemically  by  the  methe- 
moglobin  elution  method^.  This  technique  is  being  applied  to  blood 
from  Thai  women  who  have  malaria  and  are  heterozygous  for  G-6-PD 
deficiency.  Infection  rates  in  both  normal  and  enzyme-deficient 
red  blood  cells  are  being  determined  and  compared.  Hematocrit, 
reticulocyte  count,  red  blood  cell  morphology,  hemoglobin  type, 
and  G-6-PD  activity  (spectrophotometic  assay)  are  also  being  de¬ 
termined. 

To  date,  approximately  600  women  and  girls  with  malaria, who 
presented  at  the  Provincial  Hospital  or  Malaria  Eradication  Center 
in  Chantaburi,  have  been  tested  by  the  methemoglobin  elution 
technique.  Approximately  ten  per  cent  have  been  classified  as 
heterozygous  for  G-6-PD  deficiency.  Parasite  counts  have  been 
made  in  both  normal  and  enzyme-deficient  cells  and  these  data  are 
now  being  analyzed. 


Project  34663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 


Task  00,  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  112  Field  rtudies  on  drug  resistant  malaria 

Literature  Cited. 

References: 

1.  Hall,  A.P.:  Quinine  infusion  for  recrudescences  of  falci¬ 
parum  malaria  in  Vietnam.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  21: 
851-856,  1972. 

2.  Miller,  L.H.,  Makaranond,  P.,  Sitprija,  V.,  Suebsanguan, 
C  .,  and  Canfield,  C  .J  :  Hyponatremia  in  malaria .  Ann. 
Trop.  Med.  Parasitol.  61:265-279,  1967. 

3.  .'cffery,  G.M.,  Collins,  W.E.,  and  Skinner,  J.C.:  Anti- 
malarial  drug  trials  on  a  multiresistant  strain  of  Plasmo¬ 
dium  falciparum.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  l_2:844-850, 

1963. ” 

4.  Powell,  R.D.,  Brewer,  G.J.,  Alving,A.S.,  and  Miller, 
J.W.:  Studies  on  a  strain  of  chloroquine-resistant  Plasmo¬ 
dium  falciparum  from  Thailand.  Bull.  W.H.O.  30:29-44 , 

1964. 

5.  Young,  M.D. ,  Contacos,  P.G.  ,  Stitcher,  J.E. ,  and  Miller, 

J.  W.:  Drug  resistance  in  Plasmodium  falciparum  from 
Thailand.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  12_:305-314  1963. 

6.  Segal,  H.E.:  Longitudinal  malaria  studies  in  rural  North¬ 
east  Thailand.  Ann.  Prog.  Rep.  SEATO  Med.  Res.  Lab. 
1971-72. 

7.  Langer,  B.W.,  Rutledge,  L.C.,  and  Gould,  D.J.:  Chloro- 
quine:  Retention  by  Anopheles  Stephens!  after  ingestion  in 
a  blood  meal.  Mosq.  News  28(3):  455-58 ,  1968. 

8.  Ramkaran,  A.E. ,  and  Peters,  W.:  Infectivity  of  chloroquine 
resistant  Plasmodium  berghei  to  Anopheles  stephensi 


1124 


enhanced  by  chloroquine.  Nature  22115206) :635-36,  1969. 

9.  Gall,  J.E.  Jr.,  Brewer,  G.J.,  and  Dern,  R.J.:  Studies  of 
glucose-6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  activity  of  individual 
erythrocytes:  The  methemoglobin  elution  test  for  identifi¬ 
cation  of  females  heterozygous  for  G-6-PD  deficiency. 

Am.  J.  Hum.  Genet.  17:359,  1965. 

Publications: 

1.  Segal,  H.E.,  Noll,  W.W.,  and  Thiemanun,  W.:  Glucose- 
6-phosphate  dehydrogenase  deficiency  and  falciparum 
malaria  in  two  Northeast  Thai  villages.  Proc.  Helminth. 
Soc.  Wash.  39:  Special  Issue,  79,  1972. 

2.  Wilkinson,  R.N.,  Gould,  D.J. ,  and  Boonyakanist,  A.: 
Comparative  susceptibility  of  Anopheles  balabacensis  and 
Anopheles  minimus  to  na turally  occurring  Plasmodium 
falciparum  in  Central  Thailand.  Helminth.  Soc.  of  Wash. 
39:  423-27,  1972. 

3.  Wilkinson,  R.N . ,  Colwell,  E.J.  and  Neoypatimanond, 
S . :  Effect  of  sulphamethoxazole-trimethoprim  on  the  viabi¬ 
lity  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  gametocytes .  Trans.  Roy. 
Soc.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  67:148,  1973. 


1125 


527  n  t  4-2'* 


1 


n 


j  RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  AMMCT  ACCESSION* 

DA  0A  6537 

IMTI  IF  IUMMI.Y* 

72  08  01 

ABPORT  ©ORTHOS  If  BOA 

S-  BATS  MIV  lUftFRV 

7?  07  01 

4.  MIND  OF  SUMMARY 

H.  TERM. 

1.  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

U 

k  MONK  It  CUR*  TV* 

u 

F.  RCBRAMMf* 

NA 

IA  01 

IB'S  IN#TR*N 

NL 

•fc  SPECIFIC 

COMTRACTOI 

ED  Til 

OATA* 

1  ACCESS 

Out 

1.  LEVEL  OF  IUM 

K  BOAR  UNIT 

I*.  NO  /COMIt* 

PROGRAM  KLtMCNT 

PROJECT 

NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A,  PRIMARY 

63713A 

3A663713D529 

O 

O 

114 

fc.  CONTRIBUTING 

' ’"'/J  W-  -  ■?.  - 

t.  CON  TRt  BUT  IN  A 

CDOG  114  (f) 

(U)  Malaria  Program  Supervision  (09) 

1|.  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECNNOLOOICAL  AREAS* 


IT  ITART  OATI  ' 

xrnmrnnmnfmnm - 

IE  FUNOINO  AoiNCY- 

IS.  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 

66  07 

72  38 

DA  | 

C.  Tn-House 

IT*  CONTRACT  OAANT 

IS.  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

4  professional  man  rs 

k  funds  (|*i  Mmm*) 

A  DATEG/EFFECTIVEi  ^A 

A  NUMBER)* 

EXPIRATION 

fiscal 

72 

9 

630 

t  TVPBi 

4  AMOUNT: 

YEAR 

r.  CUM.  AMT. 

73 

c 

) 

630 

If.  RBSPONllBLC  OOO  OROANIXATION 

[  1 

SO.  PERFORMINO  ORGANISATION 

1 

1 - 

rank*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

ADDRESS:* 

name:*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Researct 
Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 
^"•“'•Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

RKIPOMSIRLC  INDIVIDUAL 

NAM*  buescher,  col,  e.  l. 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  (Wvmfh  SIAN  H  V  i.  AuJmN 

name:*  Rothe ,  COL,  W.E. 

TELEPHONE  202/576-2280 

tkii.moni;  202/576-3551 

social  security  ACCOUNT  NUMEER:^^^^^^^^^^^H 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not 

Considered 

ASSOCIATE  INVISTIOATORS 

name.  Sweeney, 

NAME) 

Thomas 

R.  ,  Ph.D 

i 

DA 

II.  KEYM0RM  (Pr»*»4m  MACN~t*  JSSSHtr  ct»«7ll  c  W)««  <?•"<•> 


(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Drugs;  (U)  Biology;  (U)  Chemistry 


11.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  14  APPPOACM,  II.  FftQONE M  fFn ml*  MmIMNI  H  n«Nr  (Ml  •/  nN  ir|*  SacwHIy  Cf~*lrtc*»/w.  CM*.) 

23.  (U)  To  manage,  to  integrate,  and  provide  quality  control  for  the  Drug  Research 
Program  on  Malaria,  both  in-house  and  by  contract. 

24.  (U)  To  define  areas  requiring  investigation,  to  develop  suitable  contract  proposals 
to  follow  progress  by  correspondence  or  site  visits,  to  guide  direction  of  investiga¬ 
tion,  to  provide  for  exchange  of  information,  and  to  continually  check  findings  for 
verification  through  independent  agencies  (both  in-house  and  contract).  Two  outside 
advisory  groups  are  utilized. 

25.  (U)  Studies  formerly  reported  under  this  work  unit  are  reported  under  3A663713D829 , 
Work  Unit  Number  134, 


*ir<j|iWe  io  contractor*  upon  oritkiitor** 


OD, 


r-“J498 


■£ES2ni 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  DO  FORMS  MGIA.  1  NOV  CS 
And  M9I-1.  t  MAR  «•  IFOR  ARMY  USE  ARC  OBSOLETE 

1126 


•* 


[Pll  Redacted] 


L 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHH0L00Y  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

t.  UM>  KtlMlIlT 

DA  OB  6480 

i. ...»  »r  iuh.v 

72  08  01 

REPORT  OORVBB4  IRON 
DD~Dlltt(AR)43t 

k  BATE  PREV  SUSP  BY 

72  07  01 

4.  Kill,  or  WHOM, 

H.  TERM. 

1  SUMMARY  SCTV” 

u 

L  BORN  SECURITY* 

V 

t  MSN  A Ol NS* 

NA 

14  D«rN  RMTR'R 

NL 

Sk  SPECIFIC  BATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACC  EM 

Slvit  □  MO 

l  s 
?i 

3 

m 

IB.  NO./CODSSi*  probram  element 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

BOWK  UNIT  NUMBER 

4.  PRRIAAY 

63713A 

3A663713D829 

00 

122 

«.  CONTRIBUTOR 

CPOG  114  (f) 

. .  i 

i-  title  fywuii  rt»  ct—HH—tim  {5y 


(U)  Test  system  Design  and  Development 

tl.  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 

002600  Biology 


IT  If  AIT  Ufl - - - 

70  07 

u.  imnTmspnronni - 

,  72  08 

11  ltMbi/4  mm — 

DA  | 

TT  UAiAAnmInce  UAIhoo - 

In-House 

Vt.  CONTRACT/ BRANT 

4  OATU/IFFCCTtVEi  EXPIRATION: 

k  NUMSENi* 

4  TYRE:  A  AMOUNT) 

IS  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

4  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

k  FUNDS  O"  RnnmAD 

FISCAL 

YEAN 

72 

3 

105 

73 

3 

105 

IS.  RESPONSIBLE  ODD  ONSANIlATlON 

l_ l 

as.  pens 

i 

o 

I_ i 

Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  «•*•««•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 

‘“•‘“'’Washington,  D.  C.  20012  ‘""“flashington ,  D.  C.  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VHTIOATON  (Fvmim A  UAM  It  V.t.  4MPP«  |m IIIwNmV 


RESPOND SLK  INDIVIDUAL 

NAiAii  buescher,  E.  L.  ,  COL 
telephone)  202/576-3551 

II.  DCNCHAL  UK 


"**•*  Kinnamon,  K.  E.  ,  COL 

T.LCPHON.:  202/576-2292 
SOCIAL  KCUNITV  ACCOUNT  NUMOCN- 
AUOCIATC  INVESTIGATORS 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


namci  Smith)  J.  H.)  1LT 
nanci  Rich)  R.  R.  y  1LT 


n «« ... nsn; «<•; (u )  chemical;  (U)  Chemistry;  (u)  Pharmaceutical; 

(U)  Test  System;  (U)  In  Vitro;  (U)  In  Vivo 


II.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  14  APPROACH,  IS.  PftOOFKIA  A*  MMlfMIrMH P*M*At  Mil  •!  MCA  wt+  §•«<*!*  Cl— !*•*»** 


DA 


23.  (U)  To  design  and  develop  in  vitro  and  in  vivo  test  systems  for  the  evaluation 

of  chemical  compounds  as  prophylactic  and  therapeutic  agents  against  diseases  of 
major  military  significance.  Infections  such  as  malaria,  which  render  troops  in¬ 
effective  for  extended  periods,  receive  principal  emphasis. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


24.  (U)  Appropriate  in  vitro  and  animal  pilot  models  are  designed  to  meet  a  specific 
need  for  testing  chemical  compounds.  These  models  are  expanded  into  operating  test 
systems  in-house  and  utilized  to  provide  guidance  to  contractors  when  testing  is  to  be 
done  under  contract.  When  necessary,  modifications  to  existing  test  systems  are  de¬ 
signed  and  developed. 

25.  (U)  Studies  formerly  reported  under  this  work  unit  are  reported  under  3A663713D829 , 
Work  Unit  Number  124. 


DD,  “VJ  498 


PREVIOUS  COITIONS  OP  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  M9|A  I  NOV  SB 
AND  1 4BS*  I  1  MAR  61  IFOR  ARMY  USE)  ARC  OBSOLETE. 

1127 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

i.  mmcv  wcnwir 

DA  OA  6513 

t  ,«TI  H  ».llf 

72  08  01 

mpottr  nBRfBBA  mum 

DtbDR*E(AR)*3* 

i  BATC  NNSV  IWflT 

72  07  01 

L  KINO  OF  SUMMARY 

H.  Term. 

S.  SUMMARY  SCTV* 

u 

B  BBBR  MCUHITV* 

u 

r.  nbbramrb* 

NA 

ia  m 

SfR  DMT  S'* 

NA 

IB  SNCCIFK  BATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCS  SB 

□  vis  Uhb 

V.  lIvIUmw 

L  OEM  UNIT 

IB.  MO./COOEti* 

NROOAAM  ELEMENT 

NROJECT  NUMBER 

TAB*  AREA  NUMBER 

BORE  UNIT  NUMBER 

*  NR  IMA  NT 

6371 jA 

3A663713D8ZV 

00 

— 123 - 

fe.  CONTRIBUTE* 

' 

*  HMMMK 

CDOGllA(f) 

(U)  Biological  studies  on  control  of  anopheline  vectors  of  malaria 

l|.  SCIBNTIFIC  AMO  TECHNOLOGICAL  ARBAf* — 

002600  Biology 

■  mm™ - 


TTimTOTT 

65  07 


TmrwiffB'dwcgf^  fcAfr 

12  08 


limKtfTVCTwgr 

DA  I 


U.  NAUUiAnUUIW 

C,  In-House 


ITHWTiXJTTiTOT - 

A  DATBS/tFFBCTIVlf^^  AppllCablC  C  It  Nf  RATION! 

h.  NUMBIRi* 

*  TYNBs  A  AMOUNT! 

INOOfARAROi  f,  CUM.  AMT. 


M.  RSM 

SORCBS  SSTIMATB 

A  NRBFMMBMAL  MAN  YRS 

B  FUNDS  fl*  Bm-^ 

FISCAL 

Vta.'R 

72 

2 

30 

73 

2 

30 

**.  ^BRI 

WMMNSORSANlfcA 

m  \  \ 

It.  RBINONSIBLC  OOO  ORRANIS  ATION 


NAMi»*Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 

ADORStSi* 


RBINONSIBLC  INDIVIDUAL 

NAnci  Buescher,  COL,  E.  L. 
t«l«phon*i  202  -  576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


.  nTssvot  Tussjsc  mv  JSSSSHr  SSmShRS  c»*»> 


nambi1 ‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Dlv  of  CD  and  I 
*00*®*®'*  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


NR1NCINAL  IN  VB  ATI  BATON  MAN  II  V.».  A 

•““‘Ward,  Dr.  R.A. 

202  -  576-2553 

SOCIAL  SCCUN1TT  ACCOUNT  NUMMN' 
AMOCIATB  INVt»TIOATOHt 

namb,  Eldrldge,  LTC  B.F. 
namb.  Schlefer.  MAJ  B.A. 


DA 


(U)  Anopheles;  (U)31ocontrol;  (U)  Colonize:  (U)  Mosquitoes:  (U)  Vectors 

I.  TCCMNICiL  OIJICTIWC  •  la.  tPPM ACM.  1L  IAmIA  IkAWAmI  nnwHl  N  mAn.  NMt*  tail  •!  *Mt  NA  - - «miI« 


II.  TBCHN1CAL  OBJICTIVC.*  IB  ANNUO  ACM,  IB  NNOONIM  (A»NA  IwNWAta*!  pta«|NN>«  MmIINaA  *  «—*T  MU*  Mil  *1  MM*  MB  tMtart*  CImaINmcMm  C«M.j 

23.  (U)  Development  of  methods  of  the  control  of  mosquito  vectors  of  malaria  which 
will  have  minimal  Impact  upon  the  environment.  Various  mosquito  pathogens  will  be 
studied  to  determine  those  types  which  can  be  utilized  In  a  biological  or  Integrated 
vector  control  program,  which  could  decrease  the  incidence  of  malaria  in  OCONUS 
military  personnel. 

24.  (U)  Establishment  of  laboratory  colonies  of  anophelines  from  areas  of  strategic 
importance.  Evaluation  of  rearing  procedures  through  alteration  of  environmental 
factors.  Stud/  of  mosquito  pathogens  on  mosquito  behavior,  especially  as  related  to 
disease  transmission. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  72  08,  Work  formerly  performed  under  this  work  unit  now  reported 

under  Project  3A663713D829,  Work  Unit  124. 


to  contractor*  yjfl  «WMmIw*|  gMNWf. 


0D.STJ498 


PREVIOUS  EDITION*  OF  T HI f  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORM*  1  ABBA,  I  NOV  BB 
AND  I4BB-I  t  MAR  •*  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1128 


♦ 


t 


[Pll  Redacted] 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORE  UNIT  SUMMARY 

u 


I.  NT!  PMV  lUtFRV 

72  07  01 


4.  HIM*  OF  sunnarv 

D.  Change 


IS.  NO  /COOCti* 


4.  NMANV 


b.  COMTMOUTINS 

7WSOS5&- 


FROORAM  ELEMENT 

T37T3X - 


arccrurrrr 


U 


FROJECT  NUMHR 

l3Abb!j/l!iD82y - 


nSSevMi 
DA  0A  6514 


RESAAMN0” 

KA 


iBmm 

73  07  01 


NL 


TAM  AMA  NUMW 

- TO - 


D>DK**(AR)43* 


E 


•FECIFlC  BATA* 

TNACTMACCIM 

vi  Dw» 


I.  LEVEL  •»  fl 

a  mmm 


#!f^W 


UNIT 

T 27 


mmmw. 


MMMUiMM 


1  I.  TITLt  (FwA.  wi0t  HM  CI...IM— Ml  C«M»F 

(U)  Biological  Studies  of  mosquito  malaria  Infection  and  transmission 

II.  SCIENTIFIC  A*0  TBCNNOLOSICAL  AREA*^  * 

002600  Biology 

i  ms?  bat i - p  \mim  umxm  vm  nr  nun nmv 

65  07  C0NT  DA  I 


Mitt iimimitmmiimm 


(09) 


IT  CON  TRACT/*  RANT 

A  DA TU^r MCTIvgfot  Applicable  IKPlAATMNt 


A  nvmh«i* 

A  TVM: 


A  AMOUNT t 
t,  CUM.  AMT. 


I 


It  AttFONHOCt  DOO  OASAmiIATION  | 

nanbi*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 


RttFONSIOLC  INOIVtOUAL 

*****  Bueecher,  COL,  E.L. 
T«L«pMONn  202  -  576-3551 


w.  BEN 

Ml ACBS  SSTIMATt 

A  PROFESSIONAL  NAN  YR§ 

A  FUMM  (m 

FISCAL 

year 

73 

6 

130 

74 

6 

130 

LLMAUimUl  WfUft 

C«  In-House 


MANi>*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

""Dlv  of  CD  and  I 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 

FRIMCIFAL  INVCSTIOATOA  (rwrnm I  AMN  II  V.$.  A  ■»<—!» 

Eldridge,  LTC  B.F. 

TmnwD.t  202  -  576-3719 
SOCIAL  MCURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMOCRi 
AMOCIATC  INVESTIOATORS 

mam, i  Ward,  Dr*  R»A* 

ham,!  Schneider,  Dr*  I.  DA 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 
ii.  KiwAko, kkCM  -/•  *-•-"*  ci***it**tim <*+>  ^j)  Anopheles;1  (uT  Mosquitoes  ;  I(U)  Plasmodium; 

(U)  Susceptibility;  (U)  Falciparum  malaria;  (U)  Aotus;  (U)  Immunization 

•  rrruuir  .I  Aa.**«iua  A  -  *a  MAiHaa  I  — -  •**  *-*  “**  ki  -  -*- —  a>«*A  u.f  •! A  aia  * 


It.  TICMNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  ,4  APANOACM,  IA  FftOSASM  |«M|  WAmI  MNNP»I  AAmMIIMN  «r  wit.  fWMA  Mil  *1  mM  MO  *»—*»■  Cl— IS— Mi 

23.  (U)  Development  of  physiological  means  of  Interrupting  malaria  transmission 
through  an  understanding  of  factors  influencing  susceptibility  of  anopheline  vectors 
to  malaria  and  of  factors  determining  transmission  efficiency  of  vectors.  Test 
systems  are  developed  for  the  evaluation  of  antlmalarlal  drugs  and  the  study  of 
sporozoite  Immunity. 

24.  (U)  Studies  are  conducted  on  the  infectivity  of  human  and  closely  related  simian 
malarial  parasites  to  various  mosquito  vectors  of  SE  Aslan  areas.  Attempts  to  transmit 
falciparum  malaria  to  lover  primates  are  made.  Feedings  of  anophellnes  on  gametocy- 
temlc  hosts  are  conducted,  followed  by  dissections  of  samples  of  the  mosquitoes  at 
Intervals  thereafter  to  determine  level  and  progress  of  Infections. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06.  Aotus  monkeys  treated  with  methionine  and  inoculated  with 
malaria  sporozoites  from  Infected  Anopheles  stephensl  shoved  evidence  of  Infection  after 
18  days  of  patency.  Non-methionine  treated  controls  remained  negative.  Fine  structure 
differences  mainly  In  the  gametocyte,  were  observed  between  a  chloroquine-res latent 
(Smith)  strain  and  a  chloroqulne-susceptlble  strain  of  malarial  parasite.  Anopheles 
stephensl  mosquitoes  Infected  with  Plasmodium  cynomolgl  flew  shorter  distances  and  more 
slowly  on  a  mechanical  flight  mill  than  did  non- Infected  controls.  Using  density 
gradients,  Infectious  sporozoites  were  Isolated  from  homogenates  of  Infected  anopheline 
mosquitoes.  Diploid  cell  lines  of  Armlgeres  subalbatus  and  Aedes  atropalpus  were  estab¬ 
lished.  Work  reported  under  this  unit  was  formerly  reported  under  Project  3A663713D829, 
Work  Units  123,  125,  and  126.  For  technical  reports  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 

1  Jul  72  -  30  June  73. 


te&r»cL,ftaS.u.£i  .EASSJAfljaJ^port , 


00,srj498 


[Pll  Redacted] 


FREVIOUS  COITIONS  O 9  THIS  FORM  ARC  OSSOLlTC.  DO  FORMS  1  ASIA  I  NOV  if 
AND  14*1*1.  1  MAR  ,S  (FOR  ARMY  USE  I  ARC  OBSOLETE 


1129 


i 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  124  Biological  studies  of  mosquito  malaria  infection  and 
transmission 

Investigators 

Principal:  LTC  Bruce  F.  Eldridge,  MSC;  Ronald  A.  Ward,  Ph.D.; 

Imogene  Schneider,  Ph.D. 

Associate:  MAJ  Bernard  A.  Schlefer,  MSC;  CPT  Anthony  Bosworth,  MSC; 

Leroy  Bell,  B.S.;  SP5  Paul  F.  Beeman;  SP5  Jackie  Williams; 
SF4  David  Spooner;  SP4  John  Brandt 

Description 

Studies  are  conducted  on  the  relationship  of  human  and  non-human 
malarial  parasites  to  their  mosquito  vectors.  Included  are  consideration 
of  the  role  of  genetic  and  environmental  factors  in  mosquito  suscepti¬ 
bility,  the  effect  of  mosquito  pathogens  on  mosquito  biology,  the  design 
of  insect  culture  systems  which  will  support  the  growth  and  development 
of  the  insect  phase  of  malarial  parasites,  the  use  of  density  gradients 
to  Isolate  sporozoites  from  mosquitoes,  and  the  development  of  primary 
and  established  Insect  cell  lines  from  selected  mosquito  species. 

Progress 


1.  Mosquito  transmission  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  in  monkeys. 

Although  anopheline  mosquitoes  can  be  infected  with  falciparum 
malaria  from  Aotus  trivlrgatus  donors ,  and  the  complete  sporogonous  cycle 
shown  by  transmission  back  to  man  or  chimpanzee,  monkey  to  monkey 
transmission  by  sporozoites  has  only  been  achieved  once  (3).  The  re¬ 
peated  transmission  of  this  parasite  by  mosquitoes  has  obvious  implica¬ 
tions  for  the  control  of  malaria. 

Sodeman  et  al.  (9)  observed  partial  development  of  the  exoerythro- 
cytlc  (EE)  schlzont  of  this  parasite  in  Aotus .  However,  the  EE  schlzonts 
strained  abnormally  and  did  not  release  infective  merozoltes.  They 
thought  that  the  hepatic  cell  of  Aotus  lacked  a  necessary  metabolite  for 
the  maturation  of  this  stage.  Pathological  examination  of  liver  tissues 
from  captive  Aotus  which  had  not  been  experimentally  infected  with 
malaria  showed  focal  degenerative  changes  such  as  advanced  fatty  livers 
or  hydropic  degeneration  in  2/6  animals  (5) .  These  conditions  are  often 
a  consequence  of  a  dietary  deficiency  and  may  be  reversed  with  the  ad¬ 
ministration  of  essential  amino  acids.  It  was  Inferred  that  the  inability 
of  Aotus  to  sustain  a  complete  EE  parasite  cycle  was  related  to  an  un¬ 
favorable  hepatic  environment,  and  that  this  might  be  reversed  by  dosage 
of  Aotus  with  various  essential  amino  acids  that  were  known  to  be  of 
value  in  treating  certain  forms  of  fatty  liver  in  experimental  animals. 
Methionine  was  the  first  such  amino  acid  to  be  considered. 

1130 


Two  splsnectomlzed  Aotus  trivirgatus  were  inoculated  Intravenously 
with  £.  falciparum  (Vietnam,  Smith  strain)  sporozoites  from  Anopheles 
Stephens!  mosquitoes  fed  on  Aotus  donors.  50-70  infected  salivary  glands 
were  dissected  in  chilled  Mosquito  Culture  Medium  (Grand  Island  Biologi¬ 
cal  Co.),  triturated  and  injected  into  the  femoral  vein  in  1  ml.  of 
solution.  One  Aotus  was  treated  with  methionine  and  the  other  served  as 
a  control.  0.2  g.  of  dlmethlonlne  was  administered  orally  4  days  prior 
to  the  sporozoite  Inoculation  and  5  times  weekly  for  the  following  30 
days.  The  methionine-treated  animal  exhibited  JP.  falciparum  trophozoites 
in  the  peripheral  circulation  18  days  after  sporozoite  passage  while  the 
control  Aotus  was  negative  over  a  56  day  observation  period.  Immature 
and  mature  falciparum  gametocytes  appeared  11  and  20  days  respectively, 
after  patency  in  the  treated  Aotus,  thus  confirming  the  identity  of  the 
transmission.  These  gametocytes  subsequently  proved  infective  to 
Anopheles  Stephens!. 

This  transmission  is  of  interest  as  the  prepatent  period  of  the  Smith 
strain  was  18  days  as  contrasted  to  the  36  day  period  observed  by  Collins 
and  Contacos  (3)  with  the  Cambodian  I  strain  in  this  host.  It  is  hypothe¬ 
sized  that  the  present  circumstances  of  transmission  to  a  methionine- 
treated  animal  Indicate  the  metabolic  state  of  the  liver  may  be  an  impor¬ 
tant  factor  in  sustaining  complete  EE  development  of  certain  P.  falciparum 
strains  in  abnormal  host  systems. 

2.  Fine  structure  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  (Vietnam,  Smith  strain). 

This  strain  of  falciparum  malaria  is  highly  resistant  to  chloroquine 
treatment  both  in  man  and  the  Aotus  monkey.  In  collaboration  with 
M.  Aikawa  (Case  Western  Reserve  University)  the  fine  structure  of  the 
Smith  strain  was  examined  in  order  to  determine  whether  there  is  any 
structural  difference  between  chloroquine  sensitive  and  resistant  strains 
of  P.  falciparum. 

Striking  morphological  differences  between  these  two  strains  are 
observed  mainly  in  the  gametocyte.  The  gametocytes  of  the  chloroquine 
sensitive  strain  of  P.  falciparum  show  two  membranes  surrounding  the 
parasite,  while  those  of  the  Smith  strain  show  three  membranes.  A  row 
of  microtubules  is  seen  just  beneath  the  membrane  layer  and  follows  the 
limiting  membrane  of  the  parasite,  while  microtubules  are  rarely  observed 
in  the  chloroquine  sensitive  gametocytes.  This  is  true  of  other  species 
of  plasmodlal  gametocytes. 

3.  The  Effect  of  Plasmodium  cynomolgl  on  the  flight  of  Anopheles 
Stephens 1  Liston 

The  degree  of  physiological  damage  to  mosquitoes  by  developing 
malarial  parasites  has  not  been  clearly  determined.  It  is  recognized 
that  the  plasmodlal  infection  has  the  potential  of  causing  some  damage 
at  several  stages  during  its  development  in  the  mosquito  host.  Initial 
penetration  of  the  ookinetes  through  the  stomach  wall,  development  and 

1131 


rupture  of  oocysts ,  and  invasion  of  tissue  by  migrating  sporozoites 
might  be  expected  to  have  some  mechanical,  pathological  or  other  de¬ 
leterious  effect  on  the  mosquito. 

Several  workers  (1,6)  have  compared  the  longevity  and  vitality  of 
Infected  and  uninfected  mosquitoes  and  concluded  that  there  are  no  ap¬ 
parent  detrimental  effects  by  the  plasmodla.  Conversely,  many  others 
have  suggested  that  plasmodlal  Infections  may  harm  the  mosquito  (2,8). 

De  Buck  &  Swellengrebel  (4)  found  greater  mortality  among  heavily  In¬ 
fected  mosquitoes  In  relation  to  lightly  infected  ones.  They  are  of  the 
opinion  that  salivary  infections  are  harmful  while  intestinal  infections 
alone  were  not. 

A  reduction  in  flight  range  of  Infected  mosquitoes  and  Its  rela¬ 
tion  to  the  localized  nature  of  some  malaria  epidemics  has  been  questioned 
(8).  A  reduction  In  mosquito  flight  ability  due  to  malaria  infection 
would  have  important  epidemiological  implications;  therefore,  this 
experiment  was  designed  to  determine  the  effect  of  Plasmodium  cynomc  lgi 
on  the  flight  on  Anopheles  Stephens  1  at  two  critical  points  during 
parasite  development. 

Mosquitoes  of  the  "India  strain"  of  Anopheles  Stephens!  Liston 
maintained  at  the  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  since  1962  were 
used.  They  were  reared  In  small  pans  (23  x  39  x  6  cm)  on  a  precise 
timetable  so  that  development  day  7  pupae  were  exclusively  used.  Each 
day,  approximately  200  female  pupae  were  placed  In  a  -pint  carton  with  a 
screened  top.  The  water  was  drained  off  after  emergence  and  they  were 
held  at  25.6  C  +  0.16  and  80.9%  +  0.21  relative  humidity  with  a  14  hour 
photoperiod.  Cotton  pads  saturated  with  10%  sucrose  solution  were 
available  to  the  mosquitoes. 

Hasmodiuro  cynomolgi  Mayer  of  the  "B"  strain  (£.  c.  bastlanellli) 
was  maintained  In  rhesus  monkeys  by  either  mosquito  or  blood  Induction. 
Quantitative  determination  of  circulating  parasitemia  levels  were  made 
at  time  of  each  mosquito  feeding  period. 

Mosquitoes  were  fed  on  infected  or  non-lnfected  monkeys  on  day  4 
and  flown  12  days  later  or  fed  on  day  10  and  flown  6  days  later  so  that 
all  mosquitoes  were  16  days  old  when  flown.  These  periods  were  selected 
to  correspond  to  the  period  of  maximum  maturity  of  oocyst  and  salivary 
gland  infection.  Due  to  low  oocyst  development  and  low  weights  of  mos¬ 
quitoes  feeding  on  day  10  a  second  comparison  was  made  by  feeding  mosqui¬ 
toes  on  day  4  and  flying  6  days  later.  During  this  portion  of  the  study, 
a  single  lot  of  mosquitoes  was  divided  with  1/2  feeding  on  an  infected 
monkey  and  the  remainder  on  a  non-lnfected  monkey.  Four  mosquitoes  from 
each  group  were  flown  at  the  same  time  on  day  10,  paired  by  weight,  and 
analyzed  by  differences  of  paired  comparisons.  After  feeding,  mosquitoes 
were  anesthesized  with  ether  and  50  engorged  mosquitoes  were  retained 
for  later  flight.  Eight  mosquitoes  from  each  lot  held  for  12  days  post¬ 
feeding  were  dissected  on  day  7  for  oocyst  counts. 


1132 


Mosquitoes  were  flown  on  flight  mills  in  the  manner  previously 
described  by  Schiefer  et  al,  (7).  Eight  mosquitoes  were  flown  daily 
until  a  total  of  80  lots  had  been  flown  which  provided  approximately 
50  mosquitoes  for  each  category  of  comparison.  Mosquitoes  were  weighed 
prior  to  attachment  to  the  flight  mill  arm  and  flown  for  a  24  hour  period 
In  continuous  light  at  an  average  temperature  of  23.13  +  0.21  S.E,  and 
a  relative  humidity  of  59.95%  +  0.88  S.E.  Mosquitoes  weighing  between 
2.0  and  3.0  mg  were  selected  for  flight  to  minimize  the  effect  of  weight 
variability.  Flight  distance,  duration  and  number  of  flights  were  re¬ 
corded  after  24  hours  and  the  mosquitoes  were  re-welghed  to  determine 
weight  lost.  Mosquitoes  were  then  dissected  to  determine  degree  of 
gravidity,  sporozoite  infection  and/or  number  of  oocysts. 

Preliminary  data  indicates  that  the  development  of  malarial  para¬ 
sites  in  the  mosquito  causes  some  reduction  in  the  flight  ability  of 
Anopheles  Stephens!  (Table  1) .  The  distance  flown  by  16  day  old  mosqui¬ 
toes  fed  on  day  4  on  a  non-inf ected  monkey  was  6.363  km.  This  was 
statistically  greater  than  the  same  age  mosquitoes  fed  on  infected  monkeys 
and  which  developed  sporozoites  (4.385  km)  or  which  had  mature  oocysts 
but  without  salivary  gland  infection  (4.437  km).  Mosquitoes  which  fed 
on  infected  monkeys  but  where  no  parasites  were  found  or  which  did  not 
develop  flew  an  average  of  5.493  km. 

A  paired  comparison  of  10  day  old  mosquitoes  fed  on  day  4  showed 
consistent  decreased  flight  distance  compared  to  their  paired  controls. 

The  mean  paired  difference  was  -1.343  km.  An  analysis  of  the  differences 
by  the  "t"  test  showed  significance  at  the  1%  level  of  probability.  The 
flight  distance  of  mosquitoes  which  fed  on  infected  monkeys  but  which 
developed  no  parasites  or  whose  parasites  were  not  detected  was  not  dif¬ 
ferent  from  their  paired  controls. 

Although  the  reduction  in  flight  ability  is  not  severe,  it  is 
clearly  evident  in  both  categories  of  mosquitoes  examined. 

4.  Cultivation  of  malaria  parasites  and  mosquito  tissues 

Plasmodium  cynomolgi  oocysts  of  varying  ages  were  placed  in  culture 
with  cells  from  primary  cultures  as  well  as  from  an  established  cell  line 
of  Anopheles  Stephens!.  Four  day  old  oocysts  showed  the  least  favorable 
response  to  in  vitro  culture,  whereas  6  day  old  oocysts  responded  pri¬ 
marily  by  growth  and  8  day  old  oocysts  by  differentiation.  There  were 
no  striking  ditferences  in  the  response  of  £.  cynomolgi  oocysts  to  cells 
of  the  established  line  versus  those  from  the  primary  culture.  Cells 
from  adult  tissue  were  no  more  effective  than  those  from  larval  tissues 
in  promoting  development  of  the  parasites  lii  vitro.  However,  the  oocysts 
invariably  did  better  when  cultured  together  with  A.  Stephens!  cells, 
regardless  of  origin,  than  in  medium  alone. 

Infected  Rhesus  monkey  blood,  having  a  high  gametocyte  count,  was 
placed  in  culture  with  A.  Stephens!  cells.  Although  some  exflagellation 


was  observed,  shortly  after  the  blood  waa  Introduced,  few  ookinetes  were 
found  after  the  preparations  were  fixed  and  stained  at  24  or  48  hours. 


Attempts  are  currently  being  made  to  grow  A.  Stephens!  mosquitoes 
axenically  using  media  designed  by  Rosales-Ronquillo,  Nayar  and  Lang. 
Assuming  these  attempts  are  successful,  primary  cultures  from  mldgut 
cells  will  be  initiated  and  various  stages  of  T\  cynomolgl  Introduced 
into  them. 


5.  Isolation  of  malaria  sporozoites  on  density  gradients  and  their 
subsequent  use  In  the  attempted  Immunization  of  Rhesus  monkeys 

The  main  obstacle  in  isolating  P.  cynomolgl  sporozoites  from  homo¬ 
genized  A.  stephensl  mosquitoes  on  density  gradients  has  been  the  osmotic 
fragility  of  the  parasites.  This  problem  was  resolved  during  the  past 
year  by  employing  in  the  gradient  "Path-o-cyte"  bovine  albumin  solutions 
which  are  adjusted  with  respect  to  pH,  specific  gravity  and  salinity. 
Sporozoites  isolated  from  the  gradient  were  innoculated  IV  into  a  number 
of  Rhesus  monkeys  and  the  prepatent  period  as  well  as  the  parasitemia 
was  comparable  to  that  of  the  controls. 

Prior  work  by  Nussenzwelg  et  al. ,  has  demonstrated  that  killed 
Z.*  berghei  sporozoites,  when  used  as  antigens,  did  not  give  protection 
against  rodent  malaria  whereas  the  use  of  sporozoites  attenuated  by 
X-irradiation  did.  This  suggests  that  the  products  of  sporozoite  metabo¬ 
lism  rather  than  the  sporozoites  themselves  serve  as  a  more  potent 
antigenic  stimulus.  A  successful  demonstration  of  such  potency  would 
have  obvious  implications  in  the  development  of  an  antimalarlal  vaccine. 

Control  and  Infected  A.  Stephens!  mosquitoes  were  irradiated  with 
9  kllorads  in  a  "Gammacell  220"  cobalt  source.  The  mosquitoes  were  ex¬ 
posed  in  pint-sized  cardboard  containers  at  a  dose  rate  of  approximately 
7290  rads  per  minute.  After  irradiation,  both  control  and  Infected 
mosquitoes  were  subjected  to  homogenization  and  comparable  fractions 
placed  on  separate  density  gradients.  Sporozoites  recovered  from  the 
peak  fractions  of  the  gradient  were  washed  with  a  buffered  salt  solution 
and  0.5  -  1.0  ml  injected  IV  into  each  of  two  monkeys.  The  control 
monkey  was  injected  IV  with  the  material  from  comparable  fractions  or 
the  coatrol  gradient.  Each  monkey  received  a  total  of  four  injections 
spaced  at  bi-weekly  intervals.  The  numbers  of  inngculated  sporozoites 
varied  from  a  low  of  2  x  10  to  a  high  of  6.5  x  10  and  totaled  approxi¬ 
mately  107  per  experimental  monkey.  Two  weeks  after  the  final  injection, 
six  to  ten  infected  mosquitoes  were  allowed  to  feed  on  each  of  the  three 
monkeys.  The  prepatent  period  for  both  the  control  and  experlmentals 
was  9-10  days.  The  parasitemia  curves,  at  least  for  the  initial  cycle, 
appear  to  be  quite  similar  for  all  three  monkeys. 

A  second  series  of  immunizations  are  currently  being  carried  out. 

The  procedure  is  identical  except  for  the  spacing  of  injections.  Two 
immunizing  doses  (approximately  10^  sporozoites  per  animal)  have  been 
given  four  days  apart  and  will  be  followed  by  a  third  injection  one  month 
later.  1134 


6.  Establishment  of  cell  lines  from  various  mosquito  species  and 
other  dlpterans 

In  anticipation  of  using  the  cells  for  comparative  studies  Involving 
penetration  and  replication  of  mosquito  lrridescent  virus  hi  vitro,  cell 
lines  of  Armlgeres  subalbatus  and  Aedes  atropalpus  were  Initiated.  In 
both  instances  the  primary  cultures  consisted  of  minced,  trypsinlzed 
first  stage  larvae.  Subculturing  was  successful  within  ten  days  after 
the  cultures  had  been  set  up.  The  lines  are  now  in  the  11th  and  12th 
passages,  respectively. 

An  incipient  cell  line  of  Glosslna  morsltans  has  also  been  initiated. 
These  cells  will  be  used  in  an  attempt  to  study  the  metabolism  of  the 
crithidial  and  metacycllc  forms  of  several  species  of  African  trypanosomes. 

Conclusions  and  recommendations 


1.  Cyclical  transmission  of  the  Vietnam,  Smith  strain  of  falciparum 
malaria  was  demonstrated  in  the  Aotus  monkey.  It  Is  believed  that  the 
metabolic  condition  of  the  host  liver  is  an  Important  factor  In  the 
establishment  of  an  exoerythrocytlc  cycle  in  an  abnormal  host.  Further 
studies  should  be  conducted  with  various  essential  amino  acids  to  deter¬ 
mine  their  role  in  the  development  of  this  malarial  parasite. 

2.  The  distinct  morphological  differences  between  the  gametocytes 
of  the  chloroquine  sensitive  and  resistant  strains  of  P^.  falciparum  in¬ 
dicate  that  the  resistant  strains  are  morphologically  and  physiologically 
altered.  The  presence  of  microtubules  in  the  Smith  strain  may  indicate 
that  they  may  play  a  role  in  the  development  of  chloroquine  resistance. 

3.  Anopheles  Stephens!  mosquitoes  infected  with  Plasmodium  cynomolgl 
flew  shorter  distances  and  more  slowly  on  mechanical  flight  mills  than 
did  non-inf ected  controls. 

4.  Attempts  to  grow  the  mosquito  phases  of  malaria  parasites  in 
vitro  should  be  temporarily  suspended  and  efforts  directed  towards 
growing  the  anopheline  vector  aseptically.  Once  this  is  accomplished 

It  should  be  possible  to  initiate  cultures  from  midgut  cells.  These  may 
prove  to  be  a  more  adequate  substrate  for  the  growth  and  development  of 
the  parasites  than  the  multiple  cell  type  cultures  which  have  been  used 
in  the  past. 

5.  The  isolation  of  fully  infectious  1?.  cynomolgl  sporozoites  from 
homogenates  of  infected  A.  Stephens!  mosquitoes  on  density  gradients  has 
been  realized.  When  injected  into  Rhesus  monkeys  both  the  prepatent 
periods  and  the  levels  of  parasitemia  are  comparable  to  that  of  the  con¬ 
trols.  The  resulting  preparations  are  still,  however,  contaminated  with 
some  bacteria  and  efforts  should  be  made  to  eliminate  them.  Efforts 
should  also  be  made  to  increase  the  yield  of  sporozoites  from  any  one 
gradient  and  to  cycle  the  parasite  between  monkey  and  mosquito  with 


1135 


grater  frequency,  If  this  is  accomplished  It  should  be  possible  to 
Increase  the  number  of  sporozoites  to  10^  for  both  the  Initial  and  the 
booster  Innoculatlons.  Further  variations  In  the  spacing  of  the  In¬ 
jections  should  also  be  explored. 


1136 


w 

_) 

w 

5 


« 

G 

01 

or 


51 


Jo 

m 

XJ  X3 
01 

g  <u 

0)  WM 
<D 

*J  X) 
K  O 
■H  O 
UJ  rH 

rO 

H 

4-» 


j:  nj 
oo  *o 


a  V- 
3  O 

O  4J 
X  44 

sr 

CN  U) 
0) 

,c  o 


U) 

o> 

3 

ca 

> 

u 

V 

4  J 
01 
H 

td 

44 

nj 

Pm 


CO 

o 

X 


4J 

« 

* 

* 

4 

* 

« 

tfl 

<N 

* 

* 

* 

« 

« 

4- 

Nj 

rH 

in 

O' 

rH 

CO 

IN 

r*H 

CN 

o 

v£> 

Ov 

m 

ro 

Uu 

fN 

CN 

* 

00 

o 

o 

m 

rH 

C  4 

|N 

m 

m 

m 

co 

sO 

rH 

SO 

CN 

m 

r> 

co 

c 

xj- 

sO 

CO 

co 

CO 

■» 

m 

0 

sO 

O 

o 

w 

• 

sO 

9 

m 

0 

• 

• 

• 

o 

rH 

o 

H 

rH 

CN 

o 

o 

rH 

CO 

- 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

4J 

CO 

x* 

sO 

oo 

SO 

vO 

o 

Xj 

G 

sO 

O 

r- 

00 

in 

CN 

o> 

o 

G 

CO 

sC 

O'* 

vO 

rH 

ro 

in 

IN 

U 

G 

• 

• 

• 

0 

0 

0 

• 

* 

01 

sD 

rx. 

On 

CJ 

CN 

co 

CN 

rH 

rH 

rH 

O' 

IN 

co 

CO 

-4 

TJ 

0) 

r» 

vO 

a 

• 

ro 

O 

SO 

rH 

rH 

rH 

m 

Os 

c  o 

w 

Cm 

vO 

Os 

00 

rH 

m 

ro 

CN 

O  rH 

• 

CO 

• 

v0 

• 

CN 

o 

o 

•rH  0; 

CO 

in 

# 

CN 

-J 

» 

0 

0 

O 

rH 

o 

r-4 

rH 

co 

o 

O 

u  g 

4»  XJ 

-H 

+  1 

+1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  | 

4-  ^ 

G  XI 

ro 

00 

vO 

O' 

NT 

00 

CN 

CN 

■H  C 

G 

o> 

CN 

O 

IN 

xj 

co 

rH 

G 

vT 

O' 

Ch 

vO 

rH 

CO 

co 

VO 

o  o 

• 

* 

0 

• 

• 

0 

* 

0 

X.  4m 

VO 

CO 

00 

00 

O 

so 

CN 

rH 

41 1 

CO 

*H 

in 

CN 

CO 

CN 

iH 

U 

c  w 

si 

NT 

01  <u 

• 

vO 

O 

xj 

00 

rH 

00 

O 

00 

0)  4J 

U 

o 

o> 

|N 

co 

CJ 

xT 

m 

xJ 

(J  *fH 

• 

xj 

• 

sO 

o 

0 

(O 

o 

O 

»*  o 

CO 

• 

CN 

0 

• 

ro 

0 

• 

• 

a,  n 

o 

CN 

O 

CO 

rH 

xT 

o 

O 

w  a 

+1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+1 

+  1 

4J  o 

V)  tx 

CN 

O 

ro 

CO 

m 

O 

CN 

NO 

>>  CO 

G 

r  j 

cn 

O 

CJ 

xf 

CTi 

rH 

CN 

u 

CJ 

m 

C4 

CJ 

co 

vO 

<N 

CO 

fN 

o  o 

O 

• 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

C  G 

xj 

CC 

IN 

CN 

o 

rH 

CN 

rH 

sC 

r-4 

co 

Os 

xT 

CN 

rH 

xj 

1  v* 

O 

<! 

y> 

rx 

rH 

■xj- 

CN 

• 

CO 

l  - 

r-4 

O' 

CO 

o 

co 

CO 

(A 

W 

•  t 

• 

m 

oo 

* 

00 

o 

O 

01 

• 

|n 

• 

• 

o 

» 

• 

* 

u 

CO 

o 

r-4 

o 

00 

rH 

CN 

o 

O 

•H 

0  4J 

+  ! 

+  1 

-1  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+  1 

+1 

+  1 

«M  G 

O  O' 

m 

CN 

CN 

CN 

m 

CO 

sO 

xf 

a  CO 

G 

co 

OO 

n 

co 

xf 

IN 

IN 

fN 

0  'J 

«9 

co 

r^ 

in 

o> 

O' 

o 

CN 

SO 

n.  a 

o 

« 

• 

» 

• 

• 

• 

• 

c/J  O. 

>: 

<r 

fx. 

IN 

CN 

CO 

sO 

CN 

rH 

m 

r-4 

'-r 

Os 

CO 

1 

CN 

/-x 

n 

G 

G 

•H 

■H 

U 

G 

x_r 

r-x 

•H 

M 

li 

4J 

4J 

X 

\ 

X 

X 

<t 

G 

00 

00 

CN 

G 

•r4 

•H 

•H 

N^. 

O 

JJ 

rH 

r4 

♦H 

N 

44 

44 

X/ 

Jn 

n 

44 

fi 

U 

a 

*•<: 

0 

w 

rH 

4J 

(A 

JH 

X 

o 

4/ 

4 

CTJ 

U3 

U 

X 

CO 

CO 

3 

44 

•rl 

CJ 

X 

CO 

vH 

o 

g 

X) 

X 

kJ 

Uj 

CO 

•r* 

<U 

u 

i-o 

•H 

G 

•H 

0) 

u 

o 

u 

*H 

c 

G 

rH 

CJ 

>H 

X 

•H 

■r: 

rH 

4m 

4J 

44 

Uij 

44 

G 

xH 

•*M 

4m 

4-p 

x. 

60 

o 

4l 

r—i 

4m 

O 

C- 

(J 

60 

•rH 

‘r-4 

U 

44 

0 

•H 

r-4 

4J 

G 

X 

X 

U 

rH 

4 

o 

cj 

r  4 

r) 

*j 

4J 

QJ 

44 

o 

u 

G 

01 

if) 

00 

4J 

4m 

(0 

,J 

o; 

G 

r: 

i : 

0) 

U) 

G 

•rH 

o 

ex 

QJ 

o> 

3 

u 

O 

n 

CO 

H 

to 

r- < 

rJ 

*/. 

X 

Fu 

Ov 

LO 


vO 

X* 


m 

40 


44 

<u 

.n 

U 

3 


1137 


L 


significant  at  1Z  level 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  124  Biological  studies  of  mosquito  malaria  Infection  and 
transmission 

Literature  Cited. 


References : 

1.  Boyd,  M.F.:  On  the  correlation  between  the  Incidence  of  stomach 
and  gland  infection  in  Anopheles  quadrlmaculatus  Infected  with  Plasmodium 
vivax.  Am.  J.  Trop.  Med.,  20:129-131,  1940. 

2.  Buxton,  1\A.:  The  effect  of  Proteosoma  upon  the  survival  of 
Culex.  Parasitology  27^:547-550,  1935. 

3.  Collins,  W.E.,  and  Contacos,  P.G.:  Transmission  of  Plasmodium 
falciparum  from  monkey  to  monkey  by  the  bite  of  Infected  Anopheles 
freebornl  mosquitoes.  Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  66^:371-372,  1972. 

4.  DeBuck,  A.,  and  Swellengrebel,  N.H.:  On  the  seasonal  longevity 
of  Anopheles  maculipennis  in  Holland  with  reference  to  their  ability  to 
act  as  malarial  vectors.  Proc.  Acad.  Sci.  Amsterdam,  38:335-343,  1935. 

5.  Jervis,  H.R. ,  Sprintz,  H.,  Johnson,  A.J.,  and  Wellde,  B.T.: 
Experimental  infection  with  Plasmodium  falciparum  in  Aotus  monkeys  II. 
Observations  on  host  pathology.  Amer.  J.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  21:272-281, 
1972. 


6.  Ragab,  H.A.A.:  Effect  of  Plasmodium  on  the  transmitting  mos¬ 
quito  host  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  longevity  of  the  infected  mos¬ 
quito.  J.  Egyptian  Med.  Assoc.,  41:447-454,  1958. 

7.  Schiefer,  B.A.,  Williams,  J.,  Neal,  T.J.,  and  Eldridge,  B.F.: 
Laboratory  flight  studies  with  Anopheles  Stephens!  Liston  (Diptera: 
Cullcidae) .  J.  Med.  Entomol.,  In  press. 

8.  Sinton,  J.A.  and  Shute,  P.G.:  A  report  on  the  longevity  of 
mosquitoes  in  relation  to  the  transmission  of  malaria  in  nature.  RepL. 
Public  Health  and  Med.  Subject  (London)  Rept.  No.  R5:l-45,  1938. 

9.  Sodeman,  T.M.,  Contacos,  P.G.,  Smith,  C.S.,  Jumper,  J.R.,  and 
Collins,  W.E.:  The  exoerythrocytic  stages  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  in 
Aotus  trivirgatus.  J.  Parasitol.  ^5:682-683,  1969. 


1138 


Publications: 


1.  Rutledge,  L.C.,  Ward,  R.A.,  and  Hayes,  D.G.:  Plasmodium 
cynomolgi:  The  comparative  Infectiousness  of  individual  rhesus  monkeys. 
Expt.  Parasitol.  23/120-126,  1973. 

2.  Schneider,  I.:  A  comparative  study  of  the  development  of  the 
mosquito  cycle  of  Plasmodium  cynomolgi  in  primary  cultures  versus  an 
established  cell  line  of  Anopheles  stephensl.  Proc.  Helmin.  Soc.  Wash. 
39:438-444,  1972. 

3.  Schneider,  I.:  Establishment  of  cell  lines  from  Culex 
tritaenlorhynchus  and  Culex  salinarius  (Diptera:  CulicidaeTi  Proc.  Ill 
International  Colloq.  Invertebrate  Tissue  Culture,  Slovak  Academy  of 
Science,  Bratislava,  Czechoslovakia,  pp.  121-134,  1973. 

4.  Ward,  R.A.,  and  Hayes,  D.E.:  Sporozoite  transmission  of 
Falciparum  malaria  (Vietnam,  Smith  strain)  from  monkey  to  monkey. 

Trans.  Roy.  Soc.  Trop.  Med.  Hyg.  66:670-671,  1972. 

5.  Ward,  R.A.  and  Hayes,  D.E.:  Attempted  immunization  of  rhesus 
monkeys  against  cynomolgi  malaria  with  irradiated  sporozoites.  Proc. 
Helminthol.  Soc.  Wash.  (Special  issue)  39^: 525—529,  1972. 

6.  Ward,  R.A.,  Hayes,  D.E.,  Hembree,  S.C.,  Rutledge,  L.C., 
Anderson,  S.J.,  and  Johnson,  A.J.:  Infectivity  of  Plasmodium  falciparum 
gametocytes  from  Aotus  trivirgatus  to  anopheline  mosquitoes.  Proc. 
Helminthol.  Soc.  Wash.  (Special  issue)  39:33-46,  1972. 

7.  Ward,  R.A.,  and  Savage,  K.E.:  Effects  of  microsporidian  para¬ 
sites  upon  anopheline  mosquitoes  and  malaria  transmission.  Proc. 
Helminthol.  Soc.  Wash.  (Special  issue)  39^:434-438,  1972. 


1139 


r  -”*"1  ~ 


72  08  01 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I  >M»W  ACCSSSION* 

DA  OA  6515 

in rosy 


I.  MTC  PMV  lUlMV 

72  07  01 


«■  KINO  or  SUMMARY 

Ht  Term. 


u 


■  A  DMm  lNITR*N 


JtL. 


ul 


j*k  tnclrie  oata* 

|CON  TRACTOR  ACCCSS 

3  m  Quo 


|«.  LCVtL  or  MW 
A.  VMUUMT 


10  NO/CODIli*  PROGRAM *LI*€ NT 

<>3713A 


PROJtCT  NUUOCA 


TASK  AREA  NUMGKft 


WORK  UNIT  hUMICN 


A.  PRIMARY 


?A$»713P829 


_DD_ 


125, . 


0.  CONTRIGUTING 


C.  CON  TAI  OUT  IN  0 


msmur 


II.  TITLt  fPf**MN  vlft  ImmHIF  C C«Ptj 

(U)  Taxonomy  and  Ecology 

}  ' 

of  Disease  Bearing  M 

osquitoes  of  S 

outheast  Asia  (09) 

II.  ICICRTiriC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  ARKAI* 

002600  Biology 

ii  START  DATt 

65  07 

It  f|f  iMAf  ID  COMPLBTiOM  PAfi 

72  08 

IE  FUNOlNO  AOCNCT 

DA  1 _ 1 

— i 

IS.  PtRFORNAN 

C.  In 

L___ 

CS  MCfNOO 

-House 

A  OATil/lFFtCTIV^Jot  Applicable  ««*AATlOR 

t  tvp«  4  amount 

M,  RIM 

FISCAL 

VCAA 

72 

A  PROFESSIONAL  HAN  YRS 

1 

k  FUNDS  (IN  BNHHRj 

35 

73 

1 

35 

IS.  RiSPONilRLf  OOO  ORGANISATION  ] 

M  PtRFORMNO  ONGANIIA 

" 1  1 

NAN«.»Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 


RCIPONfl  SLC  INO'VtOUAL 


“*■  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
T«L..»o..2n2  -  S7A-v;si 


><  OCNKNAL  jii 


NAN«*Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Div  of  CD  and  I 
jAMMu* Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  fFumlAA  MAP  H  V  i.  AMpalc 

«««•  Eldridge,  LTC  B.F. 

TfcMwi  202  -  576-3719 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  KUNMN 
AUOCIATI  INVCITI O  A  TONS 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


pi  Kivoopoi  macm  TmEfRf  c«X 7 

1  V'/  *• 

(U)  Arboviruses;  (U)  Disease  Vectors 


Prea  I  ^inert,  MAJ  J.F. 

_ _ I  «-«:  Harrison.  CPT.  B.A. _ DA 

0J)  Anopheles;  (U^  Aedes;  (tJ)  Mosquitoes;  (U)  Malaria; 

r  f*  nr  a 


pi.  TECHNICAL  OSJtCTIVI,*  SC  APPROACH,  I»  PROORKU  !?**"!•*>  JmNWAmI  MwllM*!  At  pr»*»#»  Mil  •»  *•«*  »•«•*»  tty  C  C*Pj 

23.  (U)  To  produce  keys,  guides,  and  other  guides  for  identification  of  mosquitoes 
which  are  vectors  of  diseases  of  military  importance.  Emphasis  is  on  vectors  of 
malaria  and  arbovirus  diseases  such  as  dengue.  Also,  to  obtain  data  on  the  ecology, 
biology,  and  disease  transmission  potential  of  these  mosquitoes. 

24.  (U)  Mosquitoes  are  collected  by  military  and  civilian  cooperating  agencies  and  are 
forwarded  to  a  joint  WRAIR-Smithsonian  Institution  team  for  identification.  This  team 
intensively  studies  these  collections,  as  well  as  collections  in  established  museums, 
and  publishes  keys,  guides,  and  other  identification  aids  which  are  returned  to  SE  Asia 
for  use  by  entomologists  engaged  in  control  and  survey  operations.  Team  also  accumu¬ 
lates  and  makes  available  disease  transmission  and  biological  data. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  72  08.  Work  formerly  performed  under  this  work  unit  now  reported 
under  Project  3A663713D829,  Work  Unit  124. 


DD,'°VJ498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  S4SSA.  I  NOV  «S 
AND  I4BB-1  I  MAR  «•  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1140 


Washington,  D.C.  20012 

AODRSSI:* 


RE  SFONtIDLC  INDIVIDUAL 

Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 


"  202  -  576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


li  mit  sin - 

65  07 

rc  iiTi.it  ib  rasirms;  sm - 

72  08 

IE  f  UNDHIO  AOS  ACT 

DA  | 

IS-  FIRFORNANCf  MCTnOO 

C .  In-House 

IT  contract/orant 

Not  Applicable 

k  NUMDCR:* 

C  TVFC:  A  AMOUNT; 

M  RESOURCE!  EITINATf 

k  FUNOSfT"  RmmmA) 

fISCAL 

YEAR 

72 

2 

30 

73 

2 

30 

If.  REIfONllDLC  DOO  ORDANIIATlON  jj 

as.  FIRS 

i 

o 

" i  l 

ReseARCH  AMD  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

Ts^orTsccuSt^ 

u 


vmnr 


4  MIND  Of  SUMMARY 

H.  Term. 


10  NO  CODCS:* 


ft.  fNIMANV 


0.  CONTWDUTINO 


RROBRAM  CLINCH T 

63713A - 


i  iwmmarv  ierr 

u 


T  RSSRAOINS^ 

NA 


RROJCCT  NUMIIN 

3AbbJ/13D8Z9 - 


»  AOCNCV  ACC.TSST 

DA  0A  6515 


Torrsnsss^ 

72  08  01 


i  OMD*R  WITr« 

JL. 


TASK  ARIA  NUMDCR 
— 00 - 


DD-D**B(AH)$}t 


sClFSCIFlC  DATA 

CONTNACTON  ACCCII 

£3  vi  Pro 


.  LCVCL  Of  MW 

A.  vote  DMT 


WORM  UNIT  NUMDCR 

— m - 


•.tttntrtnr*  |CUUm7tn 
(U)  In  Vitro  Cultivation  of  Mosquito  Tissues  and  Malarial  Parasites 

K-  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TICHNOLOOICAL  ARIAS* 

002600  Biology 


(09) 


"“••‘Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Dlv  of  CD  and  I 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

FRtNClFAL  IN  VCITI A  A  TON  (Fvml* A  MM  IfVI.  4uNeK 

Schneider,  I.  Ph.D. 

202  -  576-304^^^^^ 

SOCIAL  ICCURITV  ACCOUNT  NUMDCR: 

ASSOCIATE  IN  VCITI 0  A  TORI 

NAMCl 
NANI: 


DA 


ii  afv*oA04^«c.A.i^cN-<». i.-^^ (u ;  Aedes;  tu;  Anopheles;  (UJ  Culex  (u;  Mosquitoes; 

(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Tissue  Culture;  (U)  Immunology 


>  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  li  AFFROACH.  IS.  FROOAEU  ^«#r«pA(  IdmtltH*  »••*•*  Pftl*N  real  »t  »H*  »)•  ClM.IA.erlw  C*M-i 

23.  (U)  To  develop  reliable  in  vitro  procedures  by  which  large  quantities  of  relatively 
pure  malarial  sporozoites  can  be  produced  for  malaria  vaccine  development  studies. 

Also,  to  develop  mosquito  tissue  culture  systems  for  studies  on  pathogen  invasion  and 
growth  dynamics  in  invertebrate  tissue. 

24.  (U)  Development  of  culture  media  which  will  support  growth  of  invertebrate  stages 
of  malaria  parasites.  Development  of  various  techniques  for  the  isolation  and  puri¬ 
fication  of  individual  stages  of  parasite.  Evaluation  of  mosquito  life  cycle  stages 
for  suitability  for  establishing  primary  cultures. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  72  08.  Work  formerly  performed  under  this  work  unit  now  reported 
under  Project  3A663713D829 ,  Work  Unit  124. 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,:°VJ498 


PREVIOUS  E  Ol  T  IONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARC  OBSOLETE.  DU  FORMS  I  Aft  A , 
AND  MSB  1.  I  MAR  SB  (FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1141 


'i27-H2«  (I  7 i  -  TIO 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNU  SUMMARY 

1.  AMBCV  MCIMMR” 

DA  OA  6518 

1  UTI  OP  MMlIMn* 

72  Ofi  01 

NWMT  00RTM4.  IWSM 
DDDR*K(AK)43* 

K.  BATE  RHCV  SUSfRY 

72  07  01 

«  Kl*e  OP  IUM.A.V 

H.  TERMINATI 

l  luiHMar  ktv* 

3N  U 

A  WORK  SECURITY* 

U 

>.  RltPAMHP* 

—M 

IB  DM  I'M  MS?R*N 

ni 

•k  IRCCIFte  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

□  y.i  Dmo 

S.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

K  BORE  UMT 

IB.  NO  /COOf  •  • 

RROORAM  iLBMtNT 

PROJtC  T  NUMBER 

TAM  ARIA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

N  PRIMARY 

6t/iaa 

.  OQ 

127 

k  CONTRIBUTING 

C.  CONTRIBUTING 

CDOG  114  (1) 

It.  OCNINAL  JU 


(U)  Test  Systems  for  Plasmodium  Falciparum  ( OQ ) 


II.  SCIENTIFIC  AMO  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS1 

OO20OO  Biology 

ii.nmn 


tt  irnmn 

05  Qrf 


IT  CONTRACT/ORANT 

ATSt/EFFECTIVBi 
k  NUMKHi* 

C  TfCI: 

%  K.ND  OF  AVARO: 


yniT.ffATfO  COMRlI  tIon  OAT  t  ” 

7?  OP- 


NA 


SMRIRATION: 


4,  AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


it.  responsible  ooo  oroani  x  at  ion 


*'* Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washincton,  D.C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INOIVIOUAL 

m am ii  BUESCHER,  COL.  E.  L. 
TELEPHONE:  ^02-576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

- IT - 


WTTVWtSmZXT*  l*llk 

(U)  Isotope; 


tl  FUNOlNO  AOENC  T 

DA  I 


IS  AESOU  RCES  It  TIMA  TE 

WWIWl - 


rue  al 

v*  AM 


_ 7J 

CUHMNT 


73 


t|.  PER  FORM  ANCIMETHOO 

D.  IN -House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YM 


INFORM!  NO  OMOANIlATION 


k  FUN 01  (In  MmmmM) 


70 


JO 


nam«:*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  CC&I 
ao°m«u:*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVCtTIOATOM  (fuml* A  ISAM  It  U  I  AMPMiJr  Inilltutilt) 

"««•  SADUN,  E.  H.,  Sc.D. 

telephone  002-57-  -3308 

SOCIAL  SECURI  T  V  ACCOUNT  NUMBEN 
ASSOCIATE  IH  VESTIOA  TORS 

*«'  MOON,  A.P.  DA 


mM* - - (U)  Immunity;  (u)  Chloroquine;  (U)  Gamma  Globulin; 

(U)  Susceptibility;  (U)  Owl  Monkey 


I.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  24.  APPROACH,  IE  PROORESI  (ft N»U«A  in* IrtAfPt  pWRB»RpA»  JtfwiUfl.4  A?  ni»H>  r»«*»N  NUN  Mtk  pIM  joturltr  C*M*  J 

23  (U)  Study  susceptibility  of  chimpanzees  and  other  primates  to  infections  of  human 
malaria.  Study  the  characteristics  of  drug  resistant  strains,  provide  high  density 
of  parasites  for  morphological  and  biochemical  studies.  Conduct  physiological  and 
pathological  studies  of  malaria  and  provide  test  animals  for  chemotherapeutic  and 
immunological  investigations . 

2k  (U)  Infect  splenectomized,  drug  treated  chimpanzees  and  other  primates  with  plasmodie 
of  human  origin.  Observe  the  extent  and  duration  of  parasitemias,  study  and  response 
of  different  strains  to  chemotherapy,  study  susceptibility  to  reinfection  with 
homologous  and  heterologous  strains . 


-5  (U)  H  07  -  73  Oj  Work  unit  is 
3AOr^71'3DQ29. 


being  combined  with  work  unit  number  129>  line  item 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,”’“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I490A 
AND  1  490-  I  1  MAR  68  ( FOR  ARMY  USE  1  ARE  OBSOLETF 

1142 


NOV  6  B 


1 


(U)  Natural  and  Acquired  Immunity  In  Rodent  Malaria  (09) 

II.  SCISNTIFIC  AND  TICMNOLOOICAl  t 

002600  Biology 


irirwrwTi - 

65  07 

TT  IITIMAtlb  <fd>M#Llfl&N  SIT! 

’  72  08 

li  FUMOINO  ASINC V 

DA  I 

14.  rcrfdrmahcs  MSTHOO 

C.  IN -HOUSE 

IT.  CONTRACT/RNANT 

A  OATSI/B  FFBCTI  VS;  SUPINATION: 

A  NUMRSNi* 

A  TVRBi  A  AMOUNT: 

IS-  NSSOUNCL'  SSTIMATS 

A  FNOFSISIONAL  MAN  VRS 

k  FUNDS  (tm  Amnm*) 

FISCAL 

TSAR 

pRleloiNi - 

72 

2 

70 

CURN'IUT 

73 

2 

70 

It.  RSSPONBIRLl  DOD  OROANI  SATtON  ]  j 

SS.  PKNFONMINO  ONOANIIA' 

** l  l 

MAMSl*  Walter  Feed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
AooNSMi*  Washington,  D.C.  20v>l2 


NttPONlISLf  INDIVIDUAL 

NAMCl  BtJESCHER,  COL.  E.  L. 

TKLIPMONCl  202-576-3551 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

ttzsztztt  s^oJ«n«cu5»7^Tr 

n  u  u 


l  MTS  RRSV  »UM*RT 

72  07  01 


4.  KIM#  OS  SUMMARY 

H.  TERMINATld 


It.  MO./COOBli* 


A  RRIMANV 


#.  COMT  MRU  TINS 


«.  COM  TIM  OUT  INS 


PftOOAAM  ILIMCNT 

wm. 


CDOG  HU  (Fl 


RROJtCT  NUMNR 


3Af'63713D829~ 


OD-DJtfttMJVjftJi 


rs?nrss5T 

72  08  01 

RSRRAMNR*  #4.  OMR*N  INST  R*N  Mfc  Ml  Cl  TIC  DATA  •  LSVlL  #F  SUM 

TRACTOR  ACC  CM 

Dm 


I.  ASSMCT  ACC  SI 

DA  OA  6519 


TASK  AR  .A  NUMRIR 


J?Q 


JL 


COMTRAC 
P  VI 


A  RMKUMT 


WORK  UNIT  MUM  OCR 


ML, 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


rams.*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  CD&I 
AooACM*  Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVKITIOATON  fpw «I*A  MAM  If  (fl.  4u*«lc  IrftlHtUm*) 

MAMS:*  SADTJN,  E.  H.,  Sc.D. 

•IUMMI  202-576-3308, 

SOCIAL  4CCUMITV  ACCOUNT  NUMRKN: 

AMOCIATC  IN VIITIOATORI 

nam.':  MOON,  A.  P. 


DA 


C: 


—  M  (u)  Rodents;  (u)  Susceptibility;  (u)  Immunity; 

00  Plasmodium;  (u)  Irradiate 


tl  TCCMNICAL  OSJECTIVC.*  ti  APPROACH,  It.  PAOONCS4  (’F*Pwl«A  In* HMtml  ptA&ajh*  IPwilfft**  Ayr  Nil  •!  Nil  »< A  JMurlfr  CfMafHcalfOT  C«*.J 

23  (ll)  To  evaluate  the  role  of  humoral  and  cellular  factors  in  determining  suscep¬ 
tibility  of  hosts  to  malaria,  for  the  ma5ntenance  of  the  complete  life  cycle  of 
malaria  in  the  laboratory,  to  find  a  laboratory  animal  suitable  for  the  production  of 
large  amounts  of  infected  blood  for  immunological  and  biochemical  studies. 

2L  (u)  To  test  a  variety  of  rodent  species  for  natural  susceptibility  to  P.  berghei. 
Attempts  to  increase  susceptibility  by  splenectomy  and  chemical  treatment.  Standardize 
the  course  of  infections  quantitatively.  Evaluate  the  mechanism  of  antibody  action  on 
host  and  parasite,  and  characterize  antibodies  responsible  for  these  activities.  Study 
the  effects  of  antibody  on  the  parasite  and  on  the  host. 

25  (iJ)  72  07  -  73  06  Work  unit  is  being  combined  with  work  unit  number  I29j  line  item 

3A667713D829. 


hriflitfi  jo  contractors  upon  jrilln«laf*i 


(Pll  Redacted] 


DD.ETJ498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  M98A  I 
AND  M98-I.  1  MAR  Q0  IFOR  ARMY  USEI  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1143 


NOV  C6 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  AGENCY  ACCESSION” 

DA  0A  6520 

I  f  ATE  BP  SUMMARY” 

73  07  01 

REPORT  OOfffWOL  PftfBtt 
DD-DR**(AH)*3i 

A  (ATI  NMV  tUITNT 

72  07  01 

♦.  NIN.  ON  WUHAN* 

D.  CHANGE 

t  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

II 

1  BORN  lECURITV” 

u 

»■  RIGRAMNG* 

NA 

IB  OMB*H  INITR*N 

NL 

M  IPICIPIC  BATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACC  EM 

Q  VEft  □  NO 

9.  LEVEL  OP  BUM 

An  VBBE  UNIT 

10  NO  /COOCIi* 

RROORAM ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

BORN  UNIT  NUMBER  j 

A  PRIMARY 

TT7TV- 

m 

12Q  ! 

h.  CONTRIBUTES 

8.  CONTRIBUTING 

CDOG  life  in 

II.  SCIINTIFIC  AND  TSCMNOLOOICA 

002600  Biology 

TV  IT  A  AT  OATI 

6b  07 


IT  CONTRACT/ORANf 
A  DATCI/iapcCTIVCf 
k  NUHKK:* 

t  TVPI; 

C  KINO  OF  AVARO: 


iV  RttPONUBLl  OOP  OWOANHATION  j  | 

NAMo*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


"  Washington ,  D.C.  20012 


AttPONtlBLt  INLH  VI  DUAL 

BUESCKEF,  COL  E,  L. 

TILIPMONI:  202.576-3551 


(U)  Host  Responses  to  Malaria  (09) 


H."ll*WAme6U»Hfl6M  6Af| 

CONT 


NA 


4.  AMOUNT 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


'•  REIOUNCEI  ESTIMATE 

A  professional  MAN  VRS 

k  FUN  CM  (jm  AmmN; 

fiical 

YEAR 

PRECEDING 

73 

2 

70 

cuhhiNY 

lb 

6 

210 

ADDNCU:* 


it  fqssinV 

DA 


ti.  UrpIrmancs  n.^hod 

In-House 


ao.  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION 


I 


mm*'* Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  CD&I 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IN  VKITIQA  TON  IPuml.A  UNI  II  V  |.  acaPmi Ic  fM.lllwll.fy 

SADUN,  E.  H.,  Sc.D. 

TILIPHONC:  202-576-3308  | 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBIN' 

AMOCIATI  IN  VI  tTIO  A  TONI 

nam it  MOON,  A.  P.  DA 

N  AMI; 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

(uj  Malaria;  (U)  Gamma  globulin;  (U)  Biochemistry; 

(u)  Antibody;  00  Fluorescent;  (u)  Isotope;  (u)  Metabolism 

TECHNICAL  OBJICTIVI.*  14  APPROACH,  XI  NNOONIU  (Fwm/M*  In**  Hum  I  pmrm§H0 ft*  t*mnOlim4  *r  iwlN.  • 


pr*«»4»  ltd  ml  mcA  vim  i.ci *ity  clmmmltttBilm  Cm4m.} 


23(T0To  study  the  physiological  pathology  of  malaria  including  the  enhancement  of 
non-specific  resistance  to  infection  and  to  determxne  how  energy  requirements  are 
met  within  the  parasite. 

2l(u)  Study  the  effect  of  infection  on  the  uptake  and  distribution  of  radioisotope- 
labelled  amino  acids,  study  the  levels  of  enzyme  acti/ity  in  tissue  extracts  and 
alterations  in  protein  and  free  amino  acid  constituents  of  blood  and  urine,  study  the 
development  of  relapses,  and  the  pattern  of  parasitemias  and  fluorescent  antibodies 
prior  to,  during,  and  following  therapy.  Investigate  the  use  of  immune  gamma 
globulins  as  an  adjuvant  to  chemotherapy  in  humans  infected  with  drug  resistant  malaria, 

25 (u)  72  07  -  73  06  A  method  for  freezing  and  storing  human  erythrocytes  for  trans¬ 
fusions  has  been  applied  to  storing  erythrocytes  containing  Plasmodium  falciparum  from 
infected  owl  monkeys.  The  cells  retain  both  the  capacity  to  incorporate  C-lU  iso¬ 
leucine  into  protein  and  to  infect  animals  after  storage.  Changes  in  the  capacity  to 
synthesize  protein  and  to  infect  animals  were  not  detected  during  serial  experiments 
over  a  seven  week  period.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  June  73. 


^vmUmbnj^ontrmctot^gaMrijjnmUi^^Mggrovm^ 


ft  ’ 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,:8.'n“J498 


PREVIOUS  EOITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  1  48*  A.  1  NOV  6  B 
AND  1498-1.  1  MAR  «B  IFOR  ARMY  USEI  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1144 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROF.tfLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 
Work  Unit  129  Host  responses  to  malaria 
Investigators . 

Principal:  E.H.  Sadun,  Sc.D.,  Lib.  Doc. 

Associate:  LTC  C.L.  Diggs,  MC;  S-5  K.  Joseph;  MAJ  L.K. 

Martin,  MSC;  Sp-5  H.R.  Snodgrass;  CPT  R.A.  Wells,  MSC 

1.  Approaches  to  the  study  of  acquired  immunity  to  malaria. 

Acquired  immunity  to  infectious  disease  is  often  considered  to 
connote  complete  protection  of  an  otherwise  susceptible  host  from  the 
disease  in  question.  However,  analysis  of  the  immune  response  to  cer¬ 
tain  pathogens  is  aided  by  consideration  of  the  quantitative  character 
of  immunity.  From  this  point  of  view  absolute  immunity  simple  refers  to 
a  situation  in  which  the  host  has  such  a  high  degree  of  acquired  resist¬ 
ance  to  a  given  pathogen  that  evidence  of  infection  never  arises  at  all. 
Paritial  immunity  can  be  manifested  as  complete  protection  of  some,  but 
not  all,  of  the  individuals  in  a  population,  or  as  a  state  in  which 
parasite  growth  and  development  occurs  in  the  immune  individual,  but 
without  fulminant  disease.  Nowhere  is  the  concept  of  partial  immunity 
more  useful  than  in  the  case  of  the  malarias;  although  immunity  has  been 
shown  to  be  operative  in  many  of  these  diseases,  in  almost  every  case  it 
is  partial.  The  reasons  for  this  fact  are  poorly  understood,  but  sane 
insight  may  be  gleaned  from  the  considerations  to  follow. 

In  the  course  of  attempts  to  interpret  some  of  the  unusual  features 
of  malaria,  two  specialized  terms  have  evolved,  which  should  be  dealt 
with  at  the  outset.  The  term  "premunition"  has  been  used  for  many  years 
to  describe  a  state  in  which  immunity  depends  on  persistent  infe.l^on. 

It  stems  from  the  observation  that  individuals  often  sustain  low  grade 
parasitemia  for  long  periods  of  time  in  an  environment  in  which  non- 
immune  individuals  develop  acute  illness  with  heavy  parasitemia.  Al¬ 
though  the  observations  are  undisputed,  many  observers  question  the 
dependence  of  immunity  on  chronic  infection.  In  at  least  some  host- 
parasite  systems,  immunity  can  be  demonstrated  in  the  abscence  of 
infection,  a  situation  which  has  been  termed  "sterile  immunity." 

Another  term  often  used  in  describing  immunity  to  malaria  which  is 
confusing  to  the  general  immunologist  is  "tolerance."  It  refers  not  to 
immunological  unresponsiveness,  but  rather  to  the  ability  of  the  host 
to  tolerate  malaria  without  serious  morbidity  once  the  immune  response 
is  initiated.  In  areas  of  high  endemicity,  it  is  not  unusual  for 
patients  with  malignant  tertian  malaria  to  have  a  relatively  high  per¬ 
centage  of  their  erythrocytes  parasitized  without  serious  illness, 
whereas  a  nonimmune  individual  experiencing  his  first  attack  by  the 
same  parasite  might  be  desperately  ill  with  the  same  level  of  para¬ 
sitemia. 


1145 


In  addition  to  studies  on  the  unusual  features  of  malaria,  at¬ 
tempts  have  been  made  to  relate  phenomena  observed  in  malaria  with 
principles  already  documented  in  other  infections.  Thus,  experiments 
on  the  passive  transfer  of  immunity  with  serum  and  with  cells  have  been 
performed  and  have  been  quite  informative.  In  the  presentation  to 
follow  both  types  of  approaches  will  be  kept  in  mind  since  both  have 
important  roles  for  increasing  understanding  of  these  complex  phenomena. 

The  life  cycle  of  malaria  parasites  includes  several  stages  which 
theoretically  could  be  attacked  by  immune  mechanisms.  Thus,  the  sporo¬ 
zoite,  on  entering  the  skin  of  the  vertebrate  host  is  presumably  vul¬ 
nerable  to  the  phagocytes  end  other  cells  as  well  as  to  humoral  factors 
in  its  transit  to  its  intracellular  site.  In  avian  malaria  parasites 
this  may  be  in  a  cell  of  the  mononuclear  phagocyte  series.  It  is  thus 
possible  that  cellular  immune  mechanisms  are  induced,  on  exposure  to 
the  parasite  antigens,  to  activate  these  mononuclear  cells  for  more 
efficient  phagocytosis  and  intracellular  destruction  of  the  parasites. 

It  is  in  this  situation,  where  the  cells  of  the  system  of  phagocytes 
serve  as  host  cells  for  parasites,  that  cellular  immune  mechanisms 
seem  less  likely  in  the  case  of  mammalian  malarias  where  the  site  of 
first  intracellular  residence  is  the  hepatocyte. 

Following  the  tissue  or  exoerythrocytic  stage,  the  parasites  again 
are  exposed  to  the  extracellular  milieu  as  merozoites  which,  if  they 
are  not  inactivated,  infect  the  erythrocytes.  It  would  seem  that  the 
parasites  might  occupy  a  privileged  position  with  respect  to  immuno¬ 
logic  attack  within  the  erythrocytes.  However,  as  will  be  discussed 
below,  the  parasite  may  be  the  instrument  of  its  own  destruction  in 
terms  of  alterations  of  the  host  cell  during  its  development.  At  any 
rate,  the  parasite  must,  in  order  to  survive,  again  enter  the  extra¬ 
cellular  space  during  its  transit  to  a  new  host  cell.  It  is  at  this 
point  that  it  is  perhaps  most  vulnerable  to  host  defense  mechanisms, 
and  it  is  this  form  (the  merozoite)  which  many  investigators  believe 
is  a  prime  target  cell  of  immune  effector  activity. 

II.  General  methods  in  experimental  malariology 

Many  of  the  problems  encountered  in  experimental  malariology  are 
related  to  the  fact  that  the  technology  of  maintenance  of  parasites  in 
the  laboratory  is  poorly  developed;  culture  can  be  achieved  to  only  a 
very  limited  degree.  Furthermore,  host  specificity  of  malaria  para¬ 
sites  is  very  high,  restricting  to  a  great  extent  the  choice  of  experi¬ 
mental  hosts  to  be  used  for  a  given  parasite.  The  organisms  pathogenic 
for  man  are  infectious  in  only  a  very  limited  number  of  other  animals, 
all  of  them  primates.  However,  the  number  of  species  of  malaria  para¬ 
sites  is  very  great,  so  that  a  variety  of  model  systems  are  available 
for  experimental  purposes.  Although  more  than  100  species  of  malaria 
parasites  have  been  described  only  the  few  of  greatest  usefulness  to 
the  experimental  immunologist  need  be  considered  here.  The  four  para¬ 
sites  traditionally  considered  human  pathogens  are:  Plasmodium  falci¬ 
parum,  the  etiologic  agent  of  malignant  tertian  malaria;  P.  vivax, 

1146 


the  agent  of  benign  tertian  malaria;  P.  malar iae ,  which  causes  quartan 
malaria  and  P.  ovale  which  is  responsible  for  another  form  of  benign 
tertian  infection,  usually  called  ovale  malaria.  Maintenance  of  these 
organisms  in  the  laboratory  involves  the  use  of  either  chimpanzees, 
which  must  be  splenectomized  prior  to  infection,  or  one  of  several  new 
world  monkeys,  especially  Aotus  trivirgatus ,  the  owl  monkey. 

For  many  purposes  experimentalists  have  considered  nonhuman  para¬ 
sites  to  be  suitable  for  elucidating  many  of  the  general  principles  of 
malariology.  Among  these  are  several  simian  malaria  parasites  which 
also  have  been  shown  to  be  infectious  for  man.  Prominent  among  these 
is  P.  knowlesi,  a  natural  pathogen  of  the  crab  eating  macaque,  Macaca 
fasicularis.  Whereas  this  parasite  causes  a  moderately  severe  disease 
in  its  natural  host,  it  is  lethal  in  rhesus  monkeys  (M.  mulatta)  vithin 
about  one  week  after  inoculation  with  very  small  numbers  of  parasites. 
Much  of  the  usefulness  of  P.  knowlesi  as  an  experimental  model  for 
immunological  studies  is  related  to  this  fulminant  course  and  to  the 
f a  .t  that  it  tends  to  give  rise  to  a  synchronous  infection;  i.e.  at 
any  given  time,  the  developmental  forms  in  the  blood  are  similar. 

P.  knowlesi  has  been  known  to  be  infectious  for  man  for  many  years,  and 
in  fact  has  been  used  in  fever  therapy  for  neurosyphilis.  Recently, 
documentation  for  a  natural  human  infection  with  P.  knowlesi  has  been 
obtained,  raising  the  spector  of  zoonotic  malaria  in  situations  where 
humans  are  in  proximity  to  the  appropriate  simian  reservoir  hosts  and 
vectors . 


P.  cynomolgi ,  a  parasite  of  the  rhesus  monkey,  is  useful  experi¬ 
mentally  since  it  closely  resembles  P.  vivax  of  man  in  both  morphology 
and  in  the  course  of  the  infection  it  induces  in  its  natural  host. 

This  parasite  is  also  infectious  for  man,  as  shown  in  a  laboratory 
accident  in  which  a  vivax  like  disease  was  induced.  On  the  other  hand, 
P.  vivax  does  not  infect  rhesus  monkeys. 

Of  very  great  usefulness  in  experimental  studies  is  the  rodent 
parasite  P.  berghei.  The  natural  host  of  this  parasite  is  the  South 
African  tree  rat  Thamnomys  surdaster,  but  the  large  majority  of  studies 
in  the  laboratory  have  been  conducted  with  more  easily  obtainable 
laboratory  rodents.  Most  strains  are  highly  virulent  for  mice;  1  x  10 
parasitized  erythrocytes  kill  the  animals  in  approximately  one  week. 

The  parasites  are  also  infectious  for  rats  in  which  the  degree  of 
virulence  is  a  strong  function  of  age.  Very  young  rats  are  killed 
with  moderate  doses  of  malaria  parasites,  whereas  older  rats  develop 
only  a  low  grade  parasitemia.  Rats  not  yet  mature  show  an  immediate 
degree  of  susceptibility.  This  host  species  thus  provides  a  spectrum 
of  susceptibilities  which  can  be  exploited  for  immunological  studies 
in  malaria.  A  disadvantage  of  the  rat  as  an  experimental  host  is  the 
limited  duration  for  which  experiments  can  be  designed.  Variation  in 
counts  between  individual  animals  also  tends  to  be  high.  A  third  host 
species  which  has  found  same  usefulness  is  the  hamster,  which  is  less 
susceptible  than  mice  but  more  susceptible  than  mature  rats. 

1147 


A  large  number  of  studies  have  been  conducted  with  avian  malaria 
parasites.  Many  of  the  mo.:'.'  productive  studies  have  involved  P. 
gallinaceum  of  the  domestic  chicken.  The  duck  parasite  P.  lophurae 
and  the  canary  pathogen  P.  cathemerium  have  also  been  investigated 
extensively.  These  avian  species  have  advantages  for  certain  aspects 
of  the  study  of  the  host  resj  vise  to  malaria. 

Fundamental  to  most  experimentation  in  malariology  is  the  main¬ 
tenance  of  parasites  in  the  laboratory.  Most  investigators  choose  to 
maintain  the  parasites  by  blood  passage.  In  essence,  this  consists  of 
the  injection  of  the  recipient  animal  with  blood  from  an  infected  donor. 
In  this  way  the  life  cycle  of  the  parasite  is  in  effect  short-circuited 
to  consist  of  the  asexual  stages  only.  The  details  of  the  procedure 
vary  with  the  parasite  and  with  the  requirements  of  the  investigator. 
Typically,  P.  berghei  is  maintained  by  a  twice  weekly  passage  in  mice 
or  weekly  passage  in  rats.  Most  often,  approximately  1  x  10  parasitized 
erythrocytes  are  administered  intraperitoneally;  a  somewhat  more  repro¬ 
ducible  course  of  infection  can  be  induced  by  intravenous  injections. 

The  diluent  employed  is  not  crucial  as  long  as  the  requirement  of  pro¬ 
tection  of  the  host  red  cell  is  met.  In  this  laboratory,  citrated 
saline  anticoagulant,  used  for  collection  of  blood,  is  used  also  as  a 
vehicle  for  routine  passage;  phosphate  buffered  saline  with  added 
inou ;e  or  rat  serum  is  used  for  some  experimental  work.  Refrigeration 
of  parasites  during  manipulations  improves  their  survival.  Quantifi¬ 
cation  of  inoculum  dose  is  usually  accomplished  by  (a)  an  estimation 
of  the  percentage  of  erythrocytes  parasitized  from  thin  blood  film 
stained  with  Giemsa's  stain  and  (b)  an  erythrocyte  count;  the  concentra¬ 
tion  of  parasitized  cells  in  the  preparation  is  then  calculated.  In 
this  laboratory,  a  useful  alternative  procedure  for  determining  the 
concentration  of  Plasmodium  berghei  inoculum  is  used;  parasitized 
colls  are  enumerated  directly  in  a  cell  counting  chamber  after  vital 
staining  with  Nile  blue  sulfate.  The  procedure  does  not  work  well 
with  P.  falciparum,  due  to  the  small  size  of  the  early  trophozoites. 

It  has  not  been  evaluated  for  other  species. 

Monitoring  the  course  of  malaria  infections  has  been  accomplished 
by  a  number  of  methods,  most  of  which  involve  the  use  of  blood  films 
stained  with  a  Romanowsky  stain.  When  parasitemias  are  very  high,  a 
determination  of  the  percentage  of  erythrocytes  parasitized  using  con¬ 
ventional  thin  blood  films  is  very  useful.  Where  quantitation  of  para¬ 
sitemia  over  .a  greater  re±.g:  of  concentrations  is  desirable,  various 
methods  using  thick  blood  films  can  be  employed.  The  thick  blood  film, 
as  its  name  implies,  consists  of  a  very  heavy  film  of  blood  or.  the 
microscope  slide.  The  erythrocytes  are  lysed  by  exposure  to  water, 
leaving  only  the  poorly  staining  stroma,  nonhemoglobin  containing 
elements,  and  parasites.  The  concentration  of  parasites  in  the  blood 
is  determined  by  reference  to  the  number  of  white  cells  in  the  prepa¬ 
ration  or  by  a  knowledge  of  the  volume  of  blood  from  which  the  counts 
are  obtained.  A  method  for  enumerating  P.  berghei  parasitized  erythro¬ 
cytes  in  rat  blood  using  an  electronic  particle  counter  has  also  been 
developed;  saponin  is  used  as  a  hemolytic  agent  so  that  the  collapsed 


parasitized  cells  (primarily  reticulocytes)  can  be  counted  electron- 
ically.  This  method  has  not  been  worked  out  for  systems  in  which  the 
predominant  cell  type  is  the  mature  erythrocyte,  in  which  case  the 
residual  particles  after  saponin  lysis  are  much  smaller. 

When  it  is  necessary  or  desirable  to  induce  malaria  by  the  more 
nearly  natural  sporozoite  method,  the  technology  becomes  much  more 
complex.  Mosquitoes  must  be  maintained  in  the  laboratory  and  planning 
for  an  experiment  involves  many  more  preparatory  steps.  The  mammalian 
host  must  be  monitored  for  intravascular  development  of  the  sexual  stage 
the  gametocytes,  necessary  for  infection  in  mosquitoes.  Subsequently, 
the  mosquitoes  must  be  monitored  for  development  of  sporozoites.  These 
methods  are  well  worked  out  for  a  number  of  host-parasite-vector  systems 

Serologic  techniques  in  malariology  range  over  a  wide  variety  of 
procedures.  Although  precipitin  and  complement  fixation  tests  were 
employed  many  years  ago,  the  thrust  of  recent  serologic  studies  has 
employed  the  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  test.  In  addition,  indirect 
hemagglutination  tests  as  well  as  a  soluble  antigen  fluorescent  anti¬ 
body  assay  have  been  employed  in  recent  years.  Whereas  serologic  tests 
have  been  very  useful  in  the  understanding  of  some  epidemiological 
questions  in  malariology,  they  have  been  of  only  limited  usefulness  in 
studying  the  functional  immunity  developed  during  the  course  of  these 
diseases.  There  is  no  indication  that  serologic  positivity  is  evidence 
for  a  sufficiently  intense  functional  immunity  to  be  of  importance  as 
regards  the  outcome  of  challenge.  It  seems  likely  that  serologic 
analyses  will  become  more  important  in  the  tuture  as  more  information 
is  obtained  on  the  antigens  involved  and  m.<  re  rigor  is  introduced  in 
quantitative  methods  for  estimating  serum  antibody  concentrations. 

A  technique  of  accelerating  usefulness  in  research  in  malariology 
is  that  of  limited  culture  of  the  parasites .  Although  it  has  proved 
thus  far  to  be  impossible  to  maintain  malaria  parasites  indefinitely  in 
culture,  limited  growth  can  be  an  extremely  useful  tool  in  the  study  of 
malaria  immunology  as  well  as  other  areas  in  which  mreasurement  of 
physiological  parameters  of  the  malaria  parasite  are  important.  Since 
malaria  parasites  usually  go  through  only  one  replicative  cycle  in 
culture,  even  under  the  best  conditions,  the  choice  of  parameters 
used  to  assess  growth  and  development  is  limited.  Evidence  for 
development  has  often  been  obtained  through  morphological  observations 
on  the  change  from  immature  to  mature  trophozoites  and  finally  to 
schizonts.  Another  technique  involves  determination  of  the  increase 
in  the  number  of  parasites  during  the  culture  period.  Recently  a  marked 
cell  technique  has  been  employed  for  the  detection  of  penetration  of 
new  red  cells  in  culture.  Fetal  erythrocytes  serve  as  the  newly  infec¬ 
ted  host  cells  and  are  distinguished  from  the  adult  erythrocytes  which 
compose  the  inoculum  by  the  differential  elution  of  hemoglobin  A  and 
F  in  acid.  Perhaps  the  most  useful  method  of  assessing  physiologic 
status  of  malaria  parasites  in  culture  is  the  use  of  radioactive  pre¬ 
cursors  of  parasite  materials  to  monitor  biosynthetic  capability. 

For  example,  amino  acids  have  been  used  as  precursors  of  proteins  and 

1149 


orotic  acid  as  a  precursor  of  nucleic  acid.  It  seems  likely  that  the 
use  of  these  techniques  will  increase  over  the  next  few  years.  The 
goal  of  continuous  culture ,  on  the  other  hand,  still  seems  distant. 

III.  Th-  study  of  Immunity  to  malaria  in  humans 

Because  of  the  fact  that  immunity  to  malaria  is  rarely  complete, 
it  is  difficult  to  appreciate  its  existence  in  casual  observations  on 
a  hospital  population,  particularly  in  areas  of  ielatively  low  endemi- 
city  and  therefore  lew  antigenic  stimulation.  Physicians  are  likely 
to  observe  patients  iccurning  from  treatment  with  second,  third  or  more 
episodes  of  malaria.  However,  in  areas  holoendemic  for  malaria  those 
who  suffer  the  greatest  ltiorbidity  and  mortality  from  the  disease  are 
the  children.  Older  individuals,  although  not  completely  protected 
from  infection,  usually  experience  less  severe  illness.  On  the  other 
hand,  an  individual  from  a  nonendemic  area  who  contracts  the  infection 
can  experience  disease  which  is  just  as  severe  as  that  in  the  children 
in  the  local  populations.  This  experience  has  been  well  documented  in 
a  population  in  the  Gambia  in  terms  of  a  fall  in  prevalence  of  faci- 
parium  malaria  with  advancing  age.  Abundant  evidence  for  immunity  to 
P.  vivax,  P.  ovale  and  P.  malariae  is  also  available. 

That  much  cf  the  naturally  acquired  immunity  to  P.  falciparum 
infections  in  the  human  population  in  Africa  is  due  to  antibody  has 
been  demonstrated  convincingly  by  passive  transfer  experiments.  IgG 
was  isolated  from  plasma  obtained  in  the  Gambia  for  use  in  these  studies. 
Control  IgG  was  prepared  from  plasma  obtained  in  the  United  Kingdom. 
These  preparations  were  used  in  massive  doses  as  an  experimental  thera¬ 
peutic  measure  in  children  with  acute  falciparum  malaria.  Clear  evi¬ 
dence  of  a  therapeutic  effect  was  obtained  with  the  globulin  obtained 
locally  but  not  with  the  contr^1  material. 

Three  kinds  of  populations  of  humans  with  malaria  infections, 
(namely  hospital  populations,  residential  populations  and  volunteer 
populations)  offer  abundant  opportunities  for  studies  into  the  immuno¬ 
logy  of  malaria  to  the  investigator  with  access  to  them. 

I / .  The  sty.  y  of  immunity  to  malaria  in  laboratory  animals 

Much  of  the  information  presently  available  on  the  mechanisms  in¬ 
volved  in  immunity  to  malaria  has  been  derived  from  the  study  of  malaria 
in  laboratory  animals.  In  the  discussion  to  follow,  a  number  of  malaria 
parasites  and  host  animals  will  be  considered.  Although  species  differ¬ 
ences  obviously  occur,  the  main  features  of  immunity  to  malaria  have 
appeared  in  common  among  most  of  the  models  studied;  it,  therefore, 
seems  reasonable  tc  expect  that  many  of  the  features  elucidated  with 
one  bnst-para^ite  system  will  apply  to  many  others,  hopefully  including 
human  infection  > 

In  the  ..o>0's  jt  was  aluready  clear  that  the  spleen,  liver,  and  bone 
marrow  exhf  >Ii;ed  a  marked  phagocytic  response  during  malaria  infection. 

1150 


This  response  is  characterized  by  an  increase  in  size  and  activity  of 
the  macrophages  with  an  accumulation  of  parasitized  cells,  intracellular 
destruction  of  the  parasites,  and  the  storage  of  the  resulting  malaria 
pigment,  a  phenomenon  which  is  readily  observed  grossly  by  changes  in 
color  of  these  organs.  The  other  changes  in  the  spleen  are  also  easily 
observed  grossly  in  terms  of  the  massive  splenomegaly  which  often 
accompanies  acute  malaria.  These  changes,  which  occur  relatively  slow¬ 
ly  during  a  priijnary  attack  of  malaria,  occur  more  rap 3  clly  on  subse- 
i'lent  exposure,  and  therefore  demonstrate  a  prime  characteristic  of 
...  e  specific  immune  response,  immunologic  memory.  More  recent  data 
;»  dicate  that  the  macrophages  thus  activated  not  only  phagocytize  P. 
^rghei  parasitized  erythrocytes  but  that  there  is  phagocytosis  of 
normal  erythrocytes  as  well.  It  has  also  been  shown  that  macrophages 
from  the  peritoneal  cavity  of  mice  infected  with  BCG  phagocytize  erythro¬ 
cytes  parasitized  by  P.  knowlesi  much  more  avidly  than  macrophages  from 
uninfected  animals.  Thus,  such  hyperactive  phagocytes  are  produced 
both-  by  malaria  infection  itself  and  by  BCG.  It  is  unclear  as  to 
whether  or  not  the  mechanism  is  similar  in  the  two  instances.  The 
accumulated  evidence  is  great  that  phagocyte  activation  by  BCG  is 
via  the  cellular  immune  mechanism  elucidated  by  Mackaness  in  which 
delayed  hype r r  -o.  itivity  is  a  constant  correlate.  However,  delayed 
hyper  sens:*  Vj  f ;;  a  constant  correlate.  However,  delayed  hypersensi¬ 
tivity  reac  «.  '  ....  i.ave  not  been  demonstrated  in  malaria  infections,  al¬ 
though  the^  i  „  obabfy  occur  in  animals  immunized  with  malaria  antigen  in 
complete  Freund's  adjuvant.  Malaria  also  differs  from  other  infectious 
diseases  in  which  cellular  immune  mechanisms  have  been  demonstrated  in 
that  the  mammalian  malaria  parasites  do  not  parasitize  macrophages. 

If  macrophage  activation  in  malaria  is  mediated  through  factors 
released  by  immune  lymphocytes,  passive  transfer  of  immunity  with  lympho¬ 
cytes  from  immune  animals  should  be  possible.  This  has  in  fact  been 
demonstrated  in  rats  infected  with  P.  berghei,  but  it  is  not  clear 
whether  the  lymphocytes  act  by  virtue  of  release  of  mediators  or  by 
antibody  synthesis.  There  ;s  in  fae+  no  reason  to  believe  that  the 
latter  situation  is  not  the  case.  An  experiment  which  bears  on  this 
question  was  performed  by  Lourie,  who  found  that  anti  lymphocyte  serum 
(ALS)  inhibited  tne  ability  of  rats  to  spontaneously  clear  P.  berghei 
parasites  (i.e.  to  exhibit  an  active  immune  response),  but  that  this 
ALS  inhibition  could  be  reversed  by  the  coincident  administration  of 
antibody  with  protective  activity. 

The  roles  of  thymus  dependent  (T)  and  independent  (B)  lymphocytes 
in  immunity  to  malaria  are  under  investigation.  It  has  been  demonstra¬ 
ted  that  neonatal  thymectomy  enhances  P.  berghei  infections  rats,  but 
that  self  cure,  though  delayed,  still  occurs.  On  the  other  hand, 
embryonic  bursectomy  severely  impedes  the  development  of  active 
immunity  and  the  expression  of  passive  immunity  to  P.  gallinaceum 
infections. 

The  effect  of  splenectomy  on  latent  malaria  has  been  documented 
on  many  occasions  over  the  years.  Immunity  to  some  malaria  parasites 

n5l 


appears  to  involve  an  equilibrium  between  parasite  replication  and  host 
defense,  so  that  latent  infection  persists  and  when  splenectomy  is 
effected,  parasites  often  appear  in  the  peripheral  blood.  Splenectomy 
is  consequently  used  as  a  device  for  enhancement  of  susceptibility  to 
malaria.  In  addition  to  the  sequestration  of  both  parasitized  and 
nonparasitized  erythrocytes,  the  spleen  is  believed  to  be  able  to  remove 
parasites  from  erythrocytes,  returning  the  deparasitized  erythrocytes 
to  the  peripheral  blood.  It  seems  likely  that  splenic  sequestration 
is  a  function  of  both  enhanced  phagocytic  capability  and  abnormalities 
of  the  erythrocyte  membrane.  Membrane  alterations  occur  in  both  para¬ 
sitized  and  nonparasitized  erythrocytes  during  malarial  infections. 
Although  quantitative  comparison  with  other  sites  hac  not  thus  far  been 
experimentally  feasible  it  seems  reasonable  to  com  ider  that  the  spleen 
is  one  of  the  primary  sites  for  the  removal  of  parasites  from  the  circu¬ 
lation. 

In  addition  to  induction  of  immunity  by  virtue  of  infection  and 
recovery,  animals  can  be  immunized  by  the  administration  of  nonreplicat¬ 
ing  parasites  and  extracts  thereof.  Some  success  with  artifical  immuni¬ 
zation  was  obtained  in  the  19^0' s:  for  example,  Jules  Freund  who  in¬ 
duced  immunity  to  P.  knowlesi  by  the  injection  of  killed  parasitized 
cells  in  the  adjuvant  which  bears  his  name.  It  has  been  posfible  on 
numerous  occasions  since  that  time  to  induce  immunity  through  the  use 
of  Freund's  adjuvant.  However,  in  the  absence  of  adjuvant,  most  attempts 
to  immunize  have  been  unsuccessful  or  less  effective  than  infection  and 
cure.  Some  success  with  extracts  of  P.  berghei  has  been  obtained  in  rats 
by  Zuckerman.  A  further  advance  has  been  the  achievement  of  protection 
using  partially  purified  ant?'- gens .  Success  has  also  been  reported 
using  similar  partially  purified  antigens  in  mice. 

Immunization  through  the  use  of  irradiated  parasites  has  proven  to 
be  an  effective  experimental  procedure.  Both  mice  and  rats  can  be 
immunized  with  irradiated  P.  berghei  parasitized  erythrocytes,  and 
Aotus  monkeys  can  be  similarly  immunized  with  P.  falciparum  parasitized 
erythrocytes  which  have  been  exposed  to  20-25  kr  of  gamma  irradiation 
from  a  Co-60  source.  Attempts  to  recover  immunogenic  fractions  from 
these  irradiated  parasitized  cells  have  thus  far  failed.  In  fact,  lysis 
of  the  parasitized  cells  abolishes  immunogenicity .  These  results  raise 
the  question  as  to  whether  or  not  metabolically  active  parasites  are 
required  for  immunogenicity;  it  is  possible  that  the  effective  immunogen 
is  a  product  of  the  irradiated  parasite  rather  than  a  preformed  moiety 
in  the  inoculum.  However,  the  immunogenic  activity  of  irradiated  para¬ 
sites  is  not  blocked  by  the  simultaneous  administration  of  sulphadizine, 
an  agent  which  is  highly  effective  against  P.  berghei  and  which  might 
be  expected  to  inhibit  biosynthesis  of  antigen  in  vivo. 

Irradiated  sporozoites  of  P.  berghei  have  also  proven  to  be  highly 
effective  immunogens.  In  this  system  as  well,  disruption  of  the  para¬ 
sites  inhibits  immunogenicity.  The  immunity  to  disease  obtained  by 
irradiated  sporozoite  immunization  is  "all  or  none"  in  the  sense  that 
unless  erythrocytic  invasion  is  completely  prevented,  the  pathological 

1152 


consequences  of  the  infection,  although  possibly  delayed,  are  ultimately 
the  same  as  in  nonimmune  animals.  There  is  no  apparent  cross  protec¬ 
tion  between  erythrocytic  and  exoerythrocytic  stages;  animals  immunized 
with  sporozoites  have  no  immunity  to  blood  induced  infection;  animals 
immune  to  blood  forms  show  immunity  to  the  development  of  erythrocytic 
forms  after  infection  with  either  sporozoites  or  blood  forms.  The 
development  of  exoerythrocytic  stages  in  animals  immunized  with  blood 
forms  has  not  been  studied. 

Studies  on  the  expression  of  immunity  have  made  it  quite  clear 
that  antibody  is  a  determinant  of  the  outcome  of  malaria  infection  in 
many  host  parasite  systems.  It  was  demonstrated  many  years  ago  that 
serum  from  immune  animals  is  effective  in  the  modification  of  P.  knowlesi 
infections  in  rhesus  monkeys  and  a  decade  ago  that  P.  falciparum  in¬ 
fections  in  humans  can  be  similarly  influenced.  Studies  have  also  been 
performed  demonstrating  a  crucial  role  for  antibody  for  the  outcome  of 
infections  due  to  P.  berghei  in  the  rat.  Antibody  is  effective  in 
delaying  the  course  of  mouse  infections,  although  death  is  not  prevented. 

The  effect  of  antibody  on  malaria  parasites  can  be  studied  by  an 
in  vitro  assay  for  antibody  directed  against  P.  knowlesi  described  by 
Cil^n  et  al.  In  this  system  the  incorporation  of  radioactive  labeled 
■•mino  acid  into  parasite  protein  is  used  as  a  device  to  estimate  the 
physiologic  status  of  the  parasite.  In  the  presence  of  antibody,  pro¬ 
tein  synthesis  is  essentially  normal  until  the  time  of  schizogony  at 
which  time  further  incorporation  is  inhibited  in  the  presence  of  an 
excess  of  antibody.  This  information  strongly  suggests  that  the  site  of 
action  of  the  antibody  is  on  either  the  schizont  or  the  extracellular 
merozoite.  Most  available  data  are  in  concert  with  this  concept;  anti¬ 
body  which  is  highly  effective  against  P.  berghei  in  vivo  causes  no 
agglutination  of  parasitized  erythrocytes.  Furthermore,  in  experiments 
designed  to  test  the  permeability  of  the  red  cell  membrane,  antibody 
and  complement  induced  no  damage.  In  the  in  vivo  studies  of  Cohen  et  al. 
no  immediate  effect  on  parasitemia  was  observed  by  the  administration 
of  immune  serum;  it  was  only  at  the  time  of  schizogony  that  the  differ¬ 
ence  between  patients  treated  with  the  immune  serum  and  the  controls 
emerge  1 . 

Some  additional  information  is  available  relevant  to  the  identity 
of  the  target  cell(s)  of  protective  antibody  in  malaria.  It  has  been 
known  for  many  years  that  the  schizonts  of  P.  knowlesi  can  be  aggluti¬ 
nated  in  the  presence  of  antibody;  i.e.,  by  some  mechanisms,  antigen 
is  available  on  the  surface  of  these  cells.  Recently,  Brown  has  demon¬ 
strated  that  in  addition  to  the  agglutinin,  a  schizont  opsonizing  anti¬ 
body  can  also  be  demonstrated  in  the  serum  of  monkeys  immune  to  P. 
knowlesi.  Data  on  other  species  of  malaria  parasites  with  respect  to 
such  antibodies  are  sparse  and  the  possibility  that  P.  knowlesi  is 
peculiar  in  this  regard  cannot  be  dismissed.  A  more  likely  explanation 
for  the  paucity  of  data  on  agglutination  of  erythrocytes  infected  by 
other  parasites,  however,  is  the  fact  that  the  collection  of  large 
numbers  of  schizonts  is  expedited  in  P.  knowlesi  infections  due  to 

1153 


(a)  the  ability  of  the  parasite  to  induce  high  parasitomius  and  (b) 
its  synchrony.  At  this  point  in  time*  it  seems  likely  that  the  schizont 
and  the  merozoite  migh.  both  be  attacked  by  antibody. 

The  question  of  the  mode  of  action  of  the  antibody  on  the  target 
cell  has  been  approached  in  a  number  of  ways.  By  analogy  with  other 
systems,  it  can  bo  speculated  that  the  antibody  sensitizes  the  target 
cell  in  the  presence  of  complement  components  for  cytotoxic  reaction 
and/or  phagocytosis.  Tims,  the  effect  of  complement  on  antiparasitic 
activities  is  an  important  object  of  study.  A  number  of  workers  ha\o 
demonstrated  a  reduction  in  the  level  of  complement  components  during 
malaria  due  to  P.  berghol ,  P.  knowlcsi  and  P.  gallinaceum.  However, 
in  the  in  vitro  system  described  above,  P(Ab f )'  is  as  effective  as  is 
intact  IgO .  Furthermore,  heat  treatment  of  all  of  the  serum  additives 
in  the  culture  system  does  not  influence  the  antiparasitic  effect. 

Recent  stuiios  have  demonstrated  that  the  cobra  venom  factor  which 
destroys  the  third  component  of  complement  does  not  influence  the  pro¬ 
tective  effect  of  passively  administered  antibody  in  P.  berghei  infec¬ 
tions  of  the  rat.  The  evidence,  to  date,  therefore,  suggest  that 
complement  is  not  required  for  the  antiparasitic  effect  of  antibody. 
Destruction  of  the  target  cell  by  either  a  cytotoxic  reaction,  by  phago¬ 
cytosis  and  intracellular  destruction,  or  by  inhibition  of  penetration 
of  a  new  host  cell  (i.e.,  neutralization)  could  all  conceivably  proceed 
in  the  absence  of  complement  components.  At  this  point  in  time  the 
latter  mechanism  is  favored  by  the  evidence. 

V.  The  antigenic  structure  of  malaria  parasites 


Not  unexpectedly,  malaria  parasites  have  proved  to  be  enormously 
complex  antigenically .  This  is  perhaps  best  exemplified  in  the  studies 
of  Wilson  et  al.  who  have  demonstrated  not  only  a  large  number  of 
antigens  within  a  given  extract  of  P.  falciparum  from  a  sir.gle  patient 
but  an  almost  bewildering  array  of  different  antigens  and  antibodies 
in  different  individual  patients.  There  is  broad  cross  reactivity  be- 
tween  the  parasites  of  man  and  monkeys  as  shown  by  fluorescent  antibody 
studies,  but  very  little  between  these  and  parasites  of  rodents  or  birds. 
An  exception  is  the  reaction  of  serum  from  patients  with  P.  Talc  inarum 
to  a  constituent  of  P.  gallinaceum.  These  serological  relations]"  ‘.ps 
have  no  relevance  to  functional  immunity  to  malaria  parasites;  studies 
in  human  volunteers  have  shown  both  species  and  strain  specificity  on 
cross  challenge  of  semi-immune  vcluntoers.  Species  specificity  appears 
to  extend  to  effects  passively  transferable  by  antibody.  East  African 
gammaglobulin  is  effective  against  West  African  P.  falciparum  malaria, 
and  an  inhibitory  effect  on  r.  falciparum  of  Asian  origin  by  African  IgG 
can  be  detected  in  the  Aotus  monkey  system. 

In  addition  to  the  features  cl*  strain  and  species  specificity, 
malaria  parasites  apparently  have  the  ability  to  modulate  their  antigenic 
specificity  in  response  to  immune  pressures.  Thus,  it  lias  been  shown 
by  the  schizont  agglutination  test  that  P.  knowiori  parasites  which 
persist  in  rhesus  monkeys  after  the:  development  of  agglutinating  anti- 

1154 


body  is  no  longer  r<  active  with  the  antibody;  i.e.,  parasites  or  mul¬ 
tiple  specificities  con  evolve  sequentially  in  a  single  animal.  This 
situation  also  obtains  for  protective  antibodies  as  has  been  shown  for 
F.  bcrghci.  In  spite  of  chic  very  serious  mechanism  of  interference 
with  host  immune  processes,  protective  immunity  is  established  in  many 
host-parasite  systems.  Immunity  has  been  induced  in  both  systems  where 
antigenic  variation  has  been  studied  in  most  detail  (i.e.,  P.  knowlcsi 
in  rhesus  monkeys  and  P.  berghel  in  mice).  It  is  clear  that  in  these 
situations  the  failure  of  host  defense  through  antigenic  variation  can 
be  circumvented.  Brown  has  suggested  that  the  primary  exposure  to 
malarial  antigens  endows  the  host  with  immunologic  memory  so  that  on 
subsequent  exposures  to  a  different  variant  a  secondary  immune  response 
occurs.  In  this  model  the  variant  specificity  would  be  analogous  to  a 
hapten  which  would  function  with  a  carrier  to  which  the  host  was  al¬ 
ready  immune. 

CyroT  reservation  of  erythrocytes  parasitized  with  Plasmodium 

falciparum.  - 


A  method  d  v^loued  for  freezing  and  storing  human  erythrocyte; s  for 
transfunsions  has  applied  to  storing  of  Plasmodium  falciparum  para¬ 

sitized  erythrocytes  obtained  from  infected  owl  monkeys  (A~otus  trivir- 
gatus ) .  The  method  involves  using  a  cryoprotective  agent  containing 
glycerol  and  reconstituting  isotcnicity  stepwise  after  thawing  the  cells 
and  before  they  are  used  for  Infecting  laboratory  animals  or  for  in 
vitro  cxe'  rimonts.  The  colls  retain  both  the  capacity  to  incorporate 
CTT isoleucine  into  trichloroacetic  acid  precipitable  material  after 
storage  (protein  synthesis)  and  to  infect  animals.  Experiments  of 
limited  duration  (h-8  hours)  indicate  that  the  rate  of  protein  synthesis 
by  cells  which  have  been  stored  in  the  frozen  state  approaches  that 
observed  with  fresh  preparations.  Studies  on  the  further  in  vitro 
development  of  stored  malaria  parasites  and  on  the  effect  of  prolonged 
storage  are  in  progress.  Retention  of  infectivity  to  Aotus  monkeys 
is  superior  to  previously  used  methods  as-  judged  by  the  short  pre- 
7  at  ion  t  period.  Studies  on  the  persistence  of  infectivity  arc  also 
Lein  ,  per  forme  i.  Changes  in  the  capacity  to  synthesize  protein  and 
to  infect  animals  have  not  been  detected  during  serial  experiments 
over  a  seven  week  period. 

3.  Immunosuppression  of  the  protective  response  to  Plasmodium  berghei 

in  mice.  - 

In  attempts  to  setter  understand  mechanisms  of  the  immune  response 
drug  induced  antigen  specific  immunosuppression  has  been  v/idely  ucjI. 
Cyclophosphamide  was  used  in  attempts  to  selectively  suppress  the  immune 
response  oi'  adult  mice  to  Pi  asmodlum  b*  rghoi  by  giving  the  drug  along 
’with  malarial  antigen.  Protective  immunization  was  later  attempted  by 
injecting  potentially  protective  antigen.  During  the  final  phase,  the 
mice  were  challenged  with  the  parasite  and  the  degree  of  immune  respon¬ 
siveness  to  immunization,  as  a  function  of  pretreatment  manipulation, 
was  evaluated.  This  was  accomplished  by  studying  post-challenge 

1155 


mortality  for  a  30-day  period.  The  extent  of  possible  drug  related 
nonspecific  immunosup.,  rcscion  was  examined  by  analysis  of  sheep 
erythrocyte  hemolysin  activity  in  mice  challenged  with  sheep  erythro¬ 
cytes  immediately  following  pretreatment  manipulation.  At  the  time 
these  mice  were  challenged  with  sheep  red  cells,  the  remainder  of  the 
mice  were  being  immunized  prior  to  subsequent  malaria  infection. 

The  immune  response  of  the  mice  to  the  parasite  is  markedly  suppress¬ 
ed  by  previous  exposure  to  either  the  drug  alone  or  the  drug  given  with 
malaria  antigen.  In  the  latter  case,  there  is  an  acceleration  in  death 
rate  late  in  the  post-challenge  period  as  well  as  a  higher  total  mor-  * 

tality  30  days  alter  challenge  than  when  animals  are  treated  with  the 
trug  alone .  Confirmatory  work  lias  shown  mortality  data  to  be  highly 
reproducible.  Chemosuppressivo  phenomena  were  not  a  grossly  nonspecific 
type  an  jslicjm  tiy  fcc  .utltiurl  paAie&biii  nT  iflSMftfi  rr-il  c*U  1  It.  all 

animals  regardless  ol'  mode  of  pretreatment.  These  observations  suggest 
the  induction  of  partial  tolerance  to  the  antigens  involved. 


1156 


1 

+ 


i 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 
Work  Unit  129  Host  responses  to  malaria 
Literature  Cited, 

Publications : 


1.  Diggs,  C.L. ,  Shin,  H.,  Briggs,  N.T.,  Laudens layer,  K.  and 
Weber,  R.M. :  Antibody  mediated  immunity  to  Plasmodium  berghei  indepen¬ 
dent  of  the  third  component  of  complement.  Proc.  Helm.  Soc.  Wash. 
(Spec.  Issue)  30 :  4 56-459,  1972. 

<- •  Diggs,  C.L.,  Wellde,  B.T.,  Anderson,  J.S.,  Weber,  R.M.  and 
Rodriguez,  E.:  The  protective  effect  of  African  human  immunoglobin 
G  in  Aotus  Trivirgatus  infected  with  Asian  Plasmodium  falciparum. 

Proc.  Helm.  Soc.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  39:  44 9-455,  1972. 

3*  Lourie,  S.H.:  The  effect  of  Plasmodium  berghei  on  the  immune 
response  in  rats.  Proc.  Helm.  Soc.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  39:  477-483, 


4.  Lourie,  S.H.  and  Dunn,  M.A.:  The  effect  of  protective  sera  on 

the  course  of  Plasmodium  berghei  in  immunosuppressed  rats.  Proc.  Helm. 
Soc.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  30!  570-476,  1972. 

5.  McAlister,  R.O. :  Fractionation  of  the  serologically  reactive 
antigens  of  Plasmodium  falciparum.  Proc.  Helm.  Soc.  Wash.  (Sr>ee. 

32:  555-562,  1$>7~ . 


6.  Sadun,  E.H.:  The  research  and  development  of  serologic  tests 
for  malaria.  Amer.  Jour.  Trop.  Med.  and  Hyg.  (Supplement)  21:  677- 

682,  1972.  — 


7.  Sadun,  E.H.,  (Ed.):  "Basic • Research  in  Malaria".  Proc.  Helm. 
Soc.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  32=  582  pp.,  1972. 

b.  Sadun,  E.H.:  Preface:  Malaria  chemotherapists-perched  on  the 
shoulders  of  gaints.  Proc.  Helm.  Soc.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  32:  3-9, 


>' •  ^adun,  E.H. :  Recapitulation  and  concluding  reinarks.  Proc. 
Helm.  Soc.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  32:  5SI-582,  1972. 

—  •  »'tut.  ,  D.R. ,  I erris ,  D.H.  and  7oss,  E.W.:  Enhanced  suscepti¬ 
bility  bf  bursectomized  chickens  to  Plasmodium  gallinaceum:  Comparison 
of  three  burseetomy  methods.  Proc.  Helm.  Soc.  Wash.  < Spec .  Issue)  39* 

460-464,  1972. 


's\ 


1157 


r 


11.  ttutz,  D.R.,  Ferric,  D.H.  and  Voss,  E.W. :  Passive  serum  trans¬ 
fer  experiments  in  bursectomizod  chickens  infected  with  Plasmodium 
Tallin acoum.  Proc.  Helm.  Coe.  Wash.  (Cpcc .  Issue)  39:  464-469,  1972 • 

L  .  V/i'llde,  B.T.,  lJi,ri's,  C.L.,  Rodriguez,  K.,  Briefs,  II. T.,  Weber, 
R.M.  and  von  Boenhoff ,  A.E.  :  Require:  arts  for  induction  of  Immunity  to 
Plasmodium  ber^hei  malaria  by  irradiated  parasitized  erythrocytes. 

Pr . >e .  Helm.  Coe.  Wash.  (Spec.  Issue)  39:  529-937,  1972. 

13.  Welldo,  B.T.,  Rodrigues,  E.,  .'tuit;E,  L.  and  von  Doenhoff,  A.: 

I  actor::  affecting  the  immunoEenl city  of  Irradiated  Plasmodium  berghoi 
parasitized  erythrocytes.  Isotopes  and  Radiation  in  Parasitology,  III. 
International  Atomic  Energy  Agency,  Vienna,  pip .  187-19-’?  1973* 


1  !=>« 


1 


II  TITLf  (Pr.«.Mi  ml*  j.twHfr  CM.;* 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

t.  ASEMCY  ACCESSION* 

DA  0A  6525 

A  DATS  OF  SUMMARY*  1  REPORT  CONTROL  IFIfflOL 

73  07  01  I  DD-DRhE(AR)t3t 

A  OATS  FAS V  SUlTRY 

72  07  01 

A  KIND  OR  SUMMARY 

J?j  Change 

a  summary  scty* 

u 

A  PORN  S1CUMTV* 

u 

T.  RBORAMNO* 

NA 

BA  DWSrM  IMITR*N 

NL 

SA  SPECIFIC  DATA- 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

0  rai  □  mo 

A  WORK  UNIT 

10  MO  /CODES:*  PROORAM ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A  PRIMARY 

63713A 

3A663713D829 

00 

-132 

A  CONTRIBUTING 

CDOG  114(f)' 

l»  RESPONSIBLE  DOOOROAMIlATtON 


'*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
'“**  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


responsible  individual 

NAyt  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
TCLt.HONC:  202-576-3551 


11.  GENERAL  USE 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 
n.  nragraTygnas  teb  ttk  pste  wnniaas  gag - 


I.  PERFORMING  ORSANIIATION 


it  i+Afcf  Uf| - 

65  11 

I«.  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  0ATC 

CONT 

IS  FUNDING  AOINCV 

DA  | 

Vs.  PERFORMANCE  METHOD 

C.  In-House 

IT  CONTPACT/ORANT 

A  OATBI/t  FFCC  TIME:  CMPI  RATION: 

A  NUMBER  * 

C,  TYPE.  A  AMOUNT: 

A  K'NO  OF  AWARO:  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

IS  RESOURCE!  CSTINATC 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRS 

A  FUN  OS  fli*  MwtaA) 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

PRCCIOINC 

73 

1 

35 

74 

!  2 

95 

t)  Clinical  and  Metabolic  Studies  of  Malaria 

I  teiKNTIPIC  AND  TCCHNOLOOICAL  AREAS* 

00  2600  BIOLOGY 


"A“,:  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicine 

ADDRESS:* 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  (Fvmllt  MAM  If  V  I.  4M#Mh  (MIINMet) 

«»«•  Canfield,  COL  C.  J. 

tMPmomt  202-576-3268 
social  security  account  number: 

AMOCIAT  E  IN  VIS Tl  0  A  TORI 

McCormick,  G.  J.,  Ph.D. 

NANI;  DA 


(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Antimalaria  Is;  (U)  Parasite;  (U)  Red  Blood  Cell 


I  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  1A  APPROACH,  IS  PROGRESS  fFwmIM  INNMI pm* JWtNe  NNlilNI Sr  m»lH»  RMlNt  feel  ef  mmA  vlA  |.twttr  ClAeelSeelfen  C*N*-J 

23.  (U)  Study  pathophysiology  of  acute  falciparum  and  vivax  malaria,  and  assess 
various  modes  of  antimalarial  therapy  with  respect  to  clinical  responses  and  radical 
cure.  Document  metabolic  alterations  of  human  and  animal  red  blood  cells  when  in¬ 
fected  with  malaria  parasites  and  assess  the  effect  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  these 
alterations  in  order  to  develop  new  drugs  effective  against  resistant  falciparum 
malaria. 

24.  (U)  Document  clinical  features  of  acute  disease,  evaluate  available  therapeutic 
agents  with  respect  to  clinical  response  and  radical  cure;  provide  surveillance  for 
toxicity  and  efficacy  testing  of  new  antimalarial  agents  by  government  contractors; 
provide  expert  consultation  on  treatment  of  resistant  falciparum  infections  and 
secure  new  strains  of  malaria  for  introduction  into  the  volunteer  test  program.  Mea¬ 
sure  the  effects  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  morphologic  growth  and  radiolabelled  pre¬ 
cursor  incorporation  into  protein  and  nucleic  acids  during  in  vitro  schizogony. 
Measure  folic  acid  reductase  in  parasite  suspensions. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Consultations  with  many  physicians  treating  patients  for  ma¬ 

laria  from  Vietnam  continued  on  an  informal  basis.  Several  new  drugs  and  new  drug 
combinations  were  introduced  into  ten  clinical  test  centers,  and  cooperative  field 
trials  with  investigational  compounds  in  Thailand  were  initiated.  In  vitro  culture 
of  P.  knowlesi  parasites  has  continued  as  a  screening  procedure  for  antimalarial 
activity  and  for  demonstration  of  drug  potentiation.  Analogs  of  purine  bases  and 
nucleosides  which  were  effective  during  screening  have  been  studied  for  establishment 
of  relative  effectiveness.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of 
Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  Jun  73. 

*A  v*l J.tW.  to  contractor*  MgW 


(Pll  Redacted] 


DD,:”“J498 


PREV.OUI  EDITIONS  or  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOl  ETC.  DD  FORMS  1  ASS  A,  1  NOV  SS 
AND  1  ASS*  I  .  1  MAR  01  (FOR  ARMY*  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1159 


1 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  132  Clinical  and  metabolic  studies  of  malaria 

I 

Investigators. 

Principal:  COL  Craig  J.  Canfield,  MC 

Associate:  Gerald  J.  McCormick,  Ph.D.,  Esther  P.  Jordan,  Ph.D., 
Gloria  P.  Willett 

Description. 

The  objectives  of  this  work  unit  are  to  assess  the  clinical  state 
and  therapeutic  response  of  patients  to  acute  falciparum  and  vivax 
malaria,  provide  surveillance  for  toxicity  and  efficacy  testing  of 
new  antimalarial  agents  by  contractors,  provide  expert  consulta¬ 
tion  on  treatment  of  resistant  falciparum  infections,  secure  new 
strains  of  malaria  for  introduction  into  the  volunteer  test  program, 
study  metabolic  pathways  of  the  host  red  blood  cell  parasite  complex 
and  to  assess  the  effect  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  these  pathways  in 
order  to  develop  new  drugs  effective  against  resistant  falciparum 
malaria. 

Progress. 

Data  on  the  number  of  cases  of  malaria  in  Vietnam  during  1965-1971 
was  compiled  and  published  (1).  The  rarity  of  resistant  falciparum 
malaria  in  Negro  soldiers  in  Vietnam  was  documented  and  published 
(2). 

Admission  to  Walter  Reed  General  Hospital  for  acute  or  recrudescent 
falciparum  malaria  virtually  ceased  during  the  reporting  period.  An 
undocumented  number  of  telephone  consultations  were  provided  on 
problems  associated  with  malaria  infection  from  a  variety  of  civil¬ 
ian  and  military  treatment  facilities  throughout  the  United  States. 

The  principal  investigator  of  this  work  unit  also  served  as  princi¬ 
pal  investigator  for  all  new  antimalarial  drugs  undergoing  evalua¬ 
tion  in  the  clinical  centers  and  in  field  studies  in  Thailand.  Four 
new  IND's  and  14  annual  supplements  were  submitted  to  the  Army 
Investigational  Review  Board.  All  volunteer  and  field  studies  with 
2  of  these  drugs,  WR  33063  and  WR  30090  were  compiled  and  published 
during  the  reporting  period  (3).  Both  drugs  were  found  to  be  better 
than  any  single  drug  presently  available  for  treatment  of  resistant 
falciparum  malaria  and  were  virtually  free  from  adverse  effects. 
Coordinates  of  clinical  studies  of  even  more  active  analogs  continue. 

1160 


A 


One  new  strain  of  falciparum  malaria  was  introduced  into  the  clini¬ 
cal  center.  This  strain  was  obtained  by  Dr.  Clyde  in  Sabah  and  was 
found  to  be  both  chloroqulne  and  pyrimethamine  resistant. 

In  vitro  study  of  synergism  between  antimalarial  drugs  has  continued, 
uding  the  ^C-orotic  acid  system.  The  studies  which  were  presented 
at  the  Malaria  Workshop  at  WRAIR  were  published  (4) .  Combinations 
of  pyrimethamine  and  folinic  acid  were  found  to  be  antagonistic  in 
this  system. 

Dose  response  studies  of  analogs  of  purine  bases  and  nucleosides 
have  been  done  to  establish  relative  effectiveness  of  those  which 
were  effective  in  the  drug  screening  procedure.  The  most  effect¬ 
ive  compounds  were  puromycin  and  tubercidin  relative  to  both  RNA 
and  DNA,  and  3 ' -amino-3' -deoxy-adenosine  relative  to  RNA  only. 
Cordycepin  (3 'deoxy-adenosine)  was  not  effective  in  these  experi¬ 
ments. 

Results  from  the  collaborative  study  with  Dr.  de  Zeeuw  which  he 
presented  at  the  Malaria  Workshop  were  published  (5).  Analysis 
of  lipid  components  was  transferred  from  the  Netherlands  to  the 
University  of  Maryland. 


1161 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 

Work  Unit  132  Clinical  and  metabolic  studies  of  malaria 
Literature  Cited. 

Publications: 


1.  Canfield,  C.  J.:  Malaria  in  U.S.  military  personnel.  Proc. 
Helminth.  Soc.  Wash.  39,  15-18,  1972. 

2.  Hall,  A.  P. ,  and  Canfield,  C.  J. :  Resistant  falciparum 
malaria  in  Vietnam:  Its  rarity  in  Negro  soldiers.  Proc.  Helminth 
Soc.  Wash.  39,  66-70,  1972. 

3.  Canfield,  C.  J.,  Hall,  A.  P. ,  MacDonald,  B.  S.,  Neuman,  D.  A. 
and  Shaw,  J.  A.:  Treatment  of  falciparum  malaria  from  Vietnam 
with  a  phenanthrene  methanol  (WR  33063)  and  a  quinoline  methanol 
(WR  30090).  Antimlcrob.  Agents  and  Chemotherapy  j),  224-227,  1973 

4.  McCormick,  G.  J. ,  and  Canfield,  C.  J.:  In  vitro  evaluation  of 
antimalarial  drug  combinations.  Proc.  Helminth.  Soc.  Wash.,  39, 
292-297,  1973. 

5.  de  Zeeuw,  R.  A.,  Wijsbeck,  J.,  Rock,  R.  C. ,  and  McCormick, 

G.  J.:  Composition  of  phospholipids  in  plasmodium  knowlesl 
membranes  and  in  host  rhesus  erythrocyte  membranes.  Pror 
Soc.  Wash.,  39,  412-418,  1973. 


U62 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  >«W>  ACCKMUM* 

DA  OB  6405 

73  07  01 

MBFOMT  OOmntOL  SIMM 

DDDRkK(AR)636 

%.  DATE  ANEW  lUtfAT 

«.  MIND  OR  BUNNARY 

A.  New 

1.  BUt  -JARY  ICTY* 

U 

B.  WORK  SECURITY* 

U 

T  RCCRAMNO* 

NA 

■  A  OMB"  N  *NITR*N 

NL 

lb  sarciric  OATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCIBI 

0  Til  Dm 

1.  LEVEL  OR  BUM 

A.  «MK  UNIT 

10  NO. /COOII* 

RftooftAM  clement 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

637 13 A 

3 A663713D829 

O 

O 

134 

fc.  CONTRIBUTING 

c.  contributing 

CDQG  114  ml 

ii.  title  .  •Mrif?  ci—tu—iim  c 

(l1)  Ma.'.aria  Investigations  (09) 


I*  ICUNTIR1C  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  AAEAST 

01 2100  Organic  Chemistry 


TTTmrTTXti - 

7  07 

IB-  ESTIMATE 0  CONALITION  OAT* 

C0NT 

IS  RUNOINO  AOENCY 

DA  | 

IS  ACRR^RMANCE  method 

C.  In-House 

Tr  oiitract/orant 

IS  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A  ARORESSIONAL  MAN  YR1 

h,  RUNDS  On  AtiMMA; 

*■  O  - rfl/ERrtCTIVii 

h.  NUMBER  * 

C  MAI  RATION: 

RISCAL 

PNECROIUB 

73 

9 

630 

C  T>  At 

«.  K'l  D  OR  AWARD: 

d  ANOUNT. 

f.  CUM.  AMT. 

YEAR 

TLBHEUT 

74 

16.1 

620 

IB.  ’tCBAONIIBLC  OOP  ORGANIZATION  j 

1  1 

20.  AIRRORMINO  OROANIIATION 

I 

| 

»*“**  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

adomcu:*  Washington,  D.  0.  20012 

***««•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 

AooRtss:* v/ashingto:  ,  D.  C.  20012 

RESAONBIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

BUESCHER,  E.  L.  ,  COL 

ARINCIAAL  INVESTIGATOR  $  IAS  II  VS.  tuAitlc  Jnnitutfn) 

name-*  Rothe ,  W.  E  •  ,  COL 
teleahone:  202/576-2280 

TELEAMONI:  202/576-3551 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  NUMBER: 

>L  GENERAL  USE 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not 

Considered 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATOR! 

rame:  Sweeney,  T.  R.  ,  Ph.D. 

NAME: 

DA 

[Pll 


(U)  Biology;  LlD.  Chemistry 


(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Drug  Development;  (U)  Antimalarials ; 
(U)  Pharmacodynamics:  (U)  Drug  Metabolism;  (U)  Toxicology 


11.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  H  APPROACH,  21  AAOONEU  1*41  WJwl  HulllUd  Ay  AunWf  Ar.e.4.  Nil  ll  mmeh  vf*  fturlty  ClMtifttaflwi  C«At.> 

23.  (U)  To  manage  *  to  integrate,  and  to  provide  technical  direction  for  the  contract 
Drug  Development  Program  on  Malaria.  To  conduct  in-house  studies  in  pharmacology, 
biology  and  organic  synthesis  specifically  related  to  the  design,  development  and 
exploitation  of  new  antimalarials  for  military  use. 

24.  (U)  Close  supervision  of  the  Malaria  Program  will  be  maintained  by  defining 
necessary  research  areas,  by  providing  guidance  and  an  integrated  evaluation  of 
productivity,  and  by  the  redirection  and  coordination  of  objectives  as  dictated 
by  feedback  from  clinical  studies  of  candidate  antimalarials.  The  development  and 
exploitation  of  more  effective  chemical  structures  and  of  animal  models  for  the 
study  of  toxicity,  drug  metabolism  and  pharmacodynamics  of  new  antimalarials  will 
continue  in  support  of  IND  requirements  for  clinical  drug  trials,  and  to  provide 

a  basis  of  predicting  soldier  response  to  these  agents  under  thf  stresses  of  a 
military  environment. 

25.  (U)  72  07-73  06  Progress  was  previously  reported  under  3A6637* ^D82^  as  work 
units  114,171  and  122.  Technical  management  continued  for  50  coiu'ract..-  in  chemistry, 
9  in  biology  and  11  in  pharmacology.  Four  new  IND  applications  and  lr>  supplements 
were  submitted  and  approved.  Cardiovascular  and  pulmonary  pharmacology  was 
investigated  in  dogs,  and  drug  metabolism  in  mice,  for  4  new  drugs.  Hepatic 
microsomal  modifications  of  9  drugs  in  mice,  and  the  hemolytic  effects  in  vitro 

of  6  drugs  were  studied.  For  technical  reports  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Re¬ 
search  Annual  Progress  Report.  1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 


DD, 


T;J498 


previous  editions  of  this  form  are  obsolete  dd  forms  iaosa  i 

And  I40S-1  1  MAR  os  (FOR  ARMY  USE  I  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1163 


NOV  65 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 


Task  00  Malaria  Investigations 
Work  Unit  134  Malaria  Investigations 
Investigators . 

Principal:  COL  William  E.  Rofhe ,  VC 

Associate:  Thomas  R.  Sweeney,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Kenneth  E.  Kinnamon, 

VC:  Melvin  H.  Heiffer,  Ph.D.;  R.  Strube ,  Ph.D.; 

E.  Steck,  Ph.D.;  B.  Poon,  Ph.D.;  D.  Y  layman ,  Ph.D.; 
S.  Page,  CPT ,  MSC;  T.  Griffin,  1LT ,  OrdC ;  T.  Woods, 
2LT,  CmlC;  J.  Schafer;  P.  Loizeaux,  LTC,  VC; 

C.  Wolf,  2LT,  MSC;  B.  Atherton;  1LT ,  MSC;  J.  Waters; 
L.  Miner,  LTC,  MSC;  R.  Rozman,  Ph.D.;  A.  Einheber, 
Ph.D.;  H.  Ellis,  CPT,  MSC;  D.  Foley,  CPT,  MSC; 

A .  Berman 


General 

This  program  of  malaria  investigations  is  a  modern  medicinal  chem¬ 
istry  research  effort  designed  to  develop  drugs  to  treat  and/or 
prevent  ]?.  falciparum  and  P.  vivax  infections  of  the  soldier.  The 
fields  of  investigation  logically  include  synthetic  organic  chem¬ 
istry,  biology  and  pharmacology.  Close  supervision  is  maintained 
by  defining  necessary  research  areas,  by  providing  guidance  and  an 
integrated  evaluation  of  productivity,  and  by  the  redirection  and 
coordination  of  objectives  as  dictated  by  feedback  from  clinical 
studies  of  candidate  antimalarials.  The  development  and  exploitation 
of  more  effective  chemical  structures  and  of  animal  models  for  the 
study  of  toxicity,  drug  metabolism  and  pharmacodynamics  of  new  anti¬ 
malarials  supports  the  Investigational  New  Drug  requirements  for 
clinical  drug  trials,  and  provides  a  basis  of  predicting  soldier 
response  to  these  agents  under  the  stresses  of  a  military  environ¬ 
ment.  Program  objectives  are  being  attained  through  the  combined 
efforts  of  a  team  of  research  managers  with  the  necessary  expertise  , 
in-house  laboratory  support  in  the  areas  of  synthetic  chemistry, 
biology  and  pharmacology,  and  extramural  consultation. 

The  Contract  Chemical  Synthesis  Program 

At  the  end  of  FY-73  there  were  33  active  contracts  to  be  carded  over 
into  FY-74;  12  contracts  were  terminated  during  the  year. 

In  addition  to  the  research  synthesis  contracts  there  have  been  four 
active  preparations  laboratories  to  resynthesize,  on  a  larger  scale, 
selected  compounds  that  are  needed  for  large  animal  testing,  toxico¬ 
logical  studies  and  clinical  investigations*  There  has  also  been  one 
contract  to  synthesize  radioactively  tagged  compounds  and  one  to  ana¬ 
lyze  and  confirm  the  purity  and  identity  of  compounds  and  compositions 
to  be  used  in  preclinical  and  clinical  studies. 

1164 


* 

N 


✓ 


t 


i 


-  i 
« 


J 


During  FY-73  there  was  a  total  of  1  ,QGG  compounds  submitted  by  the 
synthesis  contract  program,  700  of  which  were  target  compounds  syn¬ 
thesized  on  a  rational  basis.  The  average  cost  per  target  compound, 
calculated  from  the  inception  of  the  program,  is  slightly  less  than 
$2,400.  The  preparations  laboratories  continued  to  work  at  full 
capacity.  The  number  of  compounds  requested  from  these  laboratories 
during  the  year  was  42,  3  and  4  in  small,  medium  and  large  quantities 
respectively;  compounds  received  numbered  46,  1  and  1  in  these 
categories  respectively.  Publications  and  manuscripts  generated 
by  the  synthesis  contractors  during  the  year  totaled  21;  3  patents 
were  issued. 

In  the  synthesis  program,  other  than  a  few  oyridine-and  phenanthrene- 
methanols  with  3  and  4  carbon  side  chains,  the  napthalene  methanols 
and  the  anthracene  methanols  were  the  only  classes  of  the  aryl  amino 
alcohols  in  which  additional  work  was  indicated,  and  which  were 
carried  over  from  last  year.  These  now  are  being  phased  out.  The 
naphthalene  methanols  seem  to  be  at  least  as  active  as  their  nitrogen 
analogs  in  the  primary  screen  and  selected  ones  will  be  carried  to 
advanced  screening.  The  anthracene  methanols  did  not  appear  to  be 
quite  as  active  as  the  phenanthrenemethanols  but  such  activity  prob¬ 
ably  could  be  developed  with  additional  work.  However,  the  inherent 
synthetic  difficulties  militated  against  the  possibility  of  the 
emergence  of  a  practical  drug  in  this  class. 

The  greatest  emphasis  during  the  past  year  was  placed  upon  the  syn¬ 
thesis  of  prophylactic  and  curative  agents.  The  primary  thrust  was 
in  the  areas  of  the  6-  and  8-aminoquinolines .  Other  areas  of  poten¬ 
tial  prophylactic  activity  now  under  study  include  the  aminonaph- 
thyridines,  the  2-aryl-2-piperidyltetrahydrofurans  and  derivatives, 
and  Endochin-related  compounds.  Both  the  synthesis  and  the  screen¬ 
ing  of  the  6-  and  8-aminoquinolines  proved  to  be  difficult. 

However,  testing  in  primates  has  shown  that  certain  of  the  new 
8-aminoquinolines  may  compare  favorably  with  primaquin. 

A  second  broad  area  of  endeavor  encompassed  the  synthesis  of 
compounds  that  are  loosely,  and  somewhat  arbitrarily  designated  as 
metabolic  inhibitors.  These  include,  for  example,  folic  and  amino 
acid  inhibitors.  Thus  there  are  being  synthesized  modifications  of 
folic  acid  itself  as  well  as  appropriately  substituted  pyrrolopri- 
midines ,  quinazolines ,  pyrimidines,  aza-  and  deaza-quinazolines  , 
and  purines,  including  nucleosides.  The  most  active  compounds  un¬ 
covered,  in  terms  of  milligrams  per  kilogram,  are  in  the  6-arythio- 
2 ,4-diamino-quinoazoline  class. 

Synthesis  of  the  phenolic  Mannich  bases,  the  bis  amidines  and  the 
cinnamoyloxazolinyl  piperazines,  all  of  which  were  based  upon  active 
prototype  compounds,  has  been  continued.  New  synthesis  programs 
have  been  started  to  exploit  the  activity  uncovered  in  the  aryl- 
alkanesulfonates  and  in  the  antibiotics  Clindamycin  and  Threomycin. 

1165 


V 


The  synthesis  program  designed  to  exploit  the  lead  uncovered  in  the 
activity  of  gem  dithiols  and  polysulfides,  while  developing  more 
active  compounds  than  the  prototypes,  did  not  yield  compounds  of  the 
caliber  desired  and  was  dropped.  Also  phased  out  was  the  work  on 
the  6-hydroxy-7-alkylthioquinoline-quinones  because  of  disappointing 
activity  in  the  primate  test  systems.  Finally,  the  synthesis  of  the 
cycloalkyl  peroxides  was  phased  out  because  of  the  inherent  instab¬ 
ility  of  the  compounds. 

Acquisition  of  Compounds 

In  addition  to  the  1,100  compounds  received  from  the  synthesis 
program,  11,600  were  acquired  under  the  Cooperative  Industry- 
Government  Agreement  for  the  Testing  of  Compounds,  and  1,400  more 
were  received  as  gifts.  The  WRAIR  bottling  team  made  eight  sample 
collection  visits  collecting  6,400  compounds. 

Renewed  emphasis  has  been  put  on  reviving  the  collaboration  of 
companies  that  have  been  inactive  for  some  time;  three  inactive 
firms  chose  to  terminate  the  Agreement.  Sixteen  new  companies  were 
contacted,  seven  of  which  signed  the  Agreement.  Competition  for 
chemicals  has  increased  markedly  during  the  year  with  the  letting 
by  the  National  Cancer  Institute  of  a  large  contract  solely  for 
the  purpose  .c  contacting  potential  submitters  and  acquiring  new 
chemicals;  in  addition  the  NCI  has  established  a  new  office  in 
Europe  for  the  same  purpose. 

The  Organic  Laboratory  Synthesis  Program 

The  in-house  synthesis  program  has  as  its  objective  the  conversion 
of  some  of  the  highly  active  quinoline-  and  phenanthrene-  methanols 
into  their  sulfur  analogs,  both  in  the  form  of  the  tree  thiol  and  as 
'a  physiologically  potential  thiol.  The  conversion  of  quinine  result¬ 
ed  in  the  compound  9-deoxyepiquinine-9-thiosulfuric  acid  which  had 
the  same  order  of  activity  as  quinine.  Heretofore,  modification  of 
the  hydroxyl  in  the  aminoalcohols ,  with  the  exception  of  the  con¬ 
version  to  the  oxazolidine,  resulted  in  loss  of  activity. 

Biology 

All  compounds  received  by  the  Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry,  WRAIR 
are  evaluated  for  anti-malarial  activity  in  a  blood-induced  P_.  berghei 
mouse  screen  and/or  a  sporozoite-induced  mouse  (P_.  berghei  yoeli V  or 
chick  (P.  gailinaceum)  screen.  Active  compounds  are  further  evalu¬ 
ated  for  other  characteristics  as  described  below. 


1166 


V 


a.  Primary  Screens 

1.  All  primary  testing  of  compounds  for  blood  schizonticidal 
activity  is  conduced  by  Dr.  Leo  Rane  at  the  University  of  Miami. 

The  endpoint  of  the  system  is  extension  of  survival  time  of  ICR/HA 
Swiss  mice  that  are  given  a  standard  inoculum  of  berghei  (KB6173) 

on  day  zero  and  a  single  subcutaneous  injection  of  the  test  agent  in 
peanut  oil  on  day  3,  i.e.  72  hours  later.  Untreated  animals  die 
within  6  to  8  days.  An  increase  of  100%  in  mean  survival  time  is 
considered  the  minimum  effective  response  for  a  candidate  compound. 
Animals  that  survive  60  days  are  scored  as  "cures”.  During  this 
report  period  .14,276  compounds  were  tested,  709  were  found  to  be 
active. 

2.  Primary  testing  of  compounds  for  prophylactic  activity  has  been 
conducted  using  a  sporozoite-induced  IP.  gallinaceum  infection  in 
white  Leghorn  cockerels  and  a  sporozoite-induced  P.  berghei  yoeli 
infection  in  HA/ICR  mice.  The  chick  test  is  a  high  volume  screen. 

The  mouse  test  has  a  much  lower  throughput  rate.  The  latter  is 
being  discontinued  because  (a)  of  the  high  efficiency  of  the  chick 
screen,  (b)  the  difficulty  in  maintaining  a  viable  colony  of 
Anopheles  mosquitoes  required  for  the  sporozoites  for  infection, 
thus,  resulting  in  the  test  being  inoperable  much  of  the  contract 
period,  and  (c)  the  cost  of  operating  two  primary  prophylactic  screens. 
During  the  current  report  period  2,624  compounds  were  tested  in  the 
a/ian  system.  Three  hundred  eighty-seven  were  found  to  be  active. 

In  the  rodent  system  304  compounds  were  screened.  Of  these  117  were 
shown  to  have  prophylactic  activity. 

b.  Secondary  Tests 

1.  Blood  Schizonticidal  Systems 

a.  Selected  compounds  are  evaluated  by  Dr.  Paul  Thompson, 
University  of  Georgia.  The  system  employs  blood  induced  P.  berghei 
infections  in  mice  to  ascertain  activity  against  drug  resistant 
parasites,  absorption  by  various  routes  of  administration,  thera¬ 
peutic  index  estimation,  duration  of  action  and  PABA  antagonis. 

During  this  report  period  63  compounds  were  tested  orally  against 
the  parent  sensitive  (P)  line  and  one  or  more  drug  resistant  lines. 

Of  these,  51  showed  activity  equal  to  or  greater  than  quinine. 

Several  combination  studies  were  conducted.  Synergism  was  found 
when  sulfadiazine  was  administered  orally  with  the  quinazoline 
WR  158,122,  the  tetrahydrofuran  WR  179,305  and  the  phenanthrene 
methanol  WR  122,455.  Synergism  was  also  found  when  quinine  and 
minocycline  (WR  8  ,778)  were  administered  concurrently. 


1167 


b.  Certain  compounds  are  sent  to  Dr.  Wallace  Peters,  Liverpool 
School  of  Tropical  Medicine  for  evaluation.  Included  in  his  work 
are  combination  studies.  He  has  found  a  high  level  of  potentiation 
between  chloroquine  and  erythromycin  when  used  against  infections  of 
moderately  resistant  (NS)  and  highly  resistant  (RC)  strains  of 

£.  berghei  in  mice. 

c.  An  in  vitro  test  is  conducted  by  Dr.  Karl  Rieckmann,  Rush- 
St.  Luke’s  Hospital,  Chicago,  Illinois.  The  test  consists  of  in¬ 
cubating  human  blood  parasitized  with  falciparum  with  test  com¬ 
pounds  for  24  hours  at  30-40°C.  After  incubation,  blood  smears  are 
prepared  and  inspected  under  the  microscope.  The  extent  of  the 
inhibition  of  the  parasite  maturation  can  be  ascertained.  Four 
strains  of  parasites  are  used  -  the  chloroquine  sensitive  Uganda 
strain  and  the  resistant  Malayan  (Camp),  Vietnam  (Marks)  and 
Cambodian  strains.  A  particularly  gratifying  development  in 
monitoring  this  test  system  is  the  finding  that  there  is  a  very 
high  correlation  between  the  activity  of  compounds  in  this  simple 
in  vitro  test  and  the  activity  of  the  compounds  in^  vivo .  During 
the  present  report  period  a  total  of  71  compounds  were  tested. 
Sixty-five  weru  found  active. 

d.  Approximately  20  compounds  per  year  are  tested  against 
blood  induced  simian  malaria  (P_.  cynomolgi )  in  Rhesus  monkeys. 

This  testing,  conducted  by  the  SEATO  Laboratory,  Bangkok,  Thialand, 
is  done  by  administering  compounds  orally  at  5  different  dose  levels 
for  seven  consecutive  days  beginning  on  the  fourth  day  after  in¬ 
fecting  the  animals.  The  course  of  the  parasitemia  in  each  animal 
is  determined  daily  for  up  to  60  days.  The  testing  is  proceeding 

at  a  highly  efficient  level. 

e.  Further  testing  is  done  using  the  owl  monkey,  Aotus 
Trivargatus .  Since  Dr.  Quintin  Geiman  was  first  able  to  establish 
Falciparum  malaria  in  this  small  South  American  monkey  several 
strains  have  been  successfully  adapted.  To  date  eight  strains  of 
Falciparum  and  two  strains  of  Vivax  have  been  established  in  these 
monkeys  by  Dr.  Leon  Schmidt,  Southern  Research  Institute,  Birmingham, 
Alabama.  All  infections  respond  to  drugs  in  much  the  same  manner 

as  the  corresponding  infections  in  man.  Approximately  6  to  8  com¬ 
pounds  per  year  are  tested  in  this  system.  Of  particular  interest 
are  studies  with  the  quinazoline  WR  158,122  (2,4-diamino-6- 
( 2-naphthyl  )-sulfonylquinazoline)  in  combination  with  sulfadiazine. 
Sulfadiazine  given  alone  at  a  dose  rate  of  80  mg/kg/day  for  seven 
days  effected  no  more  than  a  transitory  depression  of  parasitemia. 
However,  given  at  5  mg/kg/day  in  combination  with  WR  158  ,122  the 
activity  of  this  quinazoline  against  various  strains  was  enhanced 
by  16  to  64  fold.  Furthermore,  no  quinazoline  resistance  was 
developed  and  there  was  no  enhancement  of  the  toxicity  of  the 
quinazoline  when  sulfadiazine  was  concurrently  delivered. 


V 


2.  Prophylactic  and  Radical  Curative  Systems 

a.  More  definitive  determination  of  the  prophylactic  activity 
of  candidate  compounds  are  ascertained  by  Dr.  Harry  Most,  New  York 
University.  Employing  3-4  week  old  female  rats  the  effects  of  test 
compounds  on  exoerythrocytic  (EE)  forms  of  sporozoite- induced  P_. 
berghei  infections  are  determined  by  examining  microscopically  stained 
tissue  sections  prepared  from  livers  of  animals  given  sporozoites 
40-45  hours  earlier.  To  make  sure  no  EE  forms  are  overlooked  in 

the  tissue  sections  other  rats  are  inspected  daily  for  parasitemia 

,  and  if  negative  for  5  days  mice  are  subinoculated  and  the  parasitemia 

•  followed  for  6  days.  During  this  report  period  this  test  system 
has  been  modified  to  at  least  double  the  compound  throughput  from 
the  previous  6  to  8  compounds  per  year.  During  the  present  reporting 
period  17  compounds  were  tested.  Five  of  which  had  confirmed 
prophylactic  activity.  Furthermore,  more  information  at  different 

*  ,1  dose  levels  is  now  being  received. 

b.  To  determine  the  extent  that  a  compound  is  acting  as  a 
prophylactic  agent  as  opposed  to  acting  as  a  residual  blood 
schizonticidal  agent,  compounds  are  sent  to  Dr.  Wallace  Peters, 
Liverpool  School  of  Tropical  Medicine.  Of  significance  is  the  fact 
that  the  tetrahydro  furan  derivatives  show  marginal  prophylactic 
activity . 

c.  Simian  testing  for  prophylactic  and  radical  curative  activity 
is  conducted  by  Dr.  Leon  Schmidt.  The  test  employs  rhesus  monkeys 
that  receive  infections  of  sporozoites  of  P\  cynomolgi .  Compounds 
are  administered  orally  at  1/2,  1/4,  and  1/32  the  minimum  lethal 

dose  for  nine  consecutive  days  beginning  the  day  before  infection. 
Examination  for  parasitemia  is  begun  on  the  last  day  of  adminis¬ 
tration  and  repeated  daily  until  patency  or  60  days  if  negative. 

This  phase  of  the  testing  is  designed  to  determine  prophylactic 
properties  of  a  candidate  compound.  Radical  curative  properties 
can  be  subsequently  determined.  During  this  report  period  prelim¬ 
inary  indications  are  that  there  are  several  new  8-aminoquinolines 
already  in  the  WRAIR  inventory  or  being  prepared  that  are  at  least 
as  effective  as  primaquine. 

3.  Antifol  Testing 

^  During  the  reporting  period  87  compounds  were  evaluated  by  Dr. 

C.  C.  Smith,  University  of  Cincinnati  for  folic  acid  antagonism  in 
Streptococcus  faecium,  Lactobacillus  casei  and  Pediococcus  cerevisiae . 
Of  those  compounds  tested,  77  were  active  and  10  inactive. 

Twenty  were  reversed  by  addition  of  folate. 


f 


1169 


Pharmacology 

1 .  Absorption,  distribution  and  excretion  in  mice. 

The  absorption,  distribution  and  excretion  of  four  new  anti- 
malar  ials  after  oral  administration  using  radioactive  compounds 
were  studied  in  mice.  These  were  investigated  prior  to  taking 
the  drugs  into  man  for  extrapolation  to  potential  human  response. 

a.  HR  171  >669-1‘>C  : 


At  20  mg/kg  the  drug  appeared  to  be  rapidly  absorbed. 

Plasma  levels  were  relatively  constant  during  the  first  6  hours, 
peaking  at  approximately  1  ng/ml,  and  dropping  considerably  after 
24  and  48  hours.  Red  cell  levels  were  much  lower  during  this 
period.  Tissue  localization  (excluding  the  gastrointestinal 
tract)  of  the  radiolabel  after  2  and  4  hours  was  mainly  in  the 
liver,  lungs,  spleen,  kidney,  gall  bladder  and  heart.  The  main 
route  of  excretion  was  via  the  feces  with  very  small  amounts  being 
excreted  in  the  urine  and  no  radiolabel  detected  in  expired  air. 
Thin  layer  chromatography  of  feces  extracts  showed  two  major  and 
at  least  one  minor  peak.  One  major  peak  was  parent  drug,  the 
other  major  peak  was  a  glucuronide  of  a  metabolite. 

b.  WR  142 ,490-14C  : 

At  10  mg/kg  the  drug  appeared  to  be  well  absorbed.  Red 
cell  levels  were  relatively  constant  during  the  first  12  hours  , 
peaking  at  approximately  2  jig/ml  and  dropping  slowly  for  days. 
Plasma  levels  peaked  at  1.4  pg/ml  and  also  declined  slowly. 

Tissue  localization  (excluding  the  gastrointestinal  tract)  of  the 
radiolabel  at  24  and  48  how  s  was  mainly  in  the  lungs,  gall 
bladder,  kidney,  spleen  and  liver.  The  main  route  of  excretion 
was  slowly  via  the  feces  with  up  to  20%  in  the  urine  and  no 
detectable  radioactivity  in  expired  air.  The  drug  was  readily 
metabolized  with  at  least  two  major  metabolites  in  the  feces. 

c.  HR-143 ,946-14C : 

At  20  mg/kg  the  drug  was  erratically  absorbed.  Plasma 
levels  were  relatively  constant  during  the  first  6  hours,  peaking 
at  about  3.5  ug/ml  and  then  falling  rapidly.  Red  cell  levels 
were  much  lower  during  the  entire  period.  The  main  excretory 
route  was  fecal,  with  traces  in  urine  and  none  detected  in  expired 
air.  Thin  layer  chromatography  of  feces  extracts  indicated  very 
little  metabolism  of  the  drug. 


1170 


V 


d.  WR  15'J,412-14C: 


At  40  mg/kg  the  drug  appeared  to  be  moderately  well 
absorbed.  Both  plasma  and  red  cell  levels  peaked  at  2-3  jig/ml 
several  hours  postdose  and  then  gradually  declined.  The  main 
route  of  excretion  was  via  the  feces  with  up  to  10 %  in  the  urine. 

No  radioactivity  was  detected  in  expired  air.  Radioactivity 
extracted  from  feces  was  primarily  parent  drug  with  several  minor 
metabolites  while  urine  contained  primarily  metabolites. 

2.  Cardiovascular  and  pulmonary  pharmacology  in  dogs. 

The  general  cardiovascular  and  pulmonary  pharmacology  of  four 
new  antirnalarials  was  studied  in  anesthetized  dogs  after  intra¬ 
venous  ,  intraduodenal  or  oral  administration.  These  studies  are 
being  used  to  predict  potential  effects  in  humans.  In  each  in 
vivo  experiment,  systolic  and  diastolic  blood  pressure,  heart  rate, 
LKG,  and  pulmonary  rate  and  depth  were  monitored  and  recorded. 

Dose  response  curves  to  epinephrine,  nor-epinephrine ,  isoproterenol 
and  angiotensin  were  obtained  before  and  after  drug  administration. 

a.  WR  171,669: 

This  candidate  antimalarial  drug  was  administered  intra- 
duodenally  to  six  dogs  in  doses  ranging  from  20  to  100  mg/kg.  In 
addition  to  the  parameters  mentioned  above,  the  ascending  aortic 
blood  flow  was  measured  by  an  electromagnetic  flow  prone  and  the 
myocardial  contractile  force  was  determined  by  means  of  a  Walton- 
BroJie  strain  gauge  arch  sutured  to  the  right  ventricle  in  two  dogs. 
To  further  characterize  direct  cardiac  effects  the  drug  was  tested 
in  the  isolated,  perfused  dog  heart.  WR  171,660  produced  no 
observable  change  in  arterial  blood  pressure,  heart  rate,  EKG 
pattern  or  respiratory  rate  or  depth  during  a  3  hour  observation 
period.  Likewise,  cardiac  contractile  force  and  ascending  aortic 
blood  flow  were  not  affected.  D^re  response  curves  before  and  1 
hour  after  drug  administration  were  not  different. 

b.  W?s  148,946: 

Due  to  the  poor  water  solubility  of  this  chemical,  it  was 
prepared  as  a  suspension  and  administered  intraduodenally  in  doses 
of  10,  20  and  40  mg/kg  of  body  weight.  No  significant  effects  on 
blood  pressure,  heart  rate  or  respiratory  rate  were  observed  over 
a  3  hour  period.  The  failure  to  evoke  significant  responses 
directly  on  the  ^cardiovascular  or  respirat'  ry  systems  after  intra- 
duodf. nal  administration  may  be  interpreted  as  evidence  that 
relatively  large  oral  doses  could  be  tolerated  with  minimal  adverse 
effects  on  these  systems. 


( 


1171 


c.  WR  159,412: 


V 


After  intraduodenal ,  i.v.  or  oral  (in  capsules)  administra¬ 
tion  of  WR-159 ,412  to  eight  dogs,  in  doses  ranging  from  6  to 
320  mg/kg,  no  significant  effects  were  observed  on  any  of  the 
parameters  being  monitored,  thus  suggesting  a  relatively  low 
level  of  acute  toxicity  in  the  dog. 

d.  WR  158,122  +  WR  7557  (10*1  ratio) 

When  these  two  drugs,  in  combination,  were  administered 
intravenously  in  doses  of  2  5  mg/kg  and  2.5  mg/kg  respectively,  no 
significant  changes  were  noted  in  any  of  the  parameters  measured. 

3,  Hemolysis  by  8-aminoquinolines. 

The  hemolytic  effect  of  the  8-aminoquinolines  on  washed  normal 
human  red  blood  cells  was  studied  in  vitro  to  assess  the  potential 
degree  of  this  form  of  toxicity  to  humans.  Six  different  drugs 
were  tested:  WR  2975  (Primaquine),  WR  4234  (Pamaquine),  WR  183  ,538, 
WR  181,441,  WR  181,450  and  WR  182  ,471.  The  drugs,  in  concentrations 
of  0.02  ,  0.065  and  0.10  mg/ml,  were  incubated  in  saline  wich  red 
cells  at  37°C.  After  centrifugation  the  optical  density  of  the 
henolysate  was  determined,  using  appropriate  standards  and  blanks. 
All  of  the  drugs,  with  the  exception  of  pamaquine,  proved  to  be 
more  hemolytic  than  primaquine  at  0.1  mg/ml.  At  0.065  mg/ml 
WR  181,450  showed  less  hemolysis  than  primaquine.  WR  183,538  was 
extremely  hemolytic  at  all  three  drug  concentrations  while  the 
remaining  five  drugs  all  seemed  to  have  similar  hemolytic  effects 
at  0.02  mg/ml.  More  sensitive  methods  are  being  employed  to  study 
lower  urug  concentrations. 

4.  Modification  of  host  drug-metabolyzing  capacity. 

a.  BacKground : 

Antimalarial  agents,  like  many  other  chemicals  and  drugs, 
are  known  to  be  biochemically  altered  by  a  variety  of  processes  in 
the  animal  body.  When  this  occurs,  the  efficacious,  toxicological 
and  pharmacological  effects  can  be  significantly  influenced.  The 
various  desirable  or  undesirable  properties  of  a  drug  may  not  be 
those  of  the  administered  parent  chemical  but  rather  those  of  its 
metabolite (s ) .  Cuch  aspects  may  bear  importantly  on  the  clinical 
value  of  new  antimalarials  bring  readied  for  trial  in  man,  this 
value  being  determined  as  mucr.  by  toxicity  as  by  antimalarial 
potency.  Consequently,  it  is  important  to  determine,  as  part  of 
the  preclinical  testing  progran  ,  if  candidate  antimalarials  undergo 


1172 


metabolism  by  the  mammalian  host  so  as  to  affect  toxicity  and 
efficacy.  The  investigative  challenge  then,  is  to  devise  animal 
model  systems  that  can  provide  some  insight  into  these  and  related 
questions  despite  the  technical  obstacles  and  inevitable  associated 
interpretational  complexities. 

Our  objective  is  to  develop  and  to  exploit  animal  models 
for  study  of  the  impact  that  pharmacokinetic  factors  may  have  on 
toxicity  and  efficacy  of  these  drugs.  Prom  these  studies  we  hope 
to  provide  a  basis  for  predicting  some  of  the  response  of  humans 
to  antimalarials  in  a  military  environment  and  to  help  fulfill 
requirement  for  submission  of  IND’s  for  clinical  trials  of  new 
antimalarials . 

In  last  year's  Annual  Progress  Report  we  described  a  new 
mouse  model  designed  as  a  presumptive  test  for  in  vivo  evaluation 
of  the  potential  roles  of  host  drug-metabolizing  enzymes  in  the 
toxicity  (uninfected  mice)  and  efficacy  (malarious  mice)  of  anti- 
malarial  agents.  Many  of  these  enzymes  are  either  induced  by 
phenobarbital  or  inhibited  by  SKF  525A.  An  observed  change  in 
the  toxicity  and/or  in  the  parasitemia-suppressing  potency  of  an 
antimalarial  after  such  pretreatment  is  taken  as  presumptive 
evidence  of  the  participation  of  host  drug-metabolizing  enzymes. 
Results  may  point  to  the  existence  of  active  metabolites.  The 
usefulness  of  this  experimental  approach  has  been  further  broaden¬ 
ed  by  expanded  testing  of  candidate  antimalarials. 

Results  from  the  initial  exploration  of  another  potentially 
useful  in  vivo  test  system  are  also  given.  It  entails  the  charac¬ 
terization,  by  phase  contrast  microscopy,  of  the  morphology  of 
hemozoin  pigment  granules  in  endoerythrocytic  malarial  parasites 
in  response  to  treatment  of  the  infected  mouse  with  ar  t imalar ials 
and  other  agents . 

b.  Methods : 

Female  CD-I  mice,  7-9  weeks  old,  were  injected  intraperi- 
toneally  (i.p.)  with  freshly  prepared  inocula  of  red  cells  infected 
with  the  drug-sensitive  KBG  173  strain  of  P_.  berghei .  Approximately 
5  x  105  parasitized  erythrocytes  were  injected  into  each  mouse, 
producing  an  experimentally  suitable  prolonged  course  of  infection 
resulting  in  death.  Antimalarial  agents  were  given  once  orally  by 
stomach  tube  as  a  solution  or  suspension  in  0.9%  saline  containing 
0.4%  Tween  80  and  0.2%  methyl  cellulose  (MCTVM.  Control  animals 
received  the  vehicle  only 

Liver  microsomal  enzymes  were  induced  by  3  daily  (Days  0,1,  2) 
i.p.  injections  of  phenobarbital  sodium  (100  mg/kg)  dissolved  in 
water.  We  have  found  that  this  phenobarbital  pretreatment  regimen 

1173 


v 


V 


reduces  hexobarbital-induced  sleeping  time  from  30  minutes  to 
about  5  minutes.  The  first  phenobarbital  treatment  was  given  1 
hour  before  antimalarial  parasite  inoculation  (Day  0)  and  the 
antimalarial  drugs  were  given  on  Day  3,  one  day  after  the  third 
phenobarbital  injection.  The  an timalarials  were  routinely  given 
in  suppressive  but  not  curacive  doses. 

To  produce  inhibition  of  hepati  ;  drug-metabolizing  enzymes, 

SKF  525A  (50  mg/kg)  was  given  once  i.p.  45  to  60  minutes  before 
oral  antimalarial  drug  treatment  on  Day  3.  Controls  received  i.p. 
saline  only.  This  SKF  525A  pretreatment  caused  prolongation  of 
hexobarbital  sleeping  time  to  4  hours  in  mice  dosed  as  above. 
Ordinarily  by  24  hours,  however,  this  inhibitory  effect  is  reversed, 
being  supplanted  by  a  state  of  enzyme  stimulation. 

Parasitemia  was  determined  on  Days  3 ,  7  ,  10  and  14  of  infec¬ 
tion  by  examination  of  at  least  250  RBC  in  Giemsa-stained  thin 
blood  films  and  is  expressed  as  percentage  of  cells  parasitized. 

On  these  days,  smears  were  taken  1-2  hours  before  the  daily  mortal¬ 
ity  check.  The  Day  3  smear  was  taken  before  antimalarial  treatment. 
Mortality  was  routinely  followed  daily  for  14  days  or  longer  if 
necessary . 

The  main  criterion  used  for  judging  that  the  pretreatment 
regimens  affected  the  parasitemia-suppressing  action  of  the  test 
antimalarial  is  a  statistically  significant  difference  in  para¬ 
sitemia  levels  between  the  ant imalar ial-treated  mice  which  were 
pretreated  with  phenobarbital  or  SKF  525A  and  antimalariai-treated 
mice  which  were  pretreated  with  vehicle  only.  Comparison  of  para¬ 
sitemia  levels  between  the  latex  mice  and  those  receiving  no  anti- 
malarial,  shows  the  degree  of  parasitemia  suppression  effected  by 
the  antimalarial  at  the  ordinarily  subcurative  dose  level  purposely 
used . 


c.  Results  and  discussion: 

i .  Effect  of  phenobarbital  or  SKF  525A  pretreatment 
on  acute  oral  toxicity  of  primaquine 

Phenobarbital  pretreatment  afforded  mice  significant 
protection  against  the  lethal  effects  of  a  large,  single  dose  of 
primaquine.  The  magnitude  of  this  protection  and  the  effects  of 
SKF  525A  pretreatment  on  the  LD^q's  were  determined  and  compared 
in  uninfected  mice.  Primaquine  in  MCTW  was  administered  once  by 
stomach  tube  either  1  day  after  the  third  injection  of  phenobarbital 
on  1  hour  after  SKF  525A.  Cumulative  mortality  for  7  days  after 
primaquine  was  the  parameter  used  to  estimate  the  LDc^by  probit 
analysis  of  quantal  response  according  to  Finney. 


1174 


The  results  show  that  the  LD.0  of  primaquine  for  mice 
pretreated  with  phenobarbital  was  more  than  twice  that  for  the 
vehicle  controls  and  almost  twice  that  for  the  SKF  525A-pretreated 
mice.  The  figures,  in  mg/kg,  for  the  means  and  95%  confidence 
limits  were  337  (305-373)  for  primaquine,  712  (615-826)  for  pheno- 
barbital  pretreatment  and  396  (335-469)  for  SKF  525A  pretreatment. 
The  reduction  of  primaquine  lethality  by  phenobarbital  pretreatment 
suggests  that  drug-metabolizing  enzymes  serve  to  detoxify  prima¬ 
quine  and/or  its  metabolites.  The  SKF  525A  results  suggest  that 
this  inhibitor  does  not  affect  the  phenobarbital  inducible  enzymes 
responsible  for  the  effects  observed  with  primaquine.  This  tenta¬ 
tive  interpretation  requires  further  study,  however. 

ii.  Effect  of  phenobarbital  or  SKF  525A  pretreatment  on 
the  efficacy  of  candidate  antimalarial  agents 

The  results  obtained  from  the  screening  of  nine  candi¬ 
date  antimalar ials  are  shown  in  Table  1  and  are  summarized  in  Table 
2.  Neither  phenobarbital  nor  SKF  525A  by  themselves  altered  the 
course  of  P.  berghei  infection.  All  of  the  agents  (Table  2)  show 
a  significant  alteration  in  antimalarial  activity  in  response  to 
the  phenobarbital  and/or  SKF  525A  pretreatments.  This  is  inter¬ 
preted  as  meaning  that  all  undergo  metabolism  in  the  mouse. 
Phenobarbital  pretreatment  (Table  2)  had  no  effect  on  the  activity 
of  two  agents,  caused  a  decrease  in  six,  and  an  increase  in  one, 

SKF  525A  pretreatment  resulted  in  increases  in  activity  of  eight  of 
the  agents  and  had  no  effect  on  the  remaining  one. 

Several  distinctive  patterns  of  change  in  antimalarial 
activity  after  phenobarbital  and  SKF  525A  pretreatments  were 
observed.  The  most  common  one,  exhibited  by  five  of  the  nine 
agents ,  was  a  decrease  after  phenobarbital  and  an  increase  after 
SKF  525A.  This  particular  pattern  strongly  suggests  that : 
metabolism  serves  to  terminate  the  antimalarial  activity  of  these 
agents;  that  parent  chemical,  not  a  metabolite,  is  responsible 
for  antimalarial  action;  interactions  between  these  agents  and 
other  medications  that  may  affect  drug  metabolism  are  a  distinct 
clinical  possibility;  enzyme-inducers  such  as  phenobarbital  might 
be  useful  in  helping  rid  the  body  of  these  agents  when  the  thera¬ 
peutic  effects  are  no  longer  required;  and  in  view  of  the  results 
with  SKF  525A,  structural  modification  of  these  agents  at  possible 
sites  susceptible  to  metabolic  attack  may  be  helpful  in  increasing 
their  antimalarial  potency. 

In  the  case  of  WR  33,063,  both  phenobarbital  and  SKF 
525A  increased  its  antimalarial  activity.  The  increase  in  efficacy 
produced  by  SKF  525A  was  significantly  greater  than  that  elicited 
by  phenobarbital  (Table  1)  and  resulted  in  four  cures,  no  cures 
being  seen  in  any  of  the  other  parallel  groups.  The  phenobarbital- 
induced  increase  suggests  that  a  more  potent  metabolite  is  produced 

1175 


by  the  host.  The  still  greater  increase  in  antimalarial  activity 
produced  by  SKF  525A  might  be  interpreted  to  signify  that  the 
metabolism  of  the  active  metabolite,  but  not  the  metabolism  of  the 
parent  compound,  may  have  been  inhibited.  This  interpretation  allows 
that  the  parent  compound  may  itself  possess  some  antimalarial 
activity  and  may  contribute  to  the  result. 

It  is  interesting  that  the  sulfide  form  of  the  thio- 
quinazoline  WR  154,928  and  its  corresponding  sulfonyl  analogue 
WR  158 ,122  .exhibited  similar  antimalarial  activities  (Table  3) 
and  identical  responses  after  the  phenobarbital  and  SKF  525A 
pretreatment  (Table  1),  viz.,  no  change  in  efficacy  after  the 
former  and  an  increase  after  the  latter.  If  phenobarbital  affects 
the  enzymes  involved  in  the  metabolism  of  these  agents,  the  meta¬ 
bolites  are  neither  more  nor  less  potent  than  the  parent  chemical* 
However,  the  increased  activity  produced  by  SKF  525A  pretreatment 
indicates  that  the  two  pretreatment s  do  not  affect  all  of  the 
same  enzyme  systems  that  act  on  the  drug. 

WR  122,455  was  the  only  drug  that  did  not  exhibit  an 
increase  in  antimalarial  activity  after  SKF  625A  pretreatment, 
but  did  show  a  decrease  in  activity  after  phenobarbital.  These 
findings  suggest  that  the  parent  compound  is  the  active  antimalarial 
and  thac  its  metabolism,  apparently  stimulated  by  phenobarbital 
pretreatment,  is  not  inhibited  by  SKF  525A. 

The  effect  of  micronization  on  the  suppressive  efficacy 
of  WR  159,412  was  investigated.  No  statistically  significant 
biological  difference  was  seen  between  micronized  and  unmicronized 
drug  at  5  mg/kg. 

In  summary,  our  experience  to  date  with  this  test 
system  affirms  its  feasibility  and  utility.  Results  obtained, 
taken  together  with  other  types  of  information,  may  prove  especially 
valuable  in  helping  to  single  out  which  of  the  prospective  new  anti- 
malarials  may  merit  more  detailed,  in  depth  metabolic  evaluations. 

d.  Effect  of  certain  antimalarial  agents  on  hemozoin  pigment 
morphology : 

Warhurst  and  coworkers  (1971a,  1971b)  have  shown  that 
chloroquine  induces  a  coalescence  of  hemozoin  pigment  in  malaria 
parasites  in  vivo ,  an  effect  which  can  be  inhibited  by  i.p.  pre¬ 
treatment  with  certain  antimalarials .  While  this  technique  is  now 
apparently  being  pursued  exclusively  in  vitro  by  that  group,  we 
have  elaborated  on  various  in  vivo  aspects  by  modifying  the  proce¬ 
dure.  For  example,  we  are  using  oral  administration  to  yield 
information  appropriate  for  inclusion  in  an  IND.  This  would 


include  evidence  of  absorption  from  the  GI  tract  and  entry  into 
the  parasite.  The  effect  of  various  vehicles,  formulations  and/or 
drug  combinations  on  absorption  can  also  be  studied  in  this  system. 

We  found  that  a  dose  of  40  mg/kg  of  chloroquine  i.p.  caused 
no  deaths  and  induced  clumping  to  an  extent  satisfactory  for  its 
establishment  as  the  standard  dose  in  our  mice  (Charles  River, 

CD-I,  females). 

Eighty  minutes  after  chloroquine ,  phase  microscopic  examina¬ 
tion  of  unfixed,  unstained  thin  films  of  blood  from  infected 
mice  revealed  clumps  of  fully  aggregated  pigment  (Type  III  mor¬ 
phology)  in  a  population  of  our  berghei  (the  drug-sensitive  KBG 
173  strain).  At  shorter  time  intervals,  e.g.,  30-40  minutes  after 
chloroquine,  some  'parasites  had  fully  aggregated  pigment  clumps, 
while  other  demonstrated  only  a  partial  aggregation  of  pigment 
(Type  II  morphology).  We  refer  to  this  combination  in  a  micro¬ 
scope  field  of  both  total  and  partial  aggregation  of  pigment  as 
partial  clumping.  Prior  to  chloroquine,  smaller  pigment  granules 
were  dispers'd  more  evenly  throughout  the  parasite  (Type  1  mor¬ 
phology).  These  observations  indicate  a  transformation  aftei 
chloroquine  from  fine  pigment  through  a  transitional  granular  type, 
to  a  final  clumped  appearance,  which  persisted  at  least  6  hours. 

Mice  inoculated  with  1  x  10^  parasitized  RBC  showed  an 
experimentally  suitable  parasitemia  of  approximately  15%  on  Day  3. 
The  test  drug  was  administered  before  chloroquine  and  the  effect  on 
C-IPC  (chloroquine-induced  pigment  clumping)  was  determined  by 
examination  of  thin  blood  films  (50  parasitized  RBC)  taken  at  inter¬ 
vals  after  chloroquine  <  The  percentage  distribution  of  the  three 
pigment  types  is  compared  to  determine  the  degree  of  test  drug- 
induced  alterations,  if  any. 

We  confirmed  that  i.p.  administration  of  WR  33,063  or  WR  30  ,090 
•caused  inhibition  of  C-IPC  (Warhurst  ejt  al.  ,  1972). 

To  study  shorter  intervals  between  drug  pretreatment  and  chloroquine 
administration  in  our  exploration  of  the  oral  effect  of  several 
agents ,  we  administered  test  drugs  as  soon  as  30  minutes  before 
chloroquine  and  examined  pigment  morphology  as  early  as  30  minutes 
after  chloroquine.  As  mentioned  above,  a  typical  microscope  field 
reveals  partial  clumping  of  pigment  30  or  40  minutes  after  chloro¬ 
quine.  Inhibition  (either  partial  or  total)  of  this  partial 
clumping  may  be  detected  by  comparison  with  groups  receiving 
chloroquine  alone.  This  differentiation  is  useful  not  only  in 
demonstrating  gradations  of  effect  but  also  may  be  used  to  quanti¬ 
tate  the  time  course  of  drug  absorption. 


V 


Table  4  illustrates  our  results  with  WR  3G,Q9Q  and 
WR  33,063,  both  of  which  had  a  direct  effect  on  the  parasite  within 
a  total  time  of  60  minutes.  WR  30  ,090  at  10  mg/kg  had  a  greater 
effect  than  640  mg/kg  of  WR  33,063  after  a  total  time  of  60  minutes 
Neither  of  these  agents  themselves  caused  pigment  clumping  in  the 
doses  studied.  Thus,  it  appears  that  by  1  hour  enough  of  each 
drug,  when  given  by  gavage ,  had  been  absorbed  to  affect  the  para¬ 
site  directly. 

An  attempt  was  made  to  compare  two  formulations  of  WR  30,090, 
one  with  Cab-0-sil  vs.  the  corresponding  preparation  containing  no 
Cab-0-sil.  Table  4  illustrates  that  all  test  doses  were  too  well 
absorbed  to  demonstrate  a  difference  in  bioavailability  between  the 
two  formulations.  Doses  lower  than  10  mg/kg  will  have  to  be  used 
to  yield  data  allowing  a  distinction. 

SKF  525A  alone  does  not  alter  the  course  of  berghei 
infection.  However,  since  we  very  often  find  increased  efficacy  of 
antimalarials  (8  of  9  compounds  tested  so  far.  Table  2)  after 
pretrea^ment  of  infected  mice  with  SKF  525A,  we  have  considered  the 
possibil.  "y  that  SKF  525A  may  have  some  subtle  direct  effect  on 
the  parasite  in  addition  to  its  routinely-used  inhibitory  effect 
on  host  biotransformation  enzymes .  We  therefore  lookeu  for  an 
effect  of  SKF  525A  both  on  pigment  morphology  and  on  C-IPC.  We 
have  found  that  50  mg/kg  i.p.  of  SKF  525A  given  alone  does  not 
induce  pigment  coalescence  within  450  minutes.  In  addition,  the 
compound  does  not  inhibit  C-IPC  when  given  90  minutes  before 
chloroquine,  even  when  pigment  morphology  is  followed  up  to  360 
minutes  after  chloroquine.  Therefore,  we  could  not  demonstrate 
any  effect  of  SKF  525A  on  a  population  of  parasites  by  our  method. 


1178 


V 


Table 


V 


* 


>> 

+-* 

•H 

> 

•H 

fJ 

O 

< 


m  *d 

•H  *r) 

U  *) 
rd  x: 
H  tiOj 
rd  U 
£  0) 
•H  XI 

G  \ 

<  0,| 

a)  x; 

x  h 

+J  «H 


C 

O  X) 
0) 

fj  -M 

c  o 

<D  0) 
6  Mh 
4-J  C 
rd  hh 
a> 

a; 

•m  u 
a)  *h 
g  2: 
a, 

G 

<  -H 
tO 

CN  W 


CO  rO 

i — I 

k  fd 
O  E 
•H 

rH  H 

fd  C 

< 


•H 

X) 

fc 

rd 

X 

o 

a 


<y  > 

x 

CL,  Mh 

o 

O 


L> 

O 

<u 

Mh 

Mh 

W 


|o 

a> 

a> 

/^S 

x—s 

X— s 

x— > 

x— n 

X— >> 

/'■—V 

X— S 

X— > 

X"^> 

X— ' 

x-s 

x—s 

X— V 

X— N 

/*N 

zr 

O 

00 

o 

O 

zr 

CN 

CN 

zr 

ao 

oo 

an 

lO 

zr 

fO 

CN 

00 

cn 

uo 

H 

CN 

r— 1 

H 

r~\ 

H 

H 

CN 

00 

s— x 

N— X 

"w- 

x 

N-X 

— 

S-V 

^ ' 

w 

'• — 

V— X 

NX 

'w' 

>! 

to 

to 

o 

00 

tO 

00 

o 

zr 

zr 

ao 

ao 

CN 

ID 

o 

tO 

CN 

as 

» 

• 

1 

• 

1 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

a 

CN 

cr> 

r- 

to 

CN 

CN 

m 

CN 

zr 

zr 

H 

00 

00 

<H 

cn 

cn 

in 

oo 

CN 

tO 

tO 

tO 

m 

in 

zr 

zr 

zr 

zr 

UO 

i — i 

d 

V 

o 

a; 

d) 

■V 

/— s. 

<<*■■>, 

x— s 

X— S 

x-*s 

^ — s 

/ — s 

/•— N 

/— s 

x^«s 

x^S 

X — s 

X— v 

/  - 

X - s 

x—v 

X-N 

o 

to 

to 

oo 

CN 

zr 

00 

zr 

CN 

X 

00 

to 

in 

cn 

oo 

uo 

uo 

tN 

CN 

H 

a. 

H 

00 

CM 

H 

CN 

rL 

CN 

rH 

H 

H 

H 

CN 

CO 

00 

1 — j 

H 

»H 

rd 

'w' 

N-/ 

x 

^ ' 

'w' 

>w 

S^x 

VwX 

S*x 

v— X 

s^x 

N _ X 

N_X 

V _ X 

N^x 

'w' 

u 

>* 

to 

CN 

o 

CN 

zr 

O 

ao 

ao 

CN 

CN 

o 

zr 

CN 

CN 

zr 

l D 

O 

CN 

Q) 

fd 

1 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

♦ 

« 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

X 

Q 

o 

00 

m 

CN 

to 

o 

o 

zr 

00 

00 

00 

o 

UO 

o 

O 

CN 

00 

H 

zr 

zT 

zr 

rH 

zr 

in 

CO 

oo 

oo 

’ — 1 

1 — 1 

CN 

CN 

rH 

O 

w 

<u 

a 

uo 

/**n 

e 

e 

<D 

0) 

,  a> 

e 

e 

0) 

c 

00 

/■N 

X— * 

x— s 

x— s 

r-“N 

^■n 

/« — v 

x*^. 

X— \ 

x— S 

x~"s 

x-v 

X-^v 

X — V 

X— X 

x—N 

0 

LO 

zT 

00 

CN 

zr 

CN 

zr 

CN 

CN 

o 

o 

OO 

•H 

OO 

tn 

n 

CN 

CN 

»H 

a 

CN 

00 

' — I 

<— 1 

CN 

CN 

CN 

r— ( 

•H 

CN 

CN 

c\ 

CN 

CN 

00 

ro 

' — 1 

<H 

rH 

w 

>> 

s-x 

V— X 

N—X 

■s _ ✓ 

^ ^ 

'w' 

w 

1 — X 

S»X 

V 

-- _ X 

s^x 

■wX 

N_X 

VwX 

0) 

fd 

zT 

o 

zr 

00 

o 

O 

o 

CO 

tO 

O 

CN 

to 

zr 

CN 

o 

CN 

o 

ao 

ao 

Oi 

Q 

cn 

m 

uo 

00 

o 

*-H 

o 

o 

zr 

c- 

, 

tn 

CN 

H 

CN 

zr 

r- 

ao 

CN 

X 

CN 

zr 

H 

oo 

CN 

CN 

d 

»-*v 

tO 

/— \ 

/^s 

- — \ 

X—V 

/— N 

/—S 

/ — \ 

x*-s 

<x-N 

x-N 

X~N 

X~N 

X*"N 

X-N 

x-*v 

x-V 

00 

00 

to 

tD 

CN 

zt 

CN 

zr 

CN 

CM 

o 

o 

OO 

CN 

CO 

to 

to 

CN 

CN 

CN 

zt 

CO 

00 

H 

CN 

CN 

CN 

H 

H 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CO 

CO 

>H 

i — 1 

'•wx 

N - X 

NwX 

_ _ ' 

V— ' 

'w/ 

Sw' 

'w' 

vwX 

S-X 

N*xX 

>^X 

«wX 

V _ X 

N«X 

rd 

CN 

o 

o 

o 

zj- 

zr 

O 

CN 

O 

o 

zr 

zr 

00 

o 

o 

zr 

zr 

zr 

o 

a 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

• 

* 

• 

* 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

a 

% 

4-> 

C  ^ 

G 

1 

a>  * 

O 

OJ 

e  a 

> 

CL 

GO 

> 

CL 

GO 

> 

PL 

> 

cn 

> 

CL 

GO 

> 

CL 

> 

0L 

cn 

u 

4-»  • 

#1 

CL 

fd  «H 

GO 

(U  W 

c 

* 

4-> 

CL 

X“S 

bO 

00 

a>  ^ 

O 

LO 

in 

o 

O 

(0  \ 

1 

uo 

LO 

CN 

CN 

rH 

>. 

0  bo 

fd 

a  e 

Q 

c 

0 

>1 

a 

W 

Q 

a 

CL 

< 

»-0 

< 

< 

< 

rd 

< 

Ci 

to 

O 

CN 

CN 

a) 

V 

zT 

o 

cn 

H 

CN 

X 

a 

cn 

cn 

zr 

zt 

*H 

H 

a) 

o 

o 

n 

r. 

bO 

00 

CN 

CD 

00 

H 

< 

zT 

o 

zr 

in 

uo 

rd 

H 

00 

«— i 

H 

rH 

U 

H 

O 

U 

c* 

C£ 

04 

14 

(X 

s 

•x 

X 

< 


1 


1179 


! 


Oral  Therapy  on  Day  3  Responses  to  Therapy 


e 

e 

y*— S  y—N  /■— N 

y— V  y — v  — s 

y-N  y-N  y— S 

\x 

r-  o  r- 

X  O  CM 

co  cn  co 

* — i 

H  H  (N 

H 

'w'  v_y 

«—✓ 

w  S«/  ^ 

>> 

d-  CM  00 

<D  O  CM 

00  if  if 

rd 

•  •  • 

•  •  • 

•  •  • 

Q 

CM  CM  J- 

CT>  CO  uo 

00  CO  o 

ij"  00  CM 

uo  CM 

in  m  cm 

a.  r d  X 

<D  w 

$ 


i — ihhcnoocnhcnojcncncn 


CM  CD  O  00  CM  O  it  It  it  CM  If  00 


c^(j>CMitHOiroLnoorMr^ 

X  CM  CM  ir  O  .It  00 


CMCMHLO(OCMitCMltCOCOlt 
i — — |i — |  CO  CO  Oi  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  j 


Q0  O  CD  00  O  O  CJ  CM  O  CO  CM  O 


cocoxoooooouot'-  =t 

r— |  r— | 


CM  CM  CM  I  CD  OCM^tt^^J- 
rH  <H  H llco  00  CM  CM  (N  CM  CM  CM  CM 


ititOOOiDCMlfOaoCOO 
CM  CM  CM  CM  CM  H  (N  C4  (N  CM  (M  CM 


>  CD  CO  >  (D  CO  >  P<  00  >  CD  00 


to 

0) 

03 

CO 

g 

1 

X 

03 

uo 

<v 

o 

0) 

X 

X 

10 

o 

x 

> 

03 

LO 

03 

03 

t 

X 

y — \ 

•H 

* — 1 

03 

V) 

X 

G 

X 

o 

C 

CM 

X 

0J 

u 

X 

a 

03 

X 

V  A 

03 

r> 

CJ 

cj 

X 

G 

03 

S 

V 

u 

H 

03 

•H 

03 

03 

c 

G 

a 

03 

r> 

CD 

X 

m 

X 

y—s 

O 

'• — y 

CD 

,  o 

(0 

G 

CD 

03 

U. 

in 

03 

03 

X 

03 

u 

G 

X 

C 

CO 

G 

TJ 

X 

CD 

a 

,  0 

03 

C 

•H 

>1 

•H 

0 

03 

X 

> 

> 

rd 

03 

03 

U 

03 

•«H 

•H 

O 

C 

n 

x 

0) 

03 

> 

b0 

X 

£ 

■ ' 

X 

> 

CD 

03 

00 

u 

X 

o 

oj 

3 

X 

3 

03 

•rM 

r; 

>0 

g 

bn 

X 

X 

W 

G 

G 

To 

CD 

o 

rd 

E 

rd 

bO 

03 

co 

X 

> 

O 

03 

•H 

<13 

G 

c* 

03 

0 

G 

G 

CO 

to 

U 

03 

>> 

r— ( 

X 

Mh 

O 

03 

X 

x 

CD 

o 

03 

o 

E 

3 

e 

x 

03 

•H 

> 

rd 

00 

X 

X 

G 

X 

X 

UO 

a 

U 

d 

1 — 1 

bO 

o 

03 

03 

X 

3 

0 

> 

rd 

a 

X 

x 

> 

u 

0 

o 

•H 

X 

03 

• 

U 

cn 

o 

X 

> 

g 

X 

CD 

TJ 

bD 

c 

X 

•  H 

o 

03 

4-» 

U) 

03 

C 

to 

> 

G 

O 

03 

X 

> 

0 

« 

•H 

u 

G 

O 

cx 

G 

0 

03 

X 

3 

CD 

X 

0 

T3 

TJ 

G 

rd 

to 

03 

•H 

CD 

C 

03 

O 

X 

U ) 

X) 

• 

rd 

W 

X 

CO 

X 

>> 

■H 

•* 

03 

rd 

03 

0 

rd 

G 

X 

X 

u 

X 

G 

to 

TJ 

3 

txO 

X 

0) 

CO 

_ _ ' 

03 

X 

• 

g 

O 

•H 

• 

bO 

X 

X 

o 

<u 

00 

X 

03 

>> 

•H 

CO 

H 

y— \ 

X 

X 

0) 

0) 

D 

03 

> 

>, 

E 

G 

i — I 

03 

u 

3 

s_y 

(TJ 

3 

o 

>0 

X 

03 

CM 

X 

• 

Q 

C 

X 

r 

od 

nj 

>i 

3“ 

rd 

TJ 

a 

ro 

0 

U 

TJ 

> 

0) 

3 

G 

c 

y"~s 

X 

rd 

O 

X 

X 

X 

o 

o 

0 

CD 

>> 

CD 

X 

a 

0 

c 

o 

G 

03 

03 

X 

rd 

o 

bO 

• 

TJ 

Q 

•H 

W 

X 

X 

d 

•H 

CD 

CD 

03 

oo 

0 

X 

TJ 

r*H 

• 

00 

-X 

G 

•M 

TJ 

E 

03 

to 

O 

0J 

\ 

O 

03 

03 

dP 

u) 

03 

E 

a 

G 

X 

00 

U 

X 

X 

X 

3 

X 

O 

e 

/ — s 

X 

03 

X 

X 

* 

0 

C 

cQ 

C* 

CO 

X 

TJ 

r> 

3 

if) 

>> 

G 

O 

2 

CJ 

o 

O 

•H 

3c 

(/) 

rd 

X 

b0 

CJ 

o 

X 

</) 

H 

03 

U 

X 

TJ 

c?t 

1 — 1 

00 

C 

U 

rd 

X 

CM 

0) 

a) 

x: 

r* 

o 

a 

rd 

X 

X 

N 

TJ 

\ 

03 

u 

X 

X 

a 

•H 

03 

e 

bO 

G 

03 

rd 

o\° 

U 

03 

X 

X 

N 

3 

6 

•H 

pj 

X 

a 

O 

X 

X 

•H 

X 

•H 

X 

0 

o 

X 

X 

B 

X 

03 

CO 

X 

TJ 

o 

rd 

G 

•H 

X 

0 

> 

fTJ 

•H 

O 

in 

W 

X 

G 

X 

bO 

g 

to 

CO 

03 

03 

03 

V) 

bO 

G 

bO 

03 

03 

dP 

> 

TJ 

G 

X 

O 

G 

CD 

G 

H 

< 

CD 

•d 

•H 

rd 

X 

E 

*H 

» 

03 

03 

uo 

• 

03 

•H 

rd 

TJ 

y—s 

-O 

CD 

X 

CM 

O 

** 

X 

T3 

TJ 

X 

G 

X 

o 

*H 

UO 

03 

X 

03 

03 

0 

X 

O 

(0 

X 1 

o\° 

X) 

u 

S 

E 

X 

a 

03 

G 

(D 

0 

O 

TJ 

O 

03 

C0 

H 

X 

CO 

03 

x: 

Mh 

03 

X 

03 

in 

TJ 

03 

03 

X 

CO 

u 

03 

> 

w 

X 

3 

G 

G 

uo 

o 

a) 

G 

•H 

X 

rd 

rd 

G 

G 

03 

g 

Mh 

X 

03 

03 

/— n 

O 

O 

rd 

TJ 

•H 

0) 

O 

rd 

X 

O 

> 

X 

03 

O 

O 

a> 

6 

x 

S 

X 

03 

0 

D 

* — 1 

> 

03 

CD 

C 

u 

Jh 

E 

CO 

•r| 

X 

o 

r 

€S 

0 

G 

to 

O 

- 

a> 

X 

TJ 

•H 

T3 

X 

rd 

• 

>. 

G 

C 

o 

CO 

03 

X 

> 

G 

rd 

f> 

03 

/— N 

rd 

X 

o 

03 

0J 

> 

CJ 

s— y ' 

03 

X 

CO 

E 

03 

Q 

X 

g 

u 

X 

03 

X 

O 

03 

o 

03 

03 

•ro 

03 

(/) 

PM 

X 

X 

G 

O 

u 

<p 

CD 

CJ 

C 

X 

X 

U) 

s-y 

X 

B 

O 

G 

X 

o 

03 

X 

CJ 

X 

X 

rd 

• 

03 

X 

•H 

C 

g 

•H 

a 

1 

X 

U 

id 

03 

CO 

G 

B 

03 

03 

X 

w 

u 

c 

03 

00 

G 

>> 

d) 

X 

03 

G 

03 

03 

X 

03 

> 

It 

rd 

rd 

X 

H 

T> 

O 

O 

> 

G 

B 

o 

v-y 

G 

TJ 

X 

X 

■ — 1 

03 

X 

o 

X 

< 

s: 

a 

Q 

rd  uo 

u 

TJ 

03 

Table  2 


Effect  of  Phenobarbital  or  SKI’  525A  Pretreatment  on  the 
Parasitemia-Suppressing  Potency  of  Various  Antimalarials  in  Miced 


Ural  Therapy  on 
Day  3  of  Infection 

Change  in  Parasitemia 
Suppression  after 
Pretreatment  with: 

Agent 

( general  structure ) 

Dose 

(mg/kg) 

Phenobarbital^ 

SKF  525Ab 

WR  148,946 
( pyridine 
methanol ) 

5 

Decrease 

Increase 

WR  30 ,090  _ 

( quinoline 
methanol ) 

5 

Decrease 

Increase 

WR  142,490 

20 

Decrease 

Tel 

( quinoline 
methanol ) 

5 

(c) 

Increase 

WR  159,412 
( quinazoline ) 

5 

Decrease 

Increase 

WR  158,122 

20 

None 

Cc) 

( quinazoline 

10 

None 

Increase 

~WR  154,928 

( quinazoline ) 

nr 

None 

increase 

_  a 

wfe  33,063 
( phenanthrene 
methanol ) 

160 

"Increase 

lncreaseu 

wr  T7T7F5T" 

(phenanthrene 
methanol ) 

2 . 5 

Decrease 

Increase 

WR  122,455 
(phenanthrene 
methanol) 

“5” 

Decrease 

rJone 

aAll  mice  given  5  x  10^  infected  RBC  i.p.  on  Day  0. 

^Relative  to  that  observed  in  infected  mice  receiving  antimalarial 
but  no  phenobarbital  or  SKF  525A. 

Experiment  not  done. 

^The  increase  in  antimalarial  activity  was  unequivocably  greater 
after  SKF  525A  than  after  phenobarbital. 

1181 


Lack  of  Effect  of  the  State  of  Sulfur  Oxidation  on  the  Ant imalarial  Activity  of  Two 
uinazoline  Sulfides  and  Their  Corresponding  Sulfones  in  Mice  Infected  with  P.  berghe ia 


I 


o 

•H 

.C 

0H 


o 

y-N 

•H 

H 

tt) 

r- 

>> 

CN 

If 

ft) 

• 

• 

* 

• 

Q 

J- 

X) 

CO 

CN 

00 

3- 

H 

J- 

/"N 

/-s 

✓ - N 

X) 

O 

CN 

CN 

H 

H 

>> 

r-» 

r- 1 

H 

H 

cx 

V _ / 

'w' 

N— ' 

' — ' 

rd 

00 

CO 

c0 

CN 

U 

a) 

• 

• 

• 

• 

0) 

Q 

J- 

o 

cn 

sx 

H 

CN 

H 

H 

0 

4-» 

(d 

0) 

w 

x—>\ 

✓-N 

✓~\ 

c 

r\i 

CN 

H 

CN 

o 

H 

H 

H 

a 

>i 

w- 

- — ' 

'w' 

w 

ft) 

O 

O 

O 

00 

a) 

a 

• 

> 

• 

• 

o 

o 

no 

✓— "N 

/— N 

no 

CN 

CN 

H 

CN 

<— I 

r— I 

H 

H 

«*_✓ 

•w^ 

S—* < 

rd 

O 

J- 

O 

3- 

Q 

• 

• 

» 

• 

CN 

CN 

CN 

CN 

a) 

' — 1 

U 

X) 

>> 

CD 

a> 

g 

X) 

-M 

G 

0 

•H 

a 

aJ 

Mh 

<4h 

d 

04 

r— 1 

rH 

u 

£ 

G 

3 

4~> 

0 

CO 

CO 

00 

CJ 

a> 

DO 

CO 

w 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

N 

CN 

H 

CN 

H 

>» 

Q 

DO 

fd 

£ 

Q 

w 

G 

o 

>> 

O 

UJ 

04 

< 

< 

aJ 

G 

CN 

00 

a) 

a 

CN 

CN 

.c 

4-> 

H 

cn 

H 

g 

*> 

* 

a) 

00 

j- 

i— ( 

DO 

LO 

LO 

rd 

< 

1 — 1 

H 

G 

O 

✓— s 

tn 

lO 

CN 

00 

1 

G 

cn 

00 

CU 

CN 

no 

a)  >> 

O4  'H 

' — 1 

in 

ca 

•H 

C  4-* 

/-~N 

✓“N 

5  W 

o 

o 

O  *H 

H 

H 

x:  f-< 

V— ✓ 

fd 

3* 

3* 

•H 

• 

• 

a»  w 

LO 

cn 

mic 

is 

DO  GO 

c  cx 

•H  d 
>  O 

/“"s 

/*N 

>  DO 

o 

o 

u 

1 — 1 

1 — 1 

0  c 

s _ ✓ 

S— ✓ 

0)  0 

CN 

3 

C/) 

• 

• 

H 

1 — 1 

0  Sm 

a) 

• 

Im  a, 

o 

CD  £ 

hQ  0 

£  O 

ft) 

3 

Q 

C  C 

/—v 

✓ — \ 

a) 

O 

o 

C 

G  CD 

H 

rH 

O 

O  3  • 

v_/ 

'w' 

4-j  ^ 

00 

3 

• 

x)  a)  -m 

• 

• 

rx 

(D  X)  (/) 

* — 1 

CN 

• 

GO  (D 

♦H 

fd  W  H 

X)  <D 

O 

u 

§ 

^  G  C 

0  a)  fd 

PQ  ^ 

X) 

OX  <D 

* — t 

a> 

lH  W 

a) 

N 

X>  4h  - 

g 

X) 

•H 

<D  *a  c 

o 

■H 

CN  X)  0 

4h 

U-l 

•H 

•H  X 

p— 1 

-1 

(/) 

■M  4-»  0 

3 

rd 

•H  C  O 

CO 

LO 

W  (D  H 

• 

m 

cd  G  »h 

C>4 

G  (d  3: 

H 

ft)  04 

a 

lT; 

O4  O4  ►>> 

is 

O 

rd  X 

H 

o\° 

c 

ai  lo 

•a 

o 

O 

X 

co  t  0 

< — 1 

H 

rd  O  • 

x) 

to 

O 

CD 

rd  mh  a 

X) 

X) 

•H  O 

C 

CD 

£  O4 

CD 

> 

a;  a)  w 

a, 

•H 

0  c 

w 

0) 

•H  0  4-» 

d 

PQ 

n 

o 

to  2  a 

Cd 

< 

< 

0) 

rd  fd 

0  0 

Cd 

00 

CN 

rd  •  *H 

+J 

l> 

H 

a> 

04  GO  Mh 

G 

00 

o 

a)  *h 

CD 

r- 

«> 

•H 

c  GO  c 

DO 

CN 

cn 

£ 

rd  (D  DO 

fd 

CD 

LO 

♦H  X  *H 

r- 1 

«— 1 

r— 1 

X)  O  GO 

H 

i — 1 

CD 

C X 
& 

OcJ 

<? 

1 


1 


\ 


1182 


Effects  of  Antimalarials  on  Chloroquine-Induced  Figment  Clumping 


V 


G 

cd 

0) 

OZ 


03 

d) 

E 

P  ^ 
H  G 
P 

H  E 


0 

H 


oJ  a 

CN.p 

V  E 


oj  c 

HP 
P  E 


o 

g  o 

(D  P 

P  E 
E 

G  P 
2S  O 


d> 

CO  ^ 

O  bo 
Q  ^ 
N 
H  bd) 
03  E 
G  w 
O 


b0 

G 

G 

CG 


<  W  cq  Q  O  Q  U 


o  o  o  o  o  o  o 

P  O  CM  tD  H  D  H 

P  P  CN  <H  H 


O  O  ^ 
00  p 


O  O  O  O 
00  00  00  00 


o  o  o 

co  r  oo  to  :  z  z 

00  H 


lo  oo  oo  r 


o 

o 

P  r 

Z  Z  Z  X) 

CD 

P 

2 

< 

00 

CD 

O 

*> 

oo 

00 

c*; 


0 

X> 

G 

PQ 

< 

PQ  PQ 

B 

B 

0 

P 

P 

G 

■ 

cd  G 

a4 

•• 

bO 

03  0 

0 

b£ 

C 

2  CP 

P 

G 

•H 

0 

*r| 

r  CP 

>>  0 

H 

S 

bd  E 

U)  P 

P 

0 

G  3 

0  P 

a 

H 

•H  i — 1 

H 

H 

CP  O 

o  id 

• 

0 

P 

p  p 

bd  p 

3  *“l 

a 

• 

r*H  03 

G  * 

dJ 

d) 

a  *h 

O 

o 

o 

o 

0  cn 

P 

p 

tD 

* — 1 

CD  Z 

cd  r 

E  P 

r> 

P 

rH  P 

H 

Cd 

03  03 

4->  XJ 

CP 

0 

•h  a 

C  C 

G 

p 

p 

0  03 

0 

P  CM 

E 

P 

p 

03  O 

bd  H 

bO 

d) 

CP 

P  P 

p 

G 

a 

H 

d) 

P  O 

1  CM 

O 

p 

0  *H 

X)  0 

P 

P 

g 

P 

G 

G  *H 

03  E 

c 

E 

0  P 

O 

O 

O 

o 

d 

o 

G 

♦H  P 

oo 

00 

oo  r 

oo  r 

0  f: 

a 

P 

P  P 

c 

0 

*h  q 

P  (1) 

d> 

CJ 

P  -H 

a  p 

p 

•rH 

a4  p 

03 

cd 

P  H 

o 

P 

P 

G  03 

G  * 

P 

rH 

•H  »H 

O  d 

CP 

G 

P 

H  E 

0 

id 

H  p 

XI  P 

p 

d> 

t  03 

o 

o 

o 

O  P 

a 

P 

P  CP 

00 

j; 

ro  o 

oo  r 

cp 

0 

0  rH 

03 

d) 

H  » 

G  03 

P 

O  P 

• 

xc 

p 

1  Q 

* 

P  O 

P 

p 

X 

d)  H 

c 

•H 

G 

PQ  ^ 

< 

P 

a> 

£ 

•H 

b£) 

bO 

^  C 

o 

H  • 

o3 

Cd 

Cd 

bO  P 

CD 

p  d) 

G 

H 

C  CP  o 

c 

p 

0 

0 

p  e 

* 

d)  P 

cd 

cd 

P 

(P  G 

o 

i  i  0 

lo  r 

E  C3 

d) 

•H 

E 

E  H 

X; 

•H  CJ*  p 

P 

g  a 

P  0 

03 

00 

H 

G 

P 

CP 

0  P 

P  o 

0 

E 

03 

03  <H 

0 

* 

r-i  P 

P 

P 

G 

rj 

a 

03  0 

0 

X3  O 

0 

p 

P  P 

d) 

P 

c 

d) 

0 

Cd 

G  G 

P 

0 

P  cp 

E 

<D  0 

03 

0 

G 

P  P 

G 

XJ 

Cd 

p 

a> 

cd  P 

p 

d) 

rH 

0  G 

p 

•H  03 

Cd 

Cd 

0 

O 

o 

o  o 

o  o 

C 

P 

03 

p 

C  P 

G 

00 

H  CN 

H  CN 

•rt  C\C 

P 

p 

0  P 

•H 

E  P 

•H 

G 

P  P 

XJ 

E 

d3 

0 

P  P 

X3 

03  d> 

X3 

P 

a 

•H  P 

(U 

E 

03 

03 

P  P 

Cd 

d)  P 

d) 

P  c 

Cd 

G  P 

G 

Cd 

H 

p  p 

0) 

a; 

0 

C 

O 

G 

G 

/■“S 

£  p 

P 

0 

■H 

•H  P 

CP 

1 

' - 1 

03 

P 

•H 

P 

03 

a 

• — 1 

P 

Cd 

03 

P 

d) 

H  P 

d) 

,  x> 

X  *H 

X  Cd 

P  X3 

03 

> 

03  P 

< 

<  Cd 

<  1 

c  0 

x) 

P 

P  G 

d) 

1 

O 

d>  G 

d) 

cu 

0  03 

G 

o 

o  o 

O  I 

bOP 

cd 

P 

d) 

H  CP 

03 

cn 

CD  1 

CD  P 

O  rB 

03  E 

cp 

CP 

G 

o 

O  P 

03 

03 

p 

0 

1  1 

td 

*  03 

*  o 

P  X 

H 

d> 

H 

0 

o 

O  CJ 

o 

cd  0 

0 

p 

03 

A 

C 

cd 

oo 

00 

oo  dp 

d> 

G 

o 

o 

O 

H 

M 

Q 

X 

PC  ^ 

PC  CN 

S  w 

DC  w 

03 

P 

J 

1183 


V 


V 


Summary  and  Conclusions 

The  use  of  human  malarial  parasites-both  falciparum  and  P_.  vivax- 
in  standardized  animal  systems  continues  to  permit  selection  and 
chemical  development  of  new  structure  leads  which  do  not  show 
cross  resistance  against  human  strains  of  interest.  Clinical  and 
field  evaluation  of  these  candidate  antimalarials  is  progressing 
at  a  rapid  pace.  Preclinical  studies  during  this  year  have  resulted 
in  the  submission  and  approval  of  4  new  Investigational  New  Drug 
Applications  and  15  Supplements.  Promising  new  chemical  leads  have 
been  uncovered  that  await  development  as  therapeutic  and  prophylactic 
antimalarials.  The  status  of  the  Antimalaria  Drug  Development 
Program  supports  the  recommendation  that  research  and  development 
effort  be  continued  at  the  present  level.  In-depth  evaluation  of  new 
chemicals  and  efforts  to  improve  the  bioavailability  of  our  present 
clinical  drugs  are  necessities.  Program  changes  have  been  made 
to  emphasize  these  needs. 


1184 


Project  3A663713D829  MALARIA  PROPHYLAXIS 
Task  00,  Malaria  Investigations 
Work  Unit  134  Malaria  investigations 
Literature  Cited, 

References : 


1.  Warhurst,  D,  C.  and  Robinson,  B.  L.  ;  Cytotoxic  agents  and 
haemozoin  pigr.ent  in  malaria  parasites  (Plasmodium  berghei). 

Life  Sciences  10  :  755-760,  1971a, 

2.  Warhurst,  D.  C.  ,  and  Robinson,  B.L.  ,  Howells,  R.  E.  and  Peters,  W. 
The  effect  of  cytotoxic  agents  on  authophagic  vacuole  formation 

in  chloroquine-treated  malaria  parasites  (Plasmodium  berghei). 

Life  Sciences  10.  761-771,  1967b. 

3.  Warhurst,  D.  C.  ,  Homewood,  C.  A.,  Peters,  W.  and  Baggaley,  V.  C.: 

Pigment  changes  in  Plasmodium  berghei  as  indicators  of  activity 
and  mode  of  action  of  antimalarial  drugs.  Proc.  Helminth.  Soc, 
Wash.  39:  271-278,  1972. 

Publication : 


1.  Rozman,  R.  S.:  Chemotherapy  of  malaria.  ^nn.  Rev.  Pharmacol., 
13:  127-152,  1973. 


V 


S  DATE  PN1V  »UM*RV 

72  07  01 

4  KINO  OF  SUMMARY 

H.Terminatioi 

•  SUMMARY  ICTY* 

u 

S.  WORK  SECURITY* 

u 

»  RIBRADINO* 

NA 

»R  Dt 

trR  INSTR*N 

NL 

•hi  SPECIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

Kyi*  Ono 

S.  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  «0M  uni  r 

10  NO  /CODES:*  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

A.  PRIMARY 

63713A 

3A663713D829 

00 

136 

b.  CONTRIBUTING 

ruCiMfMiMVMlMF 

CD0G  114(f) 

II  START  DATE - 

66  12 

72  08 

t»  FUNDING  A  OENC  Y 

DA  | 

is  performance  mcVhoo 

C.  In-Houee 

IT.  CONTRACT/ORANT 

A  DATES/E  ELECTIVE  EXPIRATION 

b*  NUMBER  * 

C  TYPE:  d  AMOUNT: 

*  KIND  OF  ABARO:  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

•S  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

R.  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  VRS 

6.  FUNDS  (fa  itoManSa) 

fiscal 

YEAR 

pRKCTdTNS 

72 

2 

60 

CUNNK«/V 

73 

2 

60 

IS  RESPONSIBLE  OOO  ORGANISATION  j! 

10  PERFORMING  ORGANISATION  | 

RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


I  ABENCT  ACCESSION* 

DA  OA  6535 


a  OATS  o F  SUMMARY* 

72  08  01 


Mpour  co# mot  anraot 


(U)  Metabolic  and  Enzymatic  Studies  of  Normal  and  Malarial  Infected  Red  Cells 
- - 


II.  SCIENTIFIC  AN o  technological  arias' 

002600  BIOLOGY 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

NAM*  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 

t.linhonf  202-576-3551 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
iNtd&ivision  of  Medicine 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IN  VtlTIGA  TON  (Furtll*  S SAX  It  V  S.  Inillhillm*) 

"“■*  McCormick,  G.  J.,  Ph.D. 

TiLi'MMt  202-576-249^^^^^^^ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUHStA 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOATONS 

AMI: 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 
nrTTv’ii  ^ds  TFSctSTRS  sir  Ttsssf/trsnst  c*z»j 

(U)  Malaria;  (U)  Antlmalarlals;  (U)  Parasite;  (U)  Red  Blood  Cell 


-BA. 


I.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  It  APPROACH,  IS  PROGRESS  iiM»W AMI  l4mUU»4  Nr  atMkM  prec.P*  leal  .1  ..cA  Jar tmltr  Cl—tttf  "t*  C*N  | 

23.  (U)  Document  metabolic  alterations  of  human  and  animal  red  blood  cells  when 
infected  with  malaria  parasites  and  to  assess  the  effect  of  antimalarial  drugs  on 
these  alterations  in  order  to  develop  new  drugs  effective  against  resistant  falciparum 
malaria. 

24.  (U)  Measure  the  effect  of  antimalarial  drugs  on  morphologic  growth,  14-C  adenosine 
14-C  methionine  or  14-C  orotic  acid  incorporation  during  in  vitro  schizogony  and  observe 
utilization  of  metabolic  precursors  of  nucleic  acids;  to  measure  folic  acid  reductase 

in  parasite  suspensions. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  72  08  This  work  Unit  terminated  as  of  1  Aug  72  because  of  consoli¬ 

dation  into  another  work  unit.  Studies  to  be  continued  under  Project  No.  3A663713D829, 
Work  Unit  No.  132. 


to  c ontfclotM  upon  ortjinitor't  aft 


[Pll  Redacted] 


dd,:v:j498 


previous  editions  or  this  form  are  obsolete,  od  forms  ubsa  i  nov  es 
And  M08  1  1  MAR  es  l  F  OR  ARMY  USE  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1186 


\ 

? 


V 


( 


TrTTHTgTTF - 

U  1ITIMATCO  COMPLETION  OATf 

is  funOino  agency 

IS  PERFORMANCE  MEtHOO 

% 

70  07 

72  08 

DA  | 

In-House 

IT  CONTRACT/ GRANT 

II  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

A  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRS 

fat  FUNDS  (TP  *pw«an*; 

A  DATEl/EFFECTIVE:  NA 

PRICE  BINE 

K  NUMBER;* 

FISCAL 

72 

8 

350 

C  TYPE: 

d  AMOUNT; 

YEAR 

A.  KINO  OF  ANARO: 

f.  CUM.  AMT. 

73 

8 

350 

20  PERFORMING  ORGANIZATION  |  j 

wamii*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPOND  PL  C  INDl  Vi  DU  AL 

««*  8UESCHER,  COL,  E.  L. 
202/L76-3551 


It,  QEMERAL  Oil 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  ABBNCV  ACCESSION* 

DA  OB  6482 

1.  OATS  OF  SUMMARY* 

72  08  01 

report  cortikh.  arwao i 

CDDRkE(AR)636 

A  DATE  PREV  SUM*RV 

7?  07  01 

4,  RIND  OF  SUMNARY 

H.  TERM. 

»  SUMMARY  SCTY* 

u 

S.  BORN  SECURITY* 

u 

i.  ribramng*  Isa  DttB*N  ini tr*n  Ilk  specific  data* 

1  ~  |C0M tractor  access 

NA  |  GP  □„ 

S,  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  BOER  OMIT 

10  MO. /CODES:* 

PROQRAM ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

A  PRIMARY 

63713A 

3A663713D829 

00 

m— 

h.  CONTRIBUTING 

% 

c.  contributing 

tfDOk  114  (f) 

(U)  General  Pharmacology  of  Antimalariai  Drugs  (00) 

tl  SCIENTIFIC  AND  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS*  '  “ 

012600  Fharmacology 


foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


name*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicinal  Chemlstr 
Aoo««»ftas  Kington  ,  D.  C.  20012 

FRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOP  (fvmtuh  ISAM  1/1/  S.  AWfMl'  {MllIVllMj 

....•Melvin  H.  Heiffer,  Ph.D. 

T.L...O..  202/576-3397^^^^^^ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUHII  A 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIOATORS 

namk  Einheber ,  A.,  Ih.D. 

NAMct  Rozman ,  K  .  ,  fh .  D. 


ii  mi*  TSSsnrstSSSTinTSlS  c»+)  ( rj  j  Pharmacodynamics;  1 7)  Pharmacokinetics;  CJ )  Toxicity 

(U)  Drug  Metabolism;  (U)  Antimalariai  Drugs;  (U)  Preclinical  Pharmacology 


»  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  IA  APPROACH.  21  PROOREU  f  Fun.  I  .A  p«*a«raRA*  lAmltUH  Sr  pr»c«*  Itll  •/  »»th  ■>/**  J.eurfty  C»***//l C«R  J 

23,  (U)  The  technical  objective  is  to  develop  and  to  exploit  animal  models  for  the 
study  of  the  pharmacodynamics  and  toxic  effects  of  drugs  intended  for  use  as  antimalari- 
als  in  man.  The  intended  purpose  of  these  studies  is  tc  provide  a  basis  for  predicting 
the  response  of  soldiers  to  ant imalarials  in  a  military  environment  and  to  fulfill  re¬ 
quirements  tor  submission  of  INI)  for  clinical  trials  of  new  ant  imalarials . 

24,  (")  The  approach  will  be  to  study  the  effects  of  antimalariai  drugs  in  healthy  ani¬ 
mals  and  to  study  the  handling  of  antimalariai  drugs  in  healthy  animals  in  order  to 
predict  the  human  tolerance  to  new  drugs  (Phase  I).  The  effects  of  antimalariai  drugs 
in  diseased  or  injured  animals  will  be  studied  in  order  tc  determine  the  effects  of  the 
drugs  on  disease  and  injury.  The  handling  of  antimalariai  drugs  by  diseased  and  in¬ 
jured  animals  will  be  studied  in  order  to  determine  the  effect  of  disease  or  injury  upon 
pharmacokinetics  in  order  to  predict  tha  tolerance  of  new  antimalariai  drugs  in  human 
efficacy  studies  ( Phase  II). 

25,  (U)  Studies  formerly  reported  under  this  work  unit  are  reported  under  3AC63713D829, 
Work  Unit  Number  134 . 


DD"“J498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  149SA  I  NOV 
ANC  I  498  I  I  MAR  6B  FOR  ARMY  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 


[Pll  Redacted] 


1187 


V 


PROJECT  3A062110A830 
BIOSENSOR  SYSTEMS 


Task  00 

Biosensor  Systems 


< 


Vr 


s 


► 


1 1  9% 


{ 


ri27 •  82 f>  0-74  33 


1 


V 


DA  OB  6441 


^stTo^ummar?^" 

73  07  01 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


REPORT  CONTROL  trmmoL 

DD-r>fthE{Ah)bJb 


72  07  01 

D.  Change 

1  tUHMANV  1C  TV* 

u 

1.  *0*1  UCUMTV* 

u 

t.  RE4RAMMB*  |»A  M 

NA  1  N 

*m  IHSTFN 

L 

tk  SPECIFIC  OATA- 

COP TP ACTOR  ACCESS 

O  vas  D  no 

t  LEVEL  OF  SUN 

A  VORK  UNIT 

io  no  cooes  * 

PROORAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

621 10A 

3ao52i10A83o 

00 

055 

b.  contrimutino 

■  nnmwKxx 

CDOG  114(f) 

11  TlfLf  fpr«t*P*  vIN  I •evrffr  ClA*»ltU*>im  C*P*j 

(U)  Development  and  Eva! 

— 

uatlon  of  Improved  B1 

oloolcal  Sense 

ir  Systems  (21) 

It  i  'iNTIflC  AMO  TCCMNOLOOICAL  AREAS* 

001700  Animal  Husbandry  01180  Operations 

IJ  ITMT  OATI 

67  09 

1«.  ISTMATEO  COMPLCtlON  OATE 

Coilt 

IS  FUN1MNO  AuFNCY 

DA  1 

M  PERF6RMAM 

£.  In-H 

CE  MltHOO 

ouse 

IT  CONTRACT/ ORAN  T 

A  DATEt/EFFECTiVE.  NA  EXPIRATION' 

h.  NUMBER  * 

C  T V PI  A  AMOUNT: 

A  KINO  OF  ANAROt  f.  CUM.  AMT. 

IS  NS  SOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A  professional  man  yra 

b  FUNDS  f|n  RhumN) 

FISCAL 

TEAR 

PRIf  loTNl 

73 

3.25 

?.co  [ 

74 

3.5 

260 

19  RIIPONSIBLC  OOO  ORGANIZATION 

M  PERFORMINO  ORGANISATION  |  | 

Ukmt*  Walter  Reef'  Army  Institute  of  Research 
(«U:*  Washington,  DC  20012 


•“•■•Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Bio  Sensor  Research 
’"“‘Aberdeen  Proving  '.round,  MD  21010 


RCIPOMtlRLf  INDIVIDUAL 


NAME-  Buescher,  COL  E.L. 

202-576-3551 


Foreign  intelligence  not  considered 

It.  k  ivwOncn  3aZV  ZCnTImX* 


PRINCIPAL  Ilf  VII  HO  A  TO  A  (?*•*•*  MAM  It  U  $.  !■«*■<« 

Castleberry,  COL.  M.W. 
▼BUMONI'  301-671-3312 

SOCIAL  security  account  momma 
auoci at e  imvcstiqators 

«-  Lees,  CPT  6.E. 
m,  Hamlin,  CPT  H.H , 


DA 


(U)  Detector  System;  (U)  Dogs;  (U)  Genetics;  (U)  Selective  Breeding 


}|  TICMNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  14  APPPO ACM,  IS.  PROORIU  liMtHAuml  p—R RMpR#  IMmllttmA  M  ttumhm  fMltAi  Mil  *1  mmA  •**  frtrltr  Ct—alBfUmm  r« 

23.  (U)  To  develop  a  more  Intelligent  and  sensually  acute  dog  which  is  physically  and 
temperamentally  better  suited  for  military  purposes  than  Is  now  generally  available. 

24.  (U)  This  study  Is  being  made  In  response  to  the  approved  (11  Dec  68)  US  Army  QMD0, 
Detector  System  Military  Dog  (USACDC  Action  Control  Number  12527).  Critically  evalu¬ 
ated  AKC  registered  dogs  were  purchased  as  foundation  stock.  The  progeny  of  these  are 
closely  evaluated  by  recognized  tests  designed  to  reveal  the  superior  Individual. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Forty-two  litters  produced  246  weaned  puppies.  Present  kennel 
population  Is  232  German  Shepherd  Dogs.  During  the  year  257  dogs  were  transfrrred  to 
other  Federal  activities  Including  the  DOD  Dog  Center  at  Lackland  AFB,  WRAIR,  Ft. 
Monmouth,  and  the  State  Department.  An  additional  17  dogs  were  retained  as  breeders. 
Puppies  born  during  the  past  year  are  generally  more  willing  and  aggressive  than  here¬ 
tofore.  Fourteen  of  34  FY73  litters  which  have  completed  puppy  evaluation  are  consid¬ 
ered  superior  In  this  respect.  Only  4  of  the  45  litters  produced  during  FY72  were  com- 
parable  to  those  herein  reported.  This  Improvement  in  temperament  Is  attributed  pri¬ 
marily  to  the  selective  breeding  program.  This  Division  Is  cooperating  with  the 
Letterman  Army  Institute  of  Research  In  Its  recently  initiated  study  of  canine 
eosinophilic  panosteitis.  Consultant  visits  were  made  to  this  Division  by  Dr.  W.H. 
Riser  (hip  dysplasia);  Dr.  M.W.  Fox  (canine  behavior);  Dr.  D.F.  Patterson  (genetics)  an 
Mr.  E.H.  Hart  (breeding  and  blood  lines).  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed  Army 
Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  Jun  73. 


>4  yllAblw  to  cofilrmctora  « 


l  fltMAtw* i  tm 


DD.sr.1498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OISOLITE  DO  FORMS  «49»A.  I  NOV  SS 
AND  I4BS-1  I  MAR  6S  IFOR  ARMY  USEI  ARC  OBSOLETE 


1188  Qi, 


[Pll  Redacted] 


Project  3A062110A830  BIOSENSOR  SYSTEMS 


Task  00  Biosensor  Systems 

Work  Unit  055  Development  and  evaluation  of  improved  biological  sensor  systems 


INVESTIGATORS. 

Principal  -  COL  Merida  W.  Castleberry,  VC 
Associates  -  CPT  George  E.  Lees,  VC 

CPT  Melvin  H.  Hamlin  II,  VC 

OBJECTIVE .  To  develop  a  more  Intelligent  and  sensually  acute  dog  which 
Is  physical ly  and  temperamentally  better  suited  for  military  purposes 
than  Is  now  generally  available. 

BACKGROUND.  This  study  is  being  made  In  response  to  the  approved  US  Army 
QMflU,  ^'Detector  System,  Military  Dog",  (USACDC  Action  Control  Number 
12527).  Seven  breeds  of  dogs,  including  crosses,  were  studied  by  the 
University  of  Maryland  for  behavioral  evaluation  and  selection  for  army 
breeding  and  training  (Army  Contract  No.  DADA  17-68-C-8015) .  As  recom¬ 
mended  in  the  final  report  of  that  study,  and  because  of  the  years  of 
military  experience  gained  with  the  German  Shepherd  Dog,  this  breed  was 
selected  for  primary  breeding  emphasis. 

APPROACH.  Critically  evaluated  AKC  registered  breeding  stock  purchased 
especially  for  this  purpose  was  selectively  bred  to  produce  superior 
progeny.  These  are  in  turn  closely  evaluated  by  recognized  tests  designed 
to  reveal  the  superior  Individual.  Line  breeding  combined  with  progeny 
testing  of  each  generation  Is  being  used  to  accomplish  the  objective. 

PROGRESS . 

A.  Breeding  Program 

1.  Forty-two  litters  produced  246  weaned  puppies. 

2.  Present  kennel  population  Is  232  dogs. 

3.  Two  hundred  and  fifty-seven  dogs  were  transferred  to  other 
Federal  activities.  These  were: 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  183 

Patterson  Army  Hospital,  Ft.  Monmouth,  NJ  12 

DOD  Dog  Procurement  Center,  Lackland  AFB,  TX  47 

Biomedical  Laboratory,  APG-EA,  MD  5 

State  Department  4 

USA  Mobility  Equipment  Rsch  &  Dev  Center  4 

Ft.  Gordon,  GA  1 

US  Customs  1 


4.  Seventeen  dogs  were  selected  and  retained  as  additions  to  the 
breeding  colony. 


1189 


r 


v 


B.  Special  Projects 

1.  Collection  of  data  to  determine  the  possible  relationship  of 
canine  heart  rates  and  adrenal -pituitary  function  to  natural  aggressive¬ 
ness  and  self-confidence  was  completed.  The  study  Is  composed  of  93 
puppies  from  19  different  litters.  Heart  rates  were  determined  and 
blood  samples  collected  from  these  puppies  during  their  twelfth  week  of 
life.  Early  difficulties  In  the  telemetering  of  heart  rates  were  over¬ 
come  and  blood  collecting  techniques  standardized.  Interpretation  of 
the  Individual  heart  rates  and  plasma  cortisol  values  to  the  aggressive¬ 
ness  and  confidence  subsequently  exhibited  by  each  test  puppy  as  It 
matures  will  be  accomplished  at  the  time  of  Its  shipment  or  designation 
as  a  breeder. 

2.  One  of  the  primary  rejection  factors  in  the  procurement  and 
training  of  military  working  dogs  Is  that  of  underaggressiveness.  In 
conjunction  with  the  USA  Land  Warfare  Laboratory  an  exploratory  study 
was  recently  Initiated  to  determine  the  efficacy  of  food  reinforcement 
In  the  correction  of  this  trait.  This  Is  accomplished  by  positive  rein¬ 
forcement  of  an  on-going  activity  which  Is  suddenly  discontinued.  An 
aggressive  response  by  the  dog  to  the  sudden  cessation  of  the  food 
gathering  activity  ( key  pressing)  Is  rewarded  by  reactivation  of  the 
activity.  Otherwise  he  receives  a  limited  time-out  period  during 
which  he  receives  no  further  food.  Instrumentation  has  been  completed 
and  pre-experimer.tal  baseline  data  is  now  belnq  collected.  Further  work 
Is  contingent  on  the  nature  of  results  from  this  exploratory  study. 

3.  Eosinophilic  panosteitis  Is  one  of  several  synonyms  that 
identify  an  Idiopathic  clinical  syndrome  that  Is  characterized  by  inter¬ 
mittent  lameness  seen  In  larger  breeds  of  dogs.  It  Is  most  frequently 
reported  in  the  German  Shepherd  Dog.  The  condition  has  been  radio¬ 
graphically  identified  several  times  in  Individual  dogs  of  this  kennel. 
This  organization  is  cooperating  with  the  Veterinary  Division,  Letterman 
Arn\y  Institute  of  Research  In  their  recently  Initiated  study  to  define 
the  biological  parameters,  radiographic  findings,  and  etiology  of 

1  os i nophl lie  panosteitis  of  dogs.  Upon  diagnosis,  effected  dogs  with 
medical  records  Including  radiographs  will  be  sent  to  the  LAIR. 

C.  Veterinary  Medicine. 

This  Division  continued  Its  vigorous  veterinary  preventative 
medicine  program.  Its  canine  vaccination  program  Is  only  one  aspect  of 
the  effort.  Starting  with  the  puppy's  fourteenth  day  of  life,  measles 
vaccination  is  administered  to  provide  an  early  cross  Immunity  protection 
to  distemper.  Distemper  and  hepatitis  vaccine  Is  administered  at  eight 
weeks  of  age.  A  combination  distemper,  hepatitis  and  leprosplrosls 
vaccine  Is  administered  at  eleven  and  fourteen  weeks  of  age,  with  boosters 
annually  thereafter.  Rabies  Immunization  begins  with  phenolized  bacterin 


1 


t 


\ 


1190 


V. 


r 


V 


at  twelve  weeks  of  age,  modified  live  virus  vaccine  at  twenty-four 
weeks  of  age,  with  boosters  annually  thereafter.  Attesting  to  the 
efficacy  of  this  program  Is  the  fact  that  this  kennel  has  experienced 
none  of  these  diseases  during  the  past  four  years.  Some  problem  was 
experienced,  however,  with  the  hepatitis  fraction  of  the  combination 
distemper  and  hepatitis  vaccine  used  during  the  second  quarter  of  this 
report.  In  a  group  of  approximately  80  puppies  vaccinated  during  that 
period,  approximately  one-fourth  failed  to  attain  normal  growth  rate.  In 
addition,  an  unusual  number  were  affected  with  varying  degrees  of  Irido¬ 
cyclitis.  In  two  of  these  the  Iridocyclitis  became  so  severe  that  oblation 
of  the  effected  eye  was  required.  This  particular  vaccine  Is  no  longer 
used  and  the  adverse  reactions  have  ceased  to  be  a  problem. 

The  reduction  of  the  Incidence  of  hip  dysplasia  continues  to  be  an 
Integral  part  of  the  objectives  of  this  organization.  Dogs  are  routinely 
radiographed  at  five,  eight  and  eleven  months  of  age  for  this  condition. 

The  breeding  stock,  almost  without  exception,  Is  OFA  certified.  During 
the  past  fiscal  year  288  dogs  were  radiographed,  of  these  63  were  deter¬ 
mined  to  have  hip  dysplasia. 

The  surgical  capabilities  of  Bio  Sensor  Research  Division  were 
Improved  by  the  addition  of  a  new  gas  anesthesia  machine.  In  addition  to 
other  routine  surgical  procedures,  nine  spays  were  performed.  Two  young 
dogs  were  diagnosed  as  having  persistent  right  fourth  aortic  arches. 
Thoracotomies  were  performed  on  both  dogs.  A  patent  ductus  arteriosus 
present  In  one  and  a  liaamentum  arteriosum  present  In  the  other  were 
successfully  Isolated,  ligated,  and  transected. 

A  rigorous  program  of  detection,  treatment  and  elimination  of 
parasites  continued  to  be  maintained.  Only  two  external  parasites  were 
of  any  consequence.  One  of  these,  demodectlc  mange,  Is  occasionally 
encountered  and  responds  well  to  treatment.  The  other  Is  the  American 
Dog  Tick  which  Is  controlled  by  periodically  dipping  the  dogs  In  a  .03* 
Lindane  solution.  Intestinal  parasites  are  detected  by  programmed  fecal 
examinations.  The  primary  parasites  are  ascarldes  and  coccldla. 

Occasionally  the  presence  of  glardla  or  strongyloldes  Is  noted.  The 
canine  heart  worm,  Dlrofllarla  Immltls,  was  detected  In  one  dog  by  the 
Knott  test. 

D.  Consultant  Visits. 

Consultant  visits  were  made  to  this  Division  by  Dr.  W.H.  Riser 
(hip  dysplasia);  Dr.  M.W.  Fox  (canine  behavior);  Dr.  D.F.  Patterson 
(genetics)  and  Mr.  E.H.  Hart  (breeding  and  blood  lines). 

E.  Equipment. 

A  veterinary  anesthesia  machine  was  the  only  new  equipment  purchased 
this  year. 


1191 


DISCUSSION;  An  unusual  number  of  aggressive  self-confident  litters  were 
whelped  during  the  past  year.  Fourteen  of  the  thirty- four  FY73  litters 
which  have  completed  puppy  evaluation  are  considered  superior  In  this 
respect.  In  contrast,  only  four  of  the  forty-five  litters  whelped  In 
FY72  were  comparable.  This  Improvement  Is  attributed  primarily  to  this 
organization 's  selective  breeding  program.  From  birth,  each  puppy  Is 
subjected  to  continued  critical  evaluation.  If  eventually  retained  as  a 
breeder,  evaluation  Is  continued  by  the  testing  of  Its  progeny  Now  well 
Into  the  production  of  third  generation  litters,  this  progress  should 
accelerate  with  the  maturation  and  mating  of  the  best  Individuals  of 
these  latest  litters. 

The  accurate  selection  of  the  best  Individuals  for  breeding  purposes 
Is  not  always  simple.  Followlnq  shipment,  Individual  training  reports 
pertaining  to  each  dog  are  received  from  the  using  organization  engaged 
in  the  training  of  military  working  dogs.  These  reports  assist  In  the 
selection  of  future  matings.  In  addition,  they  Identify  those  males 
demonstrating  outstanding  working  dog  characteristics  at  the  training 
centers.  Yank,  son  of  an  originally  purchased  male  and  of  a  mother  born 
In  these  kennels,  Is  such  a  doq.  Classified  as  outstanding  at  the  patrol 
dog  training  center  and  following  eighteen  months  of  field  use,  he  has 
been  temporarily  returned  to  these  kennels  for  use  as  a  sire.  Several 
of  his  litters  are  now  being  evaluated. 

CONCLUSION .  Selective  breeding  has  proven  successful  in  the  production 
of  more  eggs ,  milk,  and  wool.  It  Is  proving  equally  successful  In  the 
development  of  a  more  stable,  smarter,  and  physically  better  dog  than  Is 
now  generally  available  for  military  use.  It  is  reasonable  to  expect 
the  development  of  a  line  of  truly  superior  military  dogs  with  the  next 
several  years. 

RECOMMENDATIONS.  None. 


r 


V 


/ 


DA  OB  6444 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

•^rizjiuS^cTv^^oTrnco «  t  v* 


I  OATE  Of  SUMMABY* 

73  07  01 


Mposr  c o*rwot  «n tat 

DD-DBkE(AR)636 


fiTsMCIFIC  DATA* 

CONTRACTOR ACCESS 

E  rn  □  mo 


1  OAT*  FREY  SUlFRY 

72  07  01 


4.  RIND  OF  SUMMARY 

D.  Change 


I.  RESRAOSMO* 

NA 


I*  0«rN  INSTR'N 


NL 


t  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

A.  WORK  OMT 


10.  MO./CODCtt*  FROORAM  ELEMENT 


PROJECT  NUMBER 


TAM  A*|A  NUMBER 


•RIMARY 


fimoi. 


3AQ6211QA83Q 


0£L 


056 


b.  CONTRIOUTINO 


61101A 


3A061 101A91C 


00 


e.  CONTRIOUTINO 


(U)  Diseases  of  Military  Animals 


II.  ICIINTIFIC  ANO  TSCMMOLOOICAl  AREAS* 

010100  Microbiology  005900  Environmental  Bio 

it  mn  mi - 

68  07 


li'iiviiuTib  cssxrras  bitt 

C0NT 


TT  funChn 

DA 


Si«c* 


1*.  PEAF6RMANC*  method 

C.  In-House 


»  CONTRACT/ORANT 

a  OATES/EFFECTIVE:  NA 

6  TTRC: 

A  KINO  OF  AWAROt 


IMR1RATION: 


A  AMOUNT: 
f.CUM.  AMT. 


R.  RESOURCE!  ESTIMATE 

A.  PROFESSIONAL  MAN  YRI 

k  FUNDS  fin  Mww«n4»j 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

FSEcEoFUS 

73 

6 

140 

euEHiiiv  ■  ■■■“ 

74 

CO 

180 

IF.  RESPONSIBLE  DOC  ORJANllATION 


•0.  PE  R  FORMIN  O  OROAM1 1 A  YIOM 


•«««'•  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 


RESPONSIBLE  INOIVIOUAL 

NAN*:  Buescher,  COL,  E.  L. 

TinPHo«ti  202-576-3551 


II.  OCNERAL  US* 


««*Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Veterinary  Medicine 

“"’""’’Washington,  D.C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  (fttmU A  MAW  H  V  t.  Acafmtc  fntlltvUmm) 

.»■«•  Huxsoll,  LTC,  D.  L. 

tcccpHOMc  202-576-5194. 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER 

ASSOCIATE  INVISTIOATORS  Blnn,  Ph.D. ,  L.  N. 


NAME: 

NAME: 


DA 


Foreign  Intelligence  not  considered. 

n.™,i.b««ua...u«nr».i.»..»*)  (Oj  Military  bogs;  (U)  Yroplcal  Canine  Pancytopenia; 

’U)  Ehrlichia  canls;  (U)  Babesia;  (U)  Coronavl rus ;  (U)  SV5;  (U)  Canine  Respiratory  Pis. 


II.  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  14  APPROACH,  IE  PROGRESS  *r  nwW  FNtt*  fmt  •!  »««A  •'IP  I •curltr  CIm«IRcaiI« m  €•*•■) 

23.  (U)  To  define,  study,  diagnose  and  control  known  and  potential  Infectious  diseases 
of  military  dogs.  The  major  effort  Is  directed  toward  the  cause,  pathogenesis,  treatment 
and  control  of  tropical  canine  pancytopenia  (TCP)  which  jeopardized  the  operational  effi¬ 
cacy  of  military  dogs  in  SE  Asia.  Studies  are  also  being  conducted  on  the  epidemiology, 
treatment  and  control  of  other  viral  and  parasitic  Infections  which  are  medical  problems 

n  military  dogs. 

24.  (U)  Conventional  methods  are  employed  for  epidemiological,  pathological  and  micro¬ 
biological  examinations,  and  new  procedures  are  developed  as  needed. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Clinical  response  to  tetracycline  was  evaluated  in  dogs  chroni¬ 
cally  infected  with  Ehrlichia  canls,  the  causative  agent  of  TCP.  In  the  treated  dogs 
Improvement  In  hematologic  values  and  clinical  signs  was  very  gradual.  Blood  from  dogs 
treated  with  tetracycline  was  not  Infectious  for  laboratory  Beagles.  German  Shepherd 
and  Beagle  dogs  experimentally  Infected  with  an  equine  ehrlichlal  agent  developed  a  mild, 
transient  disease  and  characteristic  Inclusions  were  Identified  in  the  cytoplasm  of 
granulocytic  cells.  The  monocyte  and  bone  marrow  cell  culture  techniques  were  evaluated 
for  the  primary  Isolation  of  rickettsial  agents  causing  human  disease.  Initial  studies 
vere  carried  out  In  guinea  pigs  experimentally  Infected  with  Rickettsia  rickettsli. 
Rickettsiae  were  readily  recognized  as  early  as  3  days  In  Glmenez  and  FA  stained  cul¬ 
tures.  Newly  procured  military  dogs  at  Lackland  AFB,  Texas  continued  to  be  highly  sus¬ 
ceptible  to  parainfluenza  SV5  infection.  Studies  were  carried  out  on  the  pathogenicity 
of  a  canine  coronavlrus  Isolate  from  military  dogs  with  diarrheal  disease.  The  virus 
produced  signs  of  enteric  Infection  In  newborn  pups.  Reovlrus  type  II  was  recovered  for 
the  first  time  from  2  puppies  with  respiratory  disease.  For  technical  report  see  Walter 
Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 

SU2L  SmmSSiSmSS^XS^mSISmSmmi 


DD"”J498 


PREVIOUS  EDIT  IONS  OR  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DD  FORMS  I  49S  A , 
AND  I  ASS-  1  .  1  MAR  OS  (FOR  ARMY  USCI  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1193 


[Pll  Redacted] 


J 


V 


Project  3A0621 1 0A830  BIOSENSOR  SYSTEMS 

Task  00  Biosensor  Systems 

Work  Unit  056  Diseases  of  military  animals 


Investigators: 

Principal:  LTC  David  L.  Huxsoll,  VC 

Associate:  Leonard  N.  Binn,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Paul  K.  Hildebrandt,  VC; 

COL  Earl  W.  Grogan,  VC;  Aaron  D.  Alexander,  Ph.D.; 

MAJ  John  L.  Brown,  VC;  MAJ  Charles  Montgomery,  VC; 

CPT  William  C.  Buhles,  VC;  CPT  George  E.  Lewis,  VC; 
CPT  Ralph  C.  Giles,  VC;  CPT  Anthony  J.  Johnson,  VC; 
CPT  Kevin  P.  Keenan,  VC;  Irene  E.  Hemelt,  AB; 

Ruth  L.  Marchwicki,  BS;  Robert  E.  Sims,  BS;  Albert 
R.  Warner,  Jr.;  Ernest  S.  Windham,  MS;  Raymond  E. 
Hayhoe;  SSG  John  B.  Mitchell;  SP5  Thomas  Johnson. 

SP5  Donavon  Eslinger;  SP5  Robert  Helt;  SP4  Alan 
Kleiman;  SP4  Merle  Peterson;  PFC  Sherri 1  Davis; 

PFC  David  Pederson;  PVT  Bruce  Dunn;  PVT  James 
McGough,  PVT  Roy  Berriere,  PVT  Leonard  Seller,  PVT 
Dennis  Bonnstetter 

Description. 

To  define,  study,  diagnose  and  control  known  and  potential  infectious 
diseases  of  military  dogs.  The  major  effort  is  directed  toward  the 
cause,  pathogenesis,  treatment  and  control  of  tropical  canine 
pancytopenia  (TCP)  which  jeopardized  the  operational  efficacy  of 
military  dogs  in  SE  Asia.  Studies  are  also  being  conducted  on  the 
epidemiology,  treatment  and  control  of  other  viral  and  parasitic 
infections  which  are  medical  problems  in  military  dogs. 

During  the  reporting  period  research  activities  have  been  concerned 
with:  (1)  the  clinical  hematological  and  immune  response  in  German 
Shepherd  dogs  during  acute  and  chronic  Ehrlichia  canis  infection, 
following  treatment  with  tetracycline,  and  challenge  inoculation 
with  the  homologous  strain  of  Ehrlichia  canis;  (2)  infectivity  and 
pathogenesis  of  an  equine  ehrlichia!  agent  in  dogs  and  other  ani¬ 
mals;  (3)  characterization  of  the  agent  of  salmon  poisoning  disease; 
(4)  use  of  the  monocyte  and  bone  marrow  culture  techniques  for  the 
isolates  of  Rickettsia  rickettsi  from  experimentally  infected  guinea 
pigs;  (5)  respiratory  disease  in  military  dogs;  (6)  pathogenicity 
of  the  canine  coronavirus  isolate  in  neonatal  dogs  and  swine;  (7) 
trachea  organ  cultures.  Some  of  the  investigations  reported  here 
have  been  done  jointly  with  Dr.  Miodrag  Ristic  and  other  investiga¬ 
tors  at  the  University  of  Illinois. 

1194 


V 


Progress. 

1 .  Clinical  and  hematologic  response  of  German  Shepherd  dogs  to 
Ehrlichia  canis  Infection,  tetracycline  therapy,  and  challenge 
Inoculation. 

It  is  known  that  experimentally  infected  German  Shepherd  dogs  often 
develop  a  severe  hemorrhagic  syndrome,  but  that  experimentally 
infected  Beagles  do  not  [1].  Nonetheless,  in  both  breeds  TCP  is 
characterized  by  pancytopenia  [1],  persistent  infection  [2,3], 
hypergammaglobulinemia  [4,5],  and  systemic,  primarily  perivascular, 
plasmacytosis  [6-8].  These  findings  have  led  to  speculation  that 
some  of  the  changes  seen  in  TCP  may  have  an  immunopathologic  basis 


.  Experimentally  infected  Beagles  and  German  Shepherd  dogs  develop  a 

similar  acute  phase  disease  of  2  to  4  weeks  duration  characterized 
by  mild  clinical  signs  and  a  transient  pancytopenia  [1].  During 
this  period  intracytoplasmic  inclusions  of  E.  canis  can  be  observed 
in  circulating  mononuclear  leukocytes.  In  Beagles  and  some  German 
Shepherd  dogs  no  further  clinical  illness  occurs,  but  dogs  remain 
infected  with  E.  canis  and  are  classified  as  having  non-severe 
chronic  TCP  (NCTcFJ^  In  contrast,  the  majority  of  German  Shepherd 
dogs,  50  to  100  days  postinfection  (PI),  develop  severe  manifesta¬ 
tions  of  TCP  characterized  by  marked  pancytopenia,  hemorrhage, 
peripheral  edema,  emaciation,  and  secondary  bacterial  infections. 

Most  of  these  dogs  succumb  due  to  hemorrhage  or  secondary  infection. 
These  dogs  are  classified  as  having  severe  chronic  TCP  (SCTCP),  the 
syndrome  observed  in  naturally  infected  German  Shepherd  dogs  in 
Southeast  Asia  [3]. 

Some  question  has  existed  in  the  past  as  to  whether  or  not  SCTCP  is 
merely  a  relapse,  albeit  more  severe,  from  the  earlier  acute  phase 
disease.  We  now  hypothesize  that  the  changes  seen  in  SCTCP  have  a 
different  pathogenesis  than  those  seen  in  acute  TCP.  To  elucidate 
further  the  pathogenesis  of  chronic  TCP,  we  studied  German  Shepherd 
„  dogs  with  acute  and  chronic  £.  canis  infection,  and  evaluated  the 

response  of  dogs  with  SCTCP  and  NCTCP  to  tetracycline  therapy.  We 
determined  the  clinical  and  hematologic  response  to  tetracycline, 
the  efficacy  of  tetracycline  in  clearing  dogs  of  persistent  infection 
with  E.  canis,  and  the  susceptibility  of  cleared  dogs  to  reinfection. 

Fourteen  purebred  German  Shepherd  dogs,  four  males  and  ten  females, 
between  one  and  two  and  a  half  years  of  age,  formed  the  basic 
experimental  group.  Purebred  Beagle  dogs  of  both  sexes,  one  to 
three  years  of  age  were  also  utilized.  All  dogs  were  vaccinated 
according  to  standard  recommendations  for  canine  distemper,  infectious 
canine  hepatitis,  leptospirosis,  and  rabies.  At  time  of  acquisition 
dogs  were  serologically  negative  for  £.  cani s  antibodies  as  determined 
by  the  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  test  recently  reported  by  Ristic, 
et  al.  [9].  Dogs  were  housed  indoors  and  offered  commercial  dry 
(  food  and  water  free  choice. 


1195 


V 


During  critical  periods  dogs  were  examined  and  rectal  temperatures 
were  taken  one  or  more  times  daily;  at  other  times  such  examinations 
were  performed  twice  or  thrice  weekly.  Thrice  weekly,  venous  blood 
was  collected  in  sealed  vacuum  glass  tubes  (Vacutainer,  Becton- 
Dickinson,  Rutherford,  N.J.)  with  EDTA  as  anticoagulant.  White 
blood  cell  (WBC)  and  red  blood  cell  (RBC)  counts  were  performed  on 
an  electronic  cell  counter  (Model  B,  Coulter  Electronics,  Inc., 
Hialeah,  Florida).  Platelet  counts  were  also  performed  electronically 
(MK-4  Platelet  Counter,  General  Sciences  Corp.,  Bridgeport,  Conn). 
Packed  cell  volumes  were  determined  by  standard  microhen.atocrit 
methods.  One  hour  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rates  (ESR)  were  de¬ 
termined  in  Wintrobe  tubes.  Hemoglobin  was  determined  by  the  cyan- 
methemoglobin  method.  Bone  marrow  aspirations  using  light  sodium 
thiamylal  anesthesia,  were  performed  on  eight  dogs  in  the  basic 
experimental  group.  Results  will  be  reported  elsewhere. 

The  isolant  of  E_.  cam's  used  in  this  study  was  originally  recovered 
from  a  naturally  infected  German  Shepherd  dog  in  Southeast  Asia. 

The  organism  was  maintained  by  passage  in  laboratory  Beagles.  This 
isolant  has  been  shown  to  be  free  of  Babesia  spp.  and  Hemobartonella 
spp.  by  passage  in  splenectomized  dogs  L10J.  Initial  infection  of 
the  14  dogs  in  the  experimental  group  was  by  intravenous  inoculation 
of  five  ml  of  whole,  heparinized  blood  (20  uniTs/ml)  from  a  dog 
acutely  ill  with  TCP.  Challenge  inoculation  of  dogs  was  similarly 
administered. 

Infectivity  of  blood  with  E_.  cam's  was  determined  by  IV  injection  of 
laboratory  Beagles  with  five  ml  of  heparinized  blood.  Beagles  were 
observed  for  signs  of  E.  cam's  infection  by  thrice  weekly  hematologic 
examination  for  a  period  of  30  days.  Results  were  confirmed  sero¬ 
logically  at  30  and  45  days  after  injection,  using  the  IFA  test. 

Tetracycline  hydrochloride,  250  mg  tablets,  was  administered  orally 
at  a  dosage  of  30  mg/lb/day  in  two  divided  doses,  for  14  consecutive 
days.  No  other  antibiotics  or  supportive  treatment  was  administered 
to  any  of  the  test  animals. 

Evaluation  of  hematologic  response  to  treatment  was  as  follows.  The 
course  of  infection  was  divided  into  six  time  periods  for  each  dog: 

(1)  a  control  period  of  30  days  immediately  preceding  infection  with 
£.  cam's ;  (2)  a  pretreatment  period  of  14  days  immediately  preceding 
onset  of  outward  signs  of  SCTCP  or  initiation  of  treatment;  and 
(3)  four  periods  of  30  days  each  covering  the  120  consecutive  days 
immediately  following  the  initiation  of  treatment.  Mean  platelet, 

WBC,  and  RBC  counts  for  each  animal  were  then  calculated  for  each 
time  period.  When  applicable,  significance  of  difference  was 
evaluated  using  the  Student's  t  test.  Level  of  significance  was 
set  at  £  < .01 . 


1196 


Dogs  were  observed  for  at  least  30  days  prior  to  infection  to  estab¬ 
lish  baseline  date  for  each  animal.  The  dogs  were  infected  with 
canis  and  observed  throughout  the  acute  phase  illness.  Treatment  was 
initiated  in  SCTCP  dogs  with  outward  signs  of  disease,  including 
hemorrhage.  Dogs  developing  SCTCP  with  pancytopenia  but  without  out¬ 
ward  signs  of  illness  or  hemorrhage  were  arbitrarily  placed  on  tetra¬ 
cycline  at  105  days  PI.  Dogs  with  NCTCP  were  observed  for  145  days 
PI  and  then  treated.  To  determine  susceptibility  to  reinfection, 
selected,  surviving  dogs  from  both  SCTCP  and  NCTCP  groups  were  chal¬ 
lenged  with  the  homologous  strain  of  E.  canis . 

All  14  German  Shepherd  dogs  inoculated  with  canis  developed  typi¬ 
cal  acute  phase  TCP  within  10  days  PI  (Figures  1  and  2).  All  dogs 
were  febrile,  anorectic,  and  lethargic.  Many  had  a  serious  conjunc¬ 
tivitis  and  rhinitis,  and  manifested  loss  of  weight,  lymphadenopathy , 
diarrhea,  and  emesis.  Pancytopenia  was  evident  by  10  to  14  days  PI. 
No  signs  of  hemorrhage  or  peripheral  edema  were  apparent  at  this 
time,  all  dogs  regained  a  normal  physical  appearance,  and  hematologic 
values  generally  improved  within  21  to  28  days  PI. 

Nine  of  the  14  dogs  developed  SCTCP  (Table  1).  The  onset  of  SCTCP 
was  heralded  by  changes  in  the  hemogram  which  began  40  to  60  days  PI. 
Severe  thrombocytopenia  and  leukopenia  were  the  earliest  and  most 
consistent  manifestations  of  severe  disease  (Figure  1).  SCTCP  did 
not  develop  in  five  dogs,  classified  as  having  NCTCP  and  without 
severe  hematologic  changes  (Figure  2).  All  NCTCP  dogs  maintained  a 
normal  physical  appearance. 

Outward  signs  of  illness  and  hemorrhage  occurred  in  seven  of  the  nine 
dogs  with  SCTCP  56  to  98  days  PI  (Table  1).  Depression  and  weakness 
were  seen  in  most  of  these  animals,  while  the  occurrence  of  corneal 
opacity,  emaciation,  anorexia,  fever,  and  peripheral  edema  were  vari¬ 
able  signs.  Treatment  was  initiated  within  12  to  72  hours  after  the 
onset  of  outward  signs  of  SCTCP,  with  the  exception  of  dog  No.  58 
which,  because  of  the  equivocal  nature  of  the  initial  hemorrhage,  was 
not  treated  until  seven  days  after  the  first  signs  were  observed. 

Dogs  No.  57  and  64  did  not  manifest  outward  signs  of  illness  by  105 
days  PI,  but  had  been  severely  thrombocytopenic  and  leukopenic  for 
more  than  30  days.  Treatment  was  initiated  on  these  dogs  at  105  days 
PI. 

Clinical  responses  in  the  nine  dogs  with  severe  chronic  TCP  are 
summarized  (Table  1).  Two  dogs  died  during  the  treatment  period, 
showing  no  apparent  clinical  improvement.  All  dogs  with  outward 
signs  of  illness  and  hemorrhage  that  survived  the  treatment  period 
showed  some  improvement  in  physical  appearance  and  activity  within 
seven  to  fourteen  days  after  the  start  of  treatment  (PT).  However, 
varying  degrees  of  depression,  emaciation,  weakness  and  fever  per¬ 
sisted  in  most  SCTCP  dogs  for  30  to  60  days  In  all  dogs  with 


Table  1.  Summary  of  clinical  signs  before  treatment  and  clinical  response  after  treatment  with 
tetracycline  in  nine  dogs  with  severe  chronic  tropical  canine  pancytopenia 

_ Outward  signs  of  severe  chronic  TCP _ 

Character  of  signs 

Dog  Days  PI  Depres-  Epi-  Hema-  Geni-  Hemor-  Peri- 


V 


h- 

U  (O 

CL 

■o 

O  J- 

•  h- 
TJ  Q- 

co 

r— 

>> 

& 

■O 

05 

E  ro 
CD  CD 

-o 

0) 

0) 

r0 

O 

c 

-c  a. 

c 

a.  to 

X) 

“O 

t— 

*p* 

CL 

•p* 

i  o 

o-  >» 

0) 

a) 

(O 

-O  rO 

rO 

CL 

O  ro 

•r* 

> 

E 

r— 

CD 

XJ 

P  X> 

o 

0) 

•r*  r- 

CD 

C  CO 

CO 

t0 

a: 

3EI  ro 

oc 

rO  05 

CD 

•r 

• 

E 

P 

• 

C 

!- 

• 

CO  ro 

05 

05 

•  Cl. 

•  to 

•  O 

• 

>>  o 

Id  "O 

•r- 

CL 

“O 

-o  -C 

*o  c 

"O 

ro  ‘i— 

XZ  0) 

E 

O 

CD  C0 

<D  P 

CD 

<D 

-o  -o 

U  *r- 

05 

P 

CL  >> 

Q.  C 

0.-0 

Q_ 

C 

s-  -o 

c 

>i 

a.  ro 

a.  o 

a.  05 

Q- 

O  -r- 

O 

CD 

u 

o  -o 

o  E 

o  c 

O 

ro 

F  X5 

P 

c 

p 

p 

"p  -t- 

P 

<•— s 

<D  c 

u 

10 

to  CVJ 

to  u 

tO  ro 

CO 

V-  H- 

-C  (0 

1X5 

CL 

CO 

o 

O) 

o  o- 

-O 

• 

a> 

a>  4- 

• 

01  0) 

CD 

4-  w 

"O  h- 

TD 

SZ 

oi-o 

o> 

■a 

a>  u 

o> 

c  a.  • 

01 

P 

CO  CD 

(0  -X 

CD 

<o 

*  • 

U  * 

-C  ro  > 
J-  05  U 


2  >>  c 

05 

05 

L- 

^  5 

05 

s-  a. 

s-  c 

05  *r- 

E  ro  0) 

O 

CO 

"O 

g  “a 

to 

g 

g  ro 

O.P 

<y“o  a 

IS) 

n 

05 

E  c 

E  "O 

-Q 

E  to 

E  L- 

O  U 

TJ  O 

-O 

o 

•r- 

0)  ro 

05  C 

O 

05  >> 

05  rO 

P  05 

05  OJ  P 

<o 

TJ 

-C 

SZ  ro 

-C  iO 

x:  05 

>> 

CO 

ro 

to 

“O 

Q. 

a  c 

•"  U 

T5 

05 

« * 

•  •  .f— 

•  **  *ij 

05 

•  r> 

.p  a. 

C  *r» 

■o  *o  c 

05  • 

CD 

T> 

“O  E 

-a  05 

CD 

“D  O 

TJ  ro 

ro  P 

CD  05  rO 

Q-f— 

C 

05 

05  05 

05  P 

C 

05  a> 

05 

CL  CO 

>  C  CL 

O  O- 

rO 

C 

>  U 

>  ro 

ro 

> 

>  r— 

O 

O  05 

x: 

CD 

O  05 

O  -r- 

-C 

O  05 

O  ro 

C  CL 

S-  CO  -C 

05  CO 

u 

CO 

U  P 

l.  a 

o 

k-  CD 

V-  E 

05 

CL  W  P 

>  >> 

U 

Q-  U 

Cl  ro 

Q.  ro 

CL  C 

05  CO 

E  0-1- 

CD  ro 

o 

O 

E  ro 

E  E 

o 

E  si 

E  O 

X)  05 

-3  J 

o  *o 

z 

2 

t— i  X) 

►— <  CD 

z 

M 

H-l  C 

j-> 

i  +  i 


i  to 
05  S-  C 
DIE  (D  o 
rO  O  C-5  *r-  I 
r  l  (OP 
i-  4-  r -  C0 


I  11+  »  I*  + 


S-  &> 
POD) 
i—  u  e 
CO  rO  05  -C 
P  Q.-C  S- 


I  III  +  II  + 


I  +  I  +  I  +  • 


X 

rO 

P  00 
</)  *r~ 


I  111  +  I 


C  -X  tO 

O  «  to 
•r  QJ  4) 
to  5  c 


■o 

E  2! 

<0  CO  ifl 

i  c  o> 
p  o>a 

3  -r  Q. 
O  tO  CO 


to  in  ro  in 
o  r^.  a> 


o>  in  vo 

oo  o  m 


in  r^coo  r-  *+  in  vo 

in  in  in  vo  vo  vo  vo  vo 


5  s~ 

O  ’r- 

_c  a. 
to  E  • 
CD  P 

-C  c 
cn-o  qj 

3  05  E 
O  PP 
O  (O  <o 
p  <u  05 

r-  U  i- 
<  p  p 


V 


FIGURE  3. 

Summary  of  hematologic  changes  In  14  German  Shepherd  dogs  that 
developed  severe  chronic  TCP  (SCTCP)  or  non-severe  chronic  TCP 
(NCTCP).  Six  time  periods  are  represented:  a  30  day  preinfection 
control  period,  a  14  day  period  imnedlately  preceding  treatment,  and 
four  post  treatment  periods  of  30  days  each.  Each  symbol  represents 
the  mean  cell  count  during  a  period  for  an  individual  dog.  Mean 
platelet  count;  SCTCP  dogs  (•),  NCTCP  dogs  (o).  Mean  WBC  count; 
SCTCP  dogs  (•)»  NCTCP  dogs  {a).  Mean  RBC  count;  SCTCP  dogs  ( A ), 
NCTCP  dogs  (A). 


V 


external  hemorrhage  and  peripheral  edema,  remission  of  these  signs 
occurred  by  14  days  PT,  although  one  dog  had  a  transient  hemorrhagic 
episode  after  the  completion  of  treatment.  Two  dogs  died  following 
treatment,  dog  No.  54  at  49  days  PT  and  dog  No.  60  at  32  days  PT, 
while  the  remaining  .five  dogs  survived. 

Clinical  signs  typical  of  terminal  SCTCP  were  noted  in  all  four  dying 
dogs.  Necropsy  was  performed  on  three  of  the  dogs.  Pathologic  diag¬ 
nosis  in  all  three  dogs  was  terminal  SCTCP  with  massive  internal 
hemorrhages,  evidence  of  secondary  bacterial  infections,  and  genera¬ 
lized  perivascular  plasmacytosis. 

The  five  dogs  with  NCTCP  did  not  develop  outward  manifestations  of 
illness  and  appeared  to  be  normal  healthy  dogs  at  145  days  PI.  No 
change  in  their  clinical  status  occurred  following  treatment  with 
tetracycline. 

Infectivity  of  blood  was  determined  in  all  dogs  surviving  the  treat¬ 
ment  period.  Blood  from  dog  No.  55,  which  died  13  days  PT,  was 
negative  for  £.  cam’s  at  the  time  of  death.  Blood  from  dogs  No.  54 
and  60,  which  succumbed  after  the  treatment  period,  was  negative  at 
44  and  32  days  PT  respectively.  Blood  from  all  dogs  surviving  SCTCP 
was  negative  for  E_.  cam’s  when  subinoculated  at  44  and  104  days  PT. 

Dogs  that  developed  SCTCP  had  slightly  lower  mean  preinfection  plate¬ 
let  and  WBC  counts,  and  slightly  higher  mean  RBC  counts  than  doqs 
that  developed  NCTCP,  but  the  differences  were  not  significant  (p  >.10). 

During  the  14  day  pretreatment  period  all  nine  dogs  with  SCTCP  had 
thrombocytopenia  (mean  +  SE,  9,800  +  1 ,800/mr)  (p  <.001),  leukopenia 
(WBC,  3,570  +  460/mm3)  fp  <.001 ),  and  anemia  (RBC,  4.54  +  .33  million/ 
mm^)  (p  <.oiJ  (Table  1  and  Figure  3).  As  a  group,  dogs  with  NCTCP 
had  slightly  subnormal  pretreatment  platelet  counts  (183,000  + 
21,800/mm3)  and  WBC  counts  (10,700  +  l,200/mm3),  but  these  differences 
were  not  significant  (p  >.10).  When  NCTCP  dogs  were  evaluated 
individually  however,  we  found  statistically  significant  thrombocy¬ 
topenia  in  three,  leukopenia  in  two,  but  anemia  in  none  of  the  five 
dogs  during  the  pretreatment  period. 

Pancytopenia  persisted  in  SCTCP  dogs  in  spite  of  tetracycline  therapy 
(Figures  1  and  3).  Dogs  surviving  SCTCP  remained  thrombocytopenic 
and  leukopenic  for  at  least  120  days  PT,  and  two  remained  anemic  for 
that  period.  Anemia  abated  in  the  other  three  dogs  between  30  and 
90  days  PT.  Irrespective  of  persistent  pancytopenia,  platelet,  WBC, 
and  RBC  counts  in  all  five  surviving  SCTCP  dogs  gradually  improved 
during  the  120  day  PT  period.  Of  the  four  dogs  that  died  with  SCTCP, 
three  could  be  evaluated  during  or  following  treatment.  No  significant 
hematologic  response  was  seen  in  dogs  No.  55  or  60.  Dog  No.  54 


1200 


V 


had  a  transient  improvement  in  platelet,  but  not  WBC  or  RRC  counts 
during  the  zero  to  30  day  PT  period.  All  three  dogs  died  with 
severe  pancytopenia. 

Dogs  with  NCTCP  that  had  depressed  cell  counts  had  variable  responses 
to  tetracycline  therapy.  One  of  the  three  dogs  with  thrombocytopenia 
14  days  pretreatment  had  normal  platelet  counts  by  30  days  PT,  and 
one  of  the  dogs  with  pretreatment  leukopenia  had  normal  WBC  counts 
by  90  days  PT.  In  dogs  that  did  not  respond,  thrombocytopenia  and 
leukopenia  persisted  for  at  least  90  days  PT. 

When  the  hematologic  data  collected  from  SCTCP  dogs  during  the  14  day 
pretreatment  period  was  evaluated  it  was  found  that  the  four  dogs 
dying  of  SCTCP,  as  a  group,  had  significantly  lower  pretreatment  WBC 
counts  (p  <.001 )  and  RBC  counts  (p  <.01 )  than  the  five  surviving 
SCTCP  dogs.  There  were  no  significant  differences  in  pretreatment 
platelet  counts  between  dying  and  surviving  SCTCP  dogs  (p  >.20). 

At  236  days  PI  (at  least  90  days  PT)  six  surviving  treated  dogs,  three 
SCTCP  and  three  NCTCP,  were  inoculated  with  E_.  canis.  All  six  inocu¬ 
lated  dogs  showed  some  clinical  or  hematologic  sinns  of  acute  E^  canis 
infection.  Two  SCTCP  dogs  (No.  65  and  66)  had  characteristic  acute 
phase  disease  and  subsequently  developed  SCTCP  with  severe  pancyto¬ 
penia  (Figure  1).  One  dog  (No.  66)  died  with  massive  intestinal  and 
serosal  hemorrhages  36  days  post  challenge  (PC)  and  was  found  to  have 
pathologic  lesions  typical  of  SCTCP,  including  generalized  plasmacy- 
tosis.  The  second  dog  (No.  65)  suffered  a  hemorrhagic  episode  55  days 
PC,  survived  and  recovered  a  normal  physical  appearance,  but  was  still 
pancytopenic  90  days  PC.  Dog  No.  64,  which  originally  had  SCTCP,  and 
the  three  NCTCP  dogs  responded  to  challenge  inoculation  with  clinical 
and  hematologic  changes  more  mild  and  of  shorter  duration  than  usually 
encountered  in  acutely  infected  German  Shepherd  dogs.  A  previously 
uninfected  German  Shepherd  dog,  serving  as  a  positive  control  and 
receiving  the  same  challenge  inoculum,  developed  typical  acute  phase 
TCP,  and  subsequently  NCTCP.  Blood  from  all  six  challenged  dogs  was 
found  to  be  positive  for  E_.  canis.  Blood  from  four  of  the  dogs  was 
infective  at  49  days  PC.  Blood  from  dogs  No.  53  and  63  was  not 
infective  at  49,  105,  or  149  days  PC,  but  was  positive  188  days  PC. 

In  a  previous  study  in  this  laboratory,  Amyx  et.  al .  [10]  evaluated 
the  efficacy  of  tetracycline  given  to  Beagle  and  German  Shepherd 
dogs  at  the  peak  of  acute  phase  experimental  TCP.  They  found  that 
when  dogs  acutely  ill  with  E_.  canis  were  treated  with  tetracycline 
defervescence  occurred  within  24  hours;  platelet  counts,  WBC  counts, 
and  ESR  returned  to  normal  within  seven  days;  and  RBC  counts  were 
normal  by  14  days.  In  contrast  to  the  rapid  recovery  of  dogs 
treated  during  acute  TCP,  we  found  that  dogs  surviving  SCTCP  showed 
very  gradual  clinical  improvement  following  treatment  and  that 


1201 


pancytopenia  persisted  for  months.  This  difference  in  response  to 
tetracycline  supports  the  hypothesis  that  SCTCP  has  a  different 
pathogenesis  than  acute  TCP. 

During  acute  infection  ehrlichiae  undergo  initial,  rapid  multiplica¬ 
tion,  and  if  the  numbers  of  £.  canis  inclusions  observed  in  peripheral 
leukocytes  are  an  indication,  it  is  at  this  time  that  the  level  of 
parasitemia  is  the  highest.  Accordingly  the  occurrence  of  fever, 
clinical  illness,  and  initial  hematologic  changes  suggest  an  acute 
infectious  process.  The  transient  pancytopenia  of  acute  phase  TCP 
may  be  similar  to  the  pancytopenia  seen  in  kala-azar,  and  in  some 
bacterial,  rickettsial,  and  viral  infections  [11,12],  In  these 
diseases  decreased  cell  counts  occur  with  a  normal  or  hypercellular 
bone  marrow,  indicating  increased  sequestration  or  destruction  of 
blood  cell  elements  rather  than  decreased  production.  That  this  is 
the  case  in  acute  TCP  is  suggested  by  the  prompt  ^sponse  of  blood 
cell  counts  to  tetracycline  administered  during  ti.e  early  phase  of 
illness. 

In  contrast  the  persistence  of  pancytopenia  following  treatment  of 
our  chronically  infected  dogs  appears  to  be  related  to  impaired 
production  of  blood  cells  in  SCTCP.  Hildebrandt  et.  al .  £6 ,7]  have 
suggested  that  there  may  be  bone  marrow  hypoplasia  in  SCTCP.  In 
man,  pancytopenia  with  marrow  hypoplasia,  or  aplastic  anemia,  may 
be  idiopathic  [13,14]  or  may  result  from  idiosyr.chratic  reactions 
to  drugs  such  as  chlorampenicol  or  phenylbutazone  [13-16],  radiation 
exposure  [14],  or  infections  such  as  viral  hepatitis  [17,18].  Ir- 
regardless  of  etiology,  pancytopenia  is  often  irreversible,  patients 
dying  with  severe  hemorrhage  due  to  thrombocytopenia,  or  with  second¬ 
ary  infections  due  to  leukopenia  [13,14].  Additionally,  many  patients 
surviving  aplastic  anemia  regain  normal  hematologic  values  only  after 
a  prolonged  course,  some  having  depressed  cell  counts  for  years. 

This  is  believed  to  be  due  to  severe  depletion  of  hematopoietic  stem 
cells  or  irreversible  changes  in  the  bone  marrow  vascular  microen¬ 
vironment,  or  both  [14,19,20,21,22],  such  changes  persisting  in  the 
absence  of  the  original  causative  agent.  Persistence  of  pancyto¬ 
penia  in  SCTCP  following  apparent  removal  of  the  etiologic  agent, 
and  the  terminal  course  followed  by  some  dogs  in  spite  of  treatment 
suggests  that  aplastic  anemia  may  be  of  major  importance  in  the 
pathogenesis  of  SCTCP. 

That  we  were  unable  to  recover  infectious  ]E.  canis  from  the  blood  of 
any  dog  receiving  the  full  14  days  course  of  tetracycline  is  presump¬ 
tive  evidence  that  tetracycline  is  effective  in  clearing  dogs  of 
persistent  infection.  Nonetheless,  it  is  possible  that  dogs  remained 
infected  and  that  (1)  the  numbers  of  circulating  infectious  units  of 
L*  canis  were  below  levels  likely  to  be  detected  by  subinoculation; 
or  (2)  viable  organisms  were  harbored  in  host  tissues  other  than  the 
blood,  as  is  believed  to  ocLur  in  another  rickettsial  disease,  re- 
crudescent  typhus  [23].  However,  the  fact  that  all  six  previously 


1202 


V 


treated  dogs  challenged  with  the  homologous  strain  of  E.  canis  had 
some  signs  of  infection  and  became  carriers  of  the  organism  provides 
further  evidence  that  dogs  were  completely  freed  of  the  original 
infection,  following  tetracycline  therapy.  This  is  of  particular 
importance  since  chronically  infected  dogs  may  serve  as  a  source  of 
infection  for  other  dogs  via  the  tick  vector. 

Results  of  challenge  inoculation  of  previously  infected,  cleared  dogs 
revealed  that  although  two  challenged  dogs  developed  clinical  and 
hematologic  changes  typical  of  acute  phase  TCP,  in  four  dogs  the 
hematologic  and  clinical  responses  to  challenge  were  remarkably 
mild.  Leeflang  [24]  found  a  somewhat  similar  response  after  he 
challenged  three  dogs  cleared  of  chronic  £.  canis  infection  by 
oxytetracycline.  His  dogs  did  not  develop  clinical  or  hematologic 
signs  of  infection  post  challenge,  but  did  become  carriers  of  the 
organism.  In  contrast,  Amyx,  et  al  [10]  reported  that  all  dogs 
treated  during  initial  acute  phase  TCP  developed  typical  acute 
phase  disease  when  subsequently  reinoculated  90  days  later.  Appar¬ 
ently,  chronic  infection  of  some  dogs  with  Ehr'ichia  canis  confers 
increased  resistance  to  reinfection. 

2.  Response  of  serum  antibody  and  gammaglobulin  in  German  Shepherd 
dogs  to  Ehrlichia  canis  infection,  tetracycline  therapy,  and 
challenge  inoculation. 

Dogs  infected  with  Ehrlichia  canis,  the  etiologic  agent  of  tropical 
canine  pancytopenia  (TCP)  remain  carriers  of  the  organism  indefinite¬ 
ly.  Such  persistent  infection  occurs  irrespective  of  the  development 
of  specific  humoral  antibodies,  hypergammaglobulinemia,  and  systemic 
proliferation  of  plasma  cells.  Similar  developments  occur  in 
Aleutian  mink  disease,  which  is  considered  to  be  an  example  of  an 
immuno-pathologic  disease  [25,26].  An  immunologic  pathogenesis  of 
disease  has  been  suggested  for  TCP  [5,9]. 

In  the  preceding  scudy  the  clinical  and  hematologic  responses  of  14 
German  Shepherd  dogs  were  evaluated  following  Ehrlichia  canis 
infection,  tetracycline  therapy,  and  challenge  inoculation.  Follow¬ 
ing  an  acute  phase  illness  in  all  dogs,  nine  developed  severe  chronic 
TCP  (SCTCP)  characterized  by  severe  pancytopenia,  hemorrhage,  and 
secondary  bacterial  infection,  while  five  had  non-severe  chronic 
TCP  (NCTCP)  with  only  mild  pancytopenia.  In  spite  of  tetracycline 
therapy,  four  SCTCP  dogs  died  whi’e  five  survived.  Hematologic 
values  in  surviving  SCTCP  dogs  improved  very  gradually,  thrombo¬ 
cytopenia  and  leukopenia  persisting  for  at  least  120  days  post 
treatment.  NCTCP  dogs  showed  only  minor  hematologic  changes 
following  treatment.  £.  canis  could  not  be  recovered  from  the 
blood  of  any  treated  dog.  5Tx  surviving,  treated  dogs,  when  chal¬ 
lenged  with  the  homologous  strain  of  £.  canis,  became  reinfected 
and  two  developed  severe  disease. 

1203 


'>27-H26  0-74  -  34 


This  study  afforded  an  opportunity  to  define  the  Immunologic 
response  in  German  Shepherd  dogs  during  acute  and  chronic  E_.  canis 
infection,  following  treatment  with  tetracycline,  and  challenge 
inoculation  with  the  homologous  strain  of  £.  canis. 

Detailed  serial  studies  of  serum  antibodies  and  gammaglobulin  had 
not  been  previously  undertaken  in  German  Shepherd  dogs,  which  often 
develop  a  severe  and  fatal  illness  during  chronic  infection  with  E_. 
canis. 

The  experimental  design  and  procedures  are  given  in  the  preceding 
study.  Blood  for  serological  tests  was  collected  weekly.  Sera  were 
stored  at  -20  C  until  time  of  test.  Serum  antibodies  to  E_.  canis 
were  determined  by  the  use  of  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  ( I  FA) 
test  recently  described  by  Ristic  et  al .  [9].  All  serial  specimens 
were  tested  simultaneously.  Sera  were  screened  at  a  dilution  of 
1:10;  positive  samples  were  serially  diluted  2-fold  and  titrated. 

Protein  of  selected  serum  samples  from  nine  dogs  in  the  experimental 
group  were  separated  by  electrophoresis,  using  cellulose  acetate 
strips  (Tital  III,  Helena  Laboratories,  Beaumont,  Texas)  and  a  Tris- 
barbital -sodium-barbital  buffer.  Fractionated  protein  was  stained 
with  Ponceau  S.  (Helena  Laboratoreis) ,  scanned  with  a  Quick-Scan 
densitometer,  and  quantitated  with  a  Quick-Quant  digital  computer 
(both  from  Helena  Laboratories).  Total  protein  was  determined 
using  a  TS  refractometer.  Serum  gammaglobulin  was  expressed  as 
percent  of  total  serum  protein. 

All  dogs  were  seronegative  for  E_.  canis  antibodies  prior  to  infection. 
The  earliest  positive  conversion  occurred  seven  days  postinfection 
(PI)  in  two  dogs,  and  all  but  one  dog  were  seropositive  by  20  days 
PI  (Table  2).  Titers  in  all  dogs  increased  from  seroconversion  to 
a  maximum  titer  at  42  to  98  days  PI.  Evaluation  of  the  geometric 
mean  titer  (GMT)  of  all  dogs  before  treatment  revealed  that  GMT 
continued  to  increase  until  approximately  80  days  PI  (Figure  4A). 

Following  tetracycline  treatment  titers  decreased  from  a  pretreat¬ 
ment  GMT  of  1:110  to  1:56  at  100  days  post  treatment  (PT),  (Figure 
4B).  Individual  titers  during  the  81  to  100  day  PT  period  ranged 
from  20  to  160.  Titers  in  four  treated  dogs  that  could  be  evalu¬ 
ated  for  an  additional  100  days  PT  remained  essentially  unchanged 
during  this  period. 

Following  challenge  inoculation  of  six  treated  dogs  with  the  homo¬ 
logous  strain  of  E.  canis,  two-fold  or  more  increases  in  IFA  titer 
occurred  in  four  Hogs  by  day  six  and  in  one  dog  by  day  14  post 
challenge  (PC),  (Figure  4C).  In  one  dog  the  IFA  titer  had  in¬ 
creased  by  33  days  PC;  this  dog  developed  SCTCP  and  died  36  days 
PC.  The  GMT  for  both  SCTCP  and  NCTCP  dogs  approximately  doubled 


1204 


V 


Table  2.  Time  of  seroconversion  in  fourteen  German  Shepherd  dog?: 
Infected  with  Ehrlichia  canis. 


Days 

postinfection 

Number  of  dogs 
seronegative 

Number  of  dogs 
seropositive 

Preinfection 

14 

0 

7 

12 

2 

13 

5 

9 

20 

1 

13 

26 

1 

13 

42 

0 

14 

1205 


V 


by  14  days  PC.  Between  21  and  33  days  PC,  the  GMT  for  the  three  SCTCP 
dogs  continued  to  Increase,  whereas  titers  In  all  NCTCP  dogs  dropped 
to  the  prechallenge  level. 

Changes  In  serum  protein  were  serially  evaluated  In  four  SCTCP  and  two 
NCTCP  dogs.  Moderate  hypoprotelnemla  occurred  In  five  of  the  six  dogs 
between  20  and  42  days  PI\  but  by  63  days  PI  values  for  total  protein 
were  normal.  Decreases  in  percent  albumin  occurred  In  five  dogs  by  20 
to  26  days  PI,  and  In  the  remaining  dog  by  42  days  PI.  The  magnitude 
of  these  changes  were  similar  to  those  reported  by  Burghen  et  al.  [5]. 

No  significant  change  occurred  In  alpha1  globulin,  but  four  of  six  dogs 
had  moderate  decreases  In  percent  alpha 2  globulin  and  increases  in  beta 
globulin  during  the  acute  phase  of  infection. 

All  six  dogs  were  hypergammaglobulinemic  by  PI  day  20  (Figure  5A). 
Gammaglobulin  levels  increased  two-fold  from  a  preinfection  mean  (+SE) 
of  10.5  +  0.72  to  21.7  +  3.03  percent  at  26  days  PI.  Hypergamma¬ 
globulinemia  persisted  Tn  all  but  one  dog  until  treatment  was  initiated 
(Figures  5A  and  5B).  In  one  NCTCP  dog,  percent  gammaglobulin  had 
dropped  to  normal  by  123  days  PI,  before  treatment. 

Following  tetracycline  therapy,  gammaglobulin  levels  in  all  five  dogs 
with  hypergammaglobulinemia  decreased  to  preinfection  values,  although 
this  occurred  faster  in  some  dogs  than  in  others  (Figure  5B).  The  most 
rapid  decreases  in  gammaglobulin  were  observed  in  the  two  dogs  that  died 
with  SCTCP  after  the  treatment  period. 

Four  dogs  were  evaluated  for  changes  in  serum  gammaglobulin  following 
challenge  inoculation  with  E.  canis.  Percent  gammaglobulin  increased 
from  a  prechallenge  mean  (+  SE)  of  10.8  +1.4  to  26.3  +  3.6  at  21  days 
PC  (Figure  5C).  However,  Fypergammaglobulinemia  persisted  in  only  two 
of  the  four  challenged  dogs;  two  NCTCP  dogs  had  normal  gammaglobulin 
levels  by  97  days  PC. 

It  is  clear  that  a  humoral  antibody  response  occurs  in  dogs  infected 
with  canis  and  that  this  response  does  not  prevent  persistent  infec¬ 
tion.  The  continued  increase  in  antibody  titer  for  80  days  PI  was  con¬ 
sistent  with  the  development  of  hypergammaglobulinemia,  and  marked 
plasmacytosis  [1,27].  This  apparent  excessive  production  of  immuno¬ 
globulins  occurs  similarly  in  several  viral  diseases  which  are  character¬ 
ized  by  persistent  infection  [25,26,28,29,30]. 

IFA  titers  persist  following  termination  of  infection  with  tetra¬ 
cycline;  however  gammaglobulin  levels,  which  are  elevated  during  the 
carrier  state  return  to  normal  when  infection  is  terminated.  Correla¬ 
tion  between  gammaglobulin  level  and  infectivity  may  have  importance  in 
the  clinical  diagnosis  of  TCP.  Gammaglobulin  levels  may  be  useful  as  a 
diagnostic  aid  in  differentiating  carrier  dogs  from  dogs  which  have  been 
cleared  of  the  infection. 


1206 


V 


The  antibody  response,  hypergammaglobulinemia,  and  plasmacytosis  in 
dogs  experimentally  infected  with  TCP  occurred  after  acute  phase  ill¬ 
ness  and  peak  parasitemia  have  passed.  Chronic  phase  illness  (SCTCP) 
did  not  become  apparent  for  at  least  40  to  60  days  PI,  when  serum 
antibody  and  gammaglobulin  are  markedly  elevated.  This  suggests  that 
the  Immune  response  may  be  a  factor  in  development  of  SCTCP. 

As  would  be  expected,  dogs  challenged  with  E.  canis  manifested  an 
anamnestic  antibody  response  with  a  two-fol?  Increase  in  titer  within 
six  days.  The  magnitude  of  increases  In  gammaglobulin  were  greater 
following  the  challenge  infection  than  in  the  original  infection,  but 
whether  the  increase  occurred  sooner  is  not  clear. 

Differences  in  serum  antibody  response  to  challenge  in  SCTCP  and 
NCTCP  dogs,  as  well  as  in  the  postchallenge  clinical  and  hematologic 
responses  of  these  two  groups  serve  to  suggest,  within  the  limita¬ 
tions  of  sample  size,  a  resistance  to  E^.  canis  in  NCTCP  dogs,  but  not 
all  SCTCP  dogs.  This  resistance,  however,  was  not  reflected  in  the 
prechallenge  IFA  titers.  SCTCP  dogs  reacted  to  challenge  infection 
almost  as  if  they  had  not  previously  been  exposed  to  £.  canis.  This 
may  indicate  some  degree  of  immunoloqic  unresponsiveness  in  SCTCP  dogs, 
again  not  reflected  in  IFA  antibody  changes. 

Antibody  and  gammaglobulin  changes  occurring  in  TCP  are  similar  to 
those  in  Aleutian  mink  disease  where  gammaglobulin  levels  may  increase 
three  to  four-fold  by  30  days  PI,  and  IFA  titers  reach  100,000  or  more 
[25,26].  Antibody  titers  in  TCP  do  continue  to  increase  well  into  the 
chronic  phase  of  infection,  as  occurs  in  Aleutian  mink  disease,  and 
severe  disease  in  both  TCP  and  Aleutian  mink  disease  usually  occurs  2 
months  or  more  after  infection  [25,27].  Further  study  of  immunologic 
changes  in  TCP  may  reveal  further  similarity  with  Aleutian  mink  disease. 
Unlike  the  situation  with  the  viral  induced  immunopathologic  diseases, 
infection  with  E.  canis  can  be  readily  terminated,  facilitating  study 
of  the  host-parasite  interaction. 

3.  Studies  on  the  infectivity  and  pathogenesis  of  an  equine  ehrlichia! 
agent  in  dogs  and  other  animals. 

Equine  ehrlichiosis  has  been  reported  since  1969  in  horses  originating 
from  the  foothills  of  the  Sacramento  valley  in  California  [31].  The 
disease  is  characterized  by  low  mortality,  fever,  anorexia,  depression, 
edema  of  the  legs,  ataxia,  leukopenia,  thrombocytopenia,  mild  anemia, 
and  inclusions  in  the  cytoplasm  of  neutrophils  and  eosinophils.  Sheep, 
goats,  and  dogs  have  been  shown  to  be  susceptible  to  experimental  in¬ 
fection  with  the  agent  but  the  clinical  signs  of  infection  in  these 
animals  were  mild  or  inapparent.  The  inclusions  in  the  cytoplasm  of 
neutrophils  and  eosinophils  of  Infected  animals  were  morphologically 
similar  to  those  previously  described  for  ehrlichia  or  ehrlichia-like 
agents  of  cattle,  sheep  and  dogs. 


1207 


V 


Ehrlichia  canis,  a  tickborne  rickettsial  agent  of  world  wide  distri¬ 
bution,  has  been  reported  to  produce  a  relatively  mild  disease  except 
in  puppies  or  debilitated  older  dogs.  However,  recent  reports  of 
tropical  canine  pancytopenia  (TCP)  have  shown  that  the  severity  of 
disease  caused  by  Ehrlichia  canis  is  dependent  upon  the  breed  of  dog. 

The  severe  disease  produced  by  TT  cani s  in  the  German  Shepherd  dog 
prompted  a  study  of  the  equine  ehrl i chi al  agent.  The  objectives  of 
the  study  were  to  (1)  confirm  the  infectivity  of  the  equine  ehrl  i  chi  al 

agent  for  dogs;  (2)  examine  the  pathogenicity  of  the  equine  ehrlichia 

in  both  German  Shepherd  and  Beagle  dogs;  (3)  study  the  serologic  re¬ 
lationship  of  the  equine  ehrlichia!  agent  and  Ehrlichia  canis;  and 
(4)  determine  the  host  range  of  the  equine  ehrTTchial  agent. 

Whole  blood  from  infected  horses  was  obtained  in  the  frozen  state  from 

Dr.  David  Gribble,  University  of  California.  The  blood  was  thawed  and 

used  to  inoculate  two  horses.  During  the  acute  stage  of  infection 
when  morulae  were  evident  in  15  to  30%  of  the  circulating  granulocytes 
blood  was  collected  in  EDTA  and  used  to  inoculate  other  animals.  In¬ 
fected  blood  was  also  preserved  in  liquid  nitrogen  for  further  passage. 
The  i sol  ant  of  E.  canis  used  in  this  study  was  recovered  from  a  German 
Shepherd  dog  with  typical  signs  of  TCP  in  Southeast  Asia. 

Twenty-five  Beagle  and  German  Shepherd  dogs,  14-26  weeks  of  age  were 
used  in  the  study.  The  dogs  were  previously  vaccinated  for  distemper, 
hepatitis,  and  leptospirosis  according  to  standard  recommendations. 

The  Beagles  were  inoculated  intravenously  with  3  ml  and  the  German 
Shepherds  with  5  ml  of  infected  blood.  In  addition  some  of  the  dogs 
were  also  inoculated  intraperitoneally  with  5  ml  of  infected  blood. 

Five  domestic  short  hair  cats,  four  females  and  one  male,  each  three 
months  of  age,  and  vaccinated  for  feline  panleukopenia,  were  inoculated 
intravenously  with  3  ml  of  infected  blood  containing  the  equine  agent. 

Twelve  Rhesus  monkeys,  4  to  6  lbs  each,  and  two  baboons,  7  and  18  months 
of  age,  were  inoculated.  Rhesus  monkeys  were  of  both  sexes.  Both 
baboons  were  males.  All  primates  were  inoculated  intravenously  with 
2  ml  of  infected  horse  blood.  Six  of  the  primates  were  also  inoculated 
subcutaneously  with  5  ml  of  infected  blood  and  six  with  5  ml  intra¬ 
peritoneally. 

Eighteen  white  mice  strain  WRAIR  ICR,  7  to  9  weeks  of  age;  20  WRC  rats 
75  to  85  gm  each;  20  young  adult  golden  hamsters;  20,  200-250  gm 
Hartley  strain  guinea  pigs;  and  six,  3-4  lb  New  Zealand  white  rabbits 
were  inoculated  by  a  combination  of  intravenous,  intraperitoneal  and 
subcutaneous  routes. 

Eight  mice  were  inoculated  intravenously  with  .05  ml  0*  fresh  infected 
horse  blood;  five  received  .25  ml  intraperitoneally  and  five  .25  ml 
subcutaneously.  Ten  rats,  10  hamsters  and  10  guinea  pigs  were  each 


1208 


V, 


V 


inoculated  intraperitoneally  with  1  ml  of  infected  horse  blood. 

Similar  groups  of  10  rats,  hamsters,  and  guinea  pigs  were  each  in¬ 
jected  with  1  ml  of  the  horse  blood  subcutaneously.  Each  of  the 
rabbits  was  also  inoculated  with  1  ml  of  infected  horse  blood,  three 
rabbits  intravenously  and  three  subcutaneously. 

Dogs,  cats  and  primates  were  examined  and  rectal  temperatures  re¬ 
corded  daily.  The  primates  were  sedated  with  ketamine  hydrochloride 
before  rectal  temperatures  were  recorded.  Blood  was  collected  from 
each  of  these  animals  daily  and  examined  to  determine  if  morulae  were 
present  in  circulating  granulocytic  cells.  Two  and  often  three  times 
a  week,  depending  upon  size  and  species,  blood  was  collected  in  sealed 
vacuum  tubes  containing  EDTA  anti -coagulant  for  clinical  laboratory 
examination.  Every  two  days  blood  was  collected  from  each  of  the  small 
laboratory  animals  and  a  buffy  coat  preparation  from  the  blood  was 
examined  for  morulae.  All  laboratory  tests  were  conducted  within  2 
hours  after  specimens  were  collected.  White  and  red  blood  cell  counts 
were  determined  with  an  electronic  cell  counter.  Thrombocyte  counts 
were  determined  with  an  electronic  platelet  counter.  A  standard  micro¬ 
hematocrit  centrifuge  was  used  for  all  packed  cell  volume  determina¬ 
tions.  Hemoglobin  determinations  were  made  by  the  cyanmethmoglobin 
method.  The  Wintrobe  tube  was  used  for  determination  of  erythrocyte 
sedimentation  rates. 

Buffy  coat  smears  were  prepared  from  peripheral  blood  and  stained  with 
either  Giemsa  or  Wright's  stain.  A  minimum  of  300  neutrophils  were  ex¬ 
amined  under  oil  immersion  (1  ,000  x)  in  each  preparation.  On  a  few 
occasions  this  number  of  cells  was  difficult  to  obtain  without  the 
preparation  of  several  buffy  coat  smears.  An  animal  was  considered  to 
be  infected  with  the  equine  agent  when  two  or  more  neutrophils,  or 
eosinophils,  containing  blue-gray  mulberry  shaped  structures  composed 
of  loose  or  compact  spheres,  or  short  rounded  rods,  were  observed. 

These  structures  were  within  the  cytoplasm  of  the  encompassing  granu- 
1 ocy te . 

A  complete  necropsy  was  performed  on  each  dog,  primate  and  cat.  Tissues 
were  collected  and  fixed  in  10%  formalin  and  processed  for  histo- 
pathology  examination  by  routine  methods.  The  morulae  observed  in  the 
dogs,  horses,  and  cats  were  indistinguishable.  Within  the  granulocytes 
of  each  individual  animal,  the  size  and  shape  of  the  structures  com¬ 
posing  the  morulae,  as  well  as  the  morulae  themselves,  varied  greatly. 
These  morulae  ranged  in  diameter  from  1.5  to  5.0y.  Morulae  were  usual¬ 
ly  one  to  a  cell,  but  occasionally  two  and  even  three  were  noted  in  the 
same  neutrophil.  Morulae  were  observed  in  the  eosinophils  of  cats, 
neutrophils  of  primates  and  in  both  neutrophils  and  eosinophils  of 
horses  and  dogs 

Many  other  cytoplasmic  inclusions,  which  varied  in  density,  color,  size 
and  shape,  were  noted  a  day  or  two  p»  Icr  to  the  appearance  of  morulae. 
Many  of  these  same  structures  were  also  observed  when  morulae  were 


1209 


present.  Neutrophils  containing  cytoplasmic  Inclusions  other  than 
morulae  were  observed  In  dogs,  nonhuman  primates,  guinea  pigs  and 
mice.  These  Inclusions  consisted  of  a  single,  or  often  a  pair  of  dark 
blue-black  sphere(s)  approximately  .2  y  In  diameter.  These  Inclusions 
were  not  considered  as  evidence  of  infection.  Gross  or  microscopic 
lesions  attributable  to  the  Infection  could  not  be  demonstrated  in  any 
of  the  animals  or  tissues  examined. 

None  of  the  25  dogs  Inoculated  with  the  equine  ehrllchlal  agent  demon¬ 
strated  any  of  the  outward  clinical  signs  of  anorexia,  conjunctivitis, 
or  hemorrhage,  typical  of  German  Shepherd  dogs  Infected  with  Ehrlichia 
canis.  Morulae  were  observed  In  the  circulating  granulocytes  of  15  of 
25  dogs  from  7  to  22  days  after  inoculation.  The  presence  of  morulae 
coincided  with  a  mild  pyrexia,  a  short  transient  thrombocytopenia  and 
decreased  hematocrit.  Morulae  appeared  In  most  of  the  dogs  between 
the  7th  and  16th  day  after  Inoculation,  and  persisted  for  1  to  4  days. 
Only  a  few  of  the  dogs  became  leukopenic  and/or  demonstrated  an  in¬ 
creased  sedimentation  rate.  Hematologic  values  of  all  25  dogs  re¬ 
turned  to  preinfection  levels  within  2  weeks  following  the  disappear¬ 
ance  of  morulae.  Morulae  were  observed  in  12  of  the  inoculated  Beagles 
and  3  of  8  German  Shepherds.  Two  to  4  months  after  the  disappearance 
of  morulae,  8  of  these  dogs,  5  Beagles  and  3  German  Shepherds,  were 
challenged  with  E.  canis  infected  blood.  Within  2  weeks  after  inocu¬ 
lation  all  eight  of  the  challenged  dogs  developed  the  typical  signs  of 
tropical  canine  pancytopenia,  exclusive  of  epistaxis.  The  signs  in¬ 
cluded  severe  pyrexia,  anorexia,  greatly  increased  erythrocyte  sedi¬ 
mentation  rate,  a  severe  thrombocytopenia,  anemia  and  leukopenia. 

Morulae  were  observed  in  eosinophils  of  1  of  3  cats  inoculated  with 
infected  horse  blood  and  1  of  2  cats  inoculated  with  infected  dog 
blood.  In  none  of  the  cats  were  morulae  seen  in  neutrophils.  The 
cats  were  only  mildly  affected.  Eosinophils  containing  morulae  we^e 
present  on  days  7  and  8  after  Inoculation.  A  definite  eosinophil  la 
occurred  in  both  cats  during  the  period  morulae  were  observed. 

Of  the  14  Inoculated  nonhuman  primates  morulae  were  observed  in  the 
blood  of  7  Rhesus  monkeys  and  1  baboon.  No  abnormalities  in  habits, 
appetite  or  physical  condition  were  noted  In  any  of  the  inoculated 
animals.  Morulae  were  noted  only  In  the  mature  neutrophils  of  the 
primates.  As  in  some  dogs  single  small  blue-black  spheres  were  seen 
In  the  cytoplasm  of  neutrophils  of  several  of  the  infected  primates. 
Morulae  were  present  within  3  to  7  days  after  inoculation.  Blood 
collected  from  two  of  the  infected  Rhesus  monkeys  was  used  to  success¬ 
fully  Infect  a  second  horse.  Infected  blood  collected  from  this 
second  horse  during  the  acute  stage  of  Illness  was  injected  into  4 
susceptible  Rhesus  monkeys.  These  4  monkeys  were  closely  observed 
and  temperatures  recorded  twice  daily.  A  small  quantity  of  blood 
was  collected  every  12  hours  from  the  monkeys  for  buffy  coat  prepara¬ 
tions.  Morulae  first  appeared  In  the  neutrophils  of  one  of  the 


V 


monkeys  on  the  3rd  day  after  Inoculation  and  continued  to  be  present 
through  the  6th  day.  Two  of  the  remaining  3  monkeys  demonstrated 
:rorulae  on  the  5th  day.  In  one  monkey  morulae  were  also  detected  on 
the  6th  and  7th  day  following  Inoculation.  Morulae  were  not  ot'erved 
In  the  granulocytes  of  the  4th  monkey. 

The  3  Rhesus  monkeys  In  which  morulae  wjre  observed  experienced  a 
definite  pyrexia.  Increased  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate,  a  mild 
thrombocytopenia  and  leukopenia,  as  well  as  a  mild  anemia.  All  ani¬ 
mals  returned  to  normal  within  one  week  of  the  disappearance  of 
morulae. 

Granulocytes  containing  morulae  were  not  observed  in  any  of  the  rats, 
mice,  guinea  pigs,  hamsters  and  rabbits  Inoculated  with  the  agent. 
However  neutrophils  containing  cytoplasmic  Inclusions  were  noted  In 
several  of  the  guinea  pigs  and  mice.  These  inclusions  did  not  meet 
the  criteria  for  morulae  but  many  were  of  Identical  color,  size  and 
shape  as  the  dark  blue-black  spheres,  appearing  singularly,  in  pairs 
or  as  triads. 

None  of  the  small  laboratory  animals  died  of  causes  attributed  to 
inoculation  with  the  equine  ehrlichia.  All  of  the  animals  continued 
to  grow  and  gain  weight  throughout  the  study. 

Beagle  and  German  Shepherd  dogs  Inoculated  with  the  equine  ehrlichial 
agent  demonstrated  only  a  mild  hematological  response  and  no  observ¬ 
able  signs  of  illness.  However  morulae  were  present  In  12  of  17 
Beagles  and  3  of  8  German  Shepherds  Inoculated  with  infected  blood. 
There  has  been  a  reported  difference  In  severity  of  disease  in  the 
Beagle  and  the  German  Shepherd  dogs  experimentally  infected  with  £. 
canis.  In  the  German  Shepherd  £.  can is  produces  a  severe  highly  " 
fatal ,  hemorrhagic  disease.  No  differences  were  noted  between  the 
two  breeds  of  dogs  Infected  with  the  equine  ehrlichial  agent. 

Cytoplasmic  inclusions  which  did  not  meet  the  criteria  for  morulae 
were  present  in  the  neutrophils  of  primates,  some  of  the  small  labo¬ 
ratory  animals,  and  dogs.  These  inclusions  appeared  to  be  indis¬ 
tinguishable  from  those  described  by  Gribble,  in  mice  and  guinea  pigs, 
of  approximately  0.2  p  in  diameter.  Such  spheres  may  represent  an 
early  stage  in  the  development  of  the  organism  within  the  cytoplasm. 
These  forms  at  times  appeared  to  be  dividing  while  others  seemed  to 
be  merely  remains  of  previous  morulae  and  yet  other  forms  were  highly 
suggestive  of  the  life  cycle  described  for  some  of  the  chlamydiae. 
Similar  structures  were  also  described  by  Donatien  and  Lestoquard  as 
a  part  of  the  developmental  cycle  of  E.  canis. 


1211 


Recently  Ewing  [32]  reported  the  Identification  of  a  "new  strain"  of 
Ehrlichia  canis  In  a  dog  In  Arkansas.  Morulae  were  found  in  neutro- 
phlls  and  In  the  eosinophils  of  2  dogs  experimentally  infected  with 
the  "new  strain"  of  Ehrlichia  canls.  This  strain  produced  relatively 
mild  disease  In  the  naturally  Infected  dog  from  which  the  i sol  ant  was 
recovered  and  In  the  2  experimentally  Infected  dogs.  The  mild  nature 
of  disease  produced  in  these  dogs  is  not  unlike  the  mild  response  re¬ 
ported  in  this  study* for  the  dogs  Infected  with  the  equine  ehrlichial 
agent.  Both  agents  were  characterized  by  the  presence  of  morulae  in 
granulocytes.  From  these  observations  one  may  speculate  that  the 
isolate  recently  recovered  by  Ewing  and  the  equine  ehrlichial  agent 
may  be  identical.  In  addition  these  agents  possess  striking  morpho¬ 
logic  resemblance  to  the  agents  of  tick-borne  fever  and  bovine 
petechial  fever.  A  recent  report  [33]  on  the  ultrastructure  of  the 
agent  of  bovine  petechial  fever  strongly  supports  the  grouping  to¬ 
gether  of  the  California  ehrlichial  agent,  the  agents  of  tick-borne 
fever  and  the  agent  of  bovine  petechial  fever  into  a  single  genus. 

The  response  of  dogs  infected  with  the  equine  ehrlichial  agent  was 
dramatically  different  from  the  severe  disease  reported  in  Beagle 
and  German  Shepherd  dogs  exposed  to  the  i sol  ants  of  Ehrlichia  canis. 

Previous  infection  with  the  equine  ehrlichial  agent  does  not  provide 
protection  against  subsequent  infection  with  Ehrlichia  canis.  Each 
of  the  8  challenged  dogs,  5  German  Shepherds  and  3  Beagles,  developed 
signs  of  TCP  (pyrexia,  depression,  lowered  thrombocyte  count,  eleva¬ 
tion  of  the  erythrocyte  sedimentation  rate,  and  lowered  red  and  white 
cell  counts)  within  7  to  10  days  after  inoculation  with  Ehrlichia 
canis.  Morulae  of  £.  canis  were  observed  in  lymphocytes  and  mono- 
cytes  of  both  breeds  of  dogs . 

Our  successful  experimental  infection  of  a  variety  of  previously  re¬ 
ported  species  plus  the  infection  of  3  new  species,  cat, Rhesus  monkey 
and  baboon,  tend  to  further  distinguish  this  agent  from  the  other 
rickettsial  agents  of  animals.  The  equine  ehrlichial  agent  was 
successfully  passed  from  a  horse  to  a  group  of  nonhuman  primates, 
back  to  a  second  horse  and  from  this  second  horse  to  a  second  group 
of  nonhuman  primates.  The  agent  was  identified  in  the  neutrophils 
of  animals  from  each  group.  These  studies  serve  to  direct  attention 
to  the  potential  transmission  of  ehrlichial  agents  to  man. 

4 .  Characterization  of  the  agent  of  Salmon  Poisoning  Disease  (SPD). 

A  previous  report  described  the  in  vitro  isolation  of  the  SPD  agent 
by  using  the  method  described  by~Ryindo  et  al . ,  for  in  vitro  culti¬ 
vation  of  £.  canis.  Upon  initial  isolation  the  SPD  agent  was  capable 
of  producing  an  acute  lethal  infection  when  inoculated  intravenously 
into  Beagle  dogs.  Continuous  in  vitro  passage  of  the  agent  was 


V 


possible,  and  at  higher  passage  the  Isolate  became  less  virulent  for 
dogs.  At  the  18th  passage  the  SPD  Isolate  was  Infectious  but  non- 
lethal  for  dogs.  Clinical  signs  produced  by  the  non-lethal  agent 
were  compatable  with  those  reported  for  Elokomln  Fluke  Fever. 

Challenge  studies  In  dogs  using  the  lethal  and  non-lethal  isolates 
are  In  progress.  Results  indicate  that  treated  dogs  which  have  re¬ 
covered  from  Infection  with  the  lethal  Isolate  are  immune  to  Infec¬ 
tion  by  the  non-lethal  isolate.  However,  dogs  which  have  recovered 
from  an  Infection  with  the  non-lethal  isolate  are  not  Immune  to  infec¬ 
tion  by  the  lethal  isolate. 

Using  a  commercially  available  anti-canine  conjugate  it  was  possible 
to  specifically  stain  both  the  lethal  and  non-lethal  isolate  in  mono- 
layers  of  canine  monocytes  by  an  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  method. 
Preliminary  results  of  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  staining  indi¬ 
cate  the  lethal  and  non-lethal  isolates  are  related  anti geni cal ly. 

Initial  results  based  upon  morphology,  CPE,  and  indirect  fluorescent 
antibody  staining  indicate  the  non-lethal  SPD  isolate  will  multiply 
in  primary  canine  kidney  cell  cultures.  Additional  studies  are  plan¬ 
ned  to  more  definitively  characterize  the  SPD  agent  and  to  compare 
disease  produced  in  dogs  by  SPD  and  £.  canis. 

5.  Isolation  of  Rickettsia  rickettsi  from  experimentally  infected 
guinea  pigs  by  primary  cultivation  of  bone  marrow  cells  and 
circulating  monocytes.  ~ 

The  cultivation  in  primary  monocyte  cell  culture  of  two  rickettsia- 
like  agents  of  the  dog.  Ehrlichia  canis  and  Neorickettsia  helminthoeca, 
was  recently  reported  [34,35].  Additionally,  £.  canis  has  been  iso¬ 
lated  from  infected  dogs  using  primary  bone  marrow  cell  cultures. 

These  findings  prompted  evaluation  of  the  bone  marrow  cell  and  peri¬ 
pheral  monocyte  culture  techniques  for  the  primary  isolation  of 
rickettsial  agents  of  man.  Initial  studies  were  carried  out  with 
Rickettsia  rickettsi . 

Male  Hartley  guinea  pigs,  400-500  gm,  were  inoculated  intraperitoneal- 
ly  with  1-4  x  103  fifty  percent  egg  infective  doses  of  a  yolk  sac 
suspension  of  R.  rickettsi  (Sheila  Smith  strain).  Rectal  temperatures 
were  recorded  cTaiTy^  Three  to  seven  days  post  inoculation  (PI) 
selected  animals  were  anesthetized;  blood  was  collected  from  the 
heart  and  heparinized  (20  units/ml),  and  both  femurs  were  removed 
aseptically.  Blood  was  centrifuged  in  10  ml  buffy  coat  centrifuge 
tubes  (Vir  Tis,  Arthur  H.  Thomas  Co.,  Philadelphia)  at  500  x  g  for 
10-20  minutes  at  4  C.  The  buffy  coat  was  aspirated,  resuspended  in 
autologous  plasma,  and  placed  in  Leighton-type  tissue  culture  tubes 
with  coverslips.  Cultures  were  incubated  at  34-35  C  for  18  hours. 


1213 


m 


washed  twice  with  Hank's  balanced  salt  solution,  and  fed  with  tissue 
culture  medium  (TCM)  (Eagle's  minimum  essential  medium  with  Earl's 
balanced  salt  solution,  supplemented  with  30-402!  guinea  pig  serum  and 
0.1  mM  L-glutamlne  per  milliliter).  TCM  was  changed  every  48-72 
hours.  Femoral  marrow  cavities  were  flushed  with  TCM  and  the  bone 
marrow  cells  were  suspended  In  the  TCM  by  vigorous  pipetting.  The 
bone  marrow  cell  suspension  was  placed  Into  Leighton-type  tubes  and 
then  handled  Identically  to  cultured  circulating  monocytes.  Cultures 
from  uninoculated  guinea  pigs  were  also  prepared. 

At  various  intervals,  3-11  days  after  Initiation  of  cultures,  cover- 
slips  were  removed  and  stained  by  the  Glmenez  technique,  or  with 
fluorescein  conjugated  anti  I*,  rickettsi  rabbit  serum.  Conjugated 
antisera  to  Rickettsia  tsutsugamushi  and  conjugated  normal  rabbit 
serum  were  used  as  controls. 

Results  of  two  experiments  are  summarized  (Tables  3  and  4). 

Rickettsiae  were  isolated  in  both  bone  marrow  cell  and  circulating 
monocyte  cultures  derived  3  to  7  days  PI.  Morphological ly-typi cal 
rickettsiae  were  readily  recognized  In  Glmenez  stained  cultures. 

The  number  of  cultured  cells  Infected  with  rickettsiae,  and  the  number 
of  organisms  per  cell  increased  with  duration  of  culture.  Organisms 
were  seen  in  the  nucleus  as  well  as  the  cytoplasm  of  infected  cells. 
Rickettsiae  In  cell  culture  were  specifically  stained  with  fluorescein 
conjugated  R.  rickettsi  antiserum  but  not  with  conjugates  of  R. 
tsutsugamushi  anti  serum  or  normal  rabbit  serum.  Guinea  pigs  Tnocu- 
lated  with  TCM  from  infected  cultures  developed  typical  signs  of  R. 
rickettsi  infection.  Although  antibiotics  were  not  used  in  any  cul¬ 
tures,  bacterial  contamination  was  not  a  problem.  II.  rickettsi  was 
not  observed  in  cultures  from  uninfected  guinea  pigs. 

Studies  are  in  progress  to  evaluate  the  sensitivity  of  the  bone  marrow 
cell  culture  and  monocyte  culture  techniques  and  to  relate  success  of 
culture  to  levels  of  rickettsemia,  clinical  signs,  and  development  of 
specific  serum  antibodies.  That  rickettsiae  were  recognized  as  early 
as  3  days  after  cultures  were  initiated  suggests  the  possible  useful¬ 
ness  of  primary  cultures  as  a  means  of  rapid  and  specific  diagnosis  in 
R.  rickettsi  infections.  It  is  hoped  that  these  techniques  will  be 
applicable  to  other  rickettsial  infections  as  well. 

6.  Respiratory  disease  in  military  dogs. 

In  May- June  of  1966,  epizootics  of  respiratory  disease  occurred  at  the 
military  dog  procurement  and  training  centers  [36,37].  Signs  of  upper 
respiratory  disease  occurred  in  approximately  33  percent  of  the  dogs 
at  the  Ft.  Benning  scout  dog  training  center.  The  epizootic  disrupted 
the  training  and  deployment  of  the  dogs.  The  etiological  agent  was 
shown  to  be  parainfluenza  SV-5  which  was  recovered  from  affected  dogs. 


1214 


Table  4.  Isolation  of  Rickettsia  rickettsi  from  guinea  pigs  by 
primary  cultivation  of  circulating  monocytes. 


Guinea  pig 

Day  post- 

Days  of  culture  a 

no. 

infection 

3  5 

7 

Tl 

2491 

3 

- 

- 

+ 

2492 

4 

- 

+ 

ND 

2493 

5 

+ 

ND 

ND 

24^4 

7 

- 

+ 

ND 

a  Plus  (+)  Indicates  R.  rickettsi  observed  in  culture:  minus  (-) 
indicates  R.  rickettsi  not  observed;  ND  indicates  not  done. 


1 


N 


1216 


) 


V 


By  the  use  of  serological  tests,  the  virus  was  shown  to  infect  almost 
all  the  dogs  [36,37].  In  1967  and  1963  respiratory  disease  con¬ 
tinued  to  appear  in  military  dogs  at  the  procurement  and  training 
centers  [38].  Sero-epldemlologlcal  studies  indicated  that  SV-5  in¬ 
fections  continued  and  dogs  were  Infected  soon  after  arrival  at  the 
procurement  center  [38].  Since  1969  the  Incidence  of  respiratory 
disease  and  SV-5  infections  have  declined  to  a  very  low  level.  How¬ 
ever,  more  than  85%  of  newly  procured  dogs  continue  to  be  susceptible 
to  SV-5  infection  on  the  basis  of  serological  test  findings  (Annual 
Report  1971-72).  This  report  sunmarizes  further  serological  studies 
on  SV-5  Infections  in  military  dogs  at  the  procurement  and  training 
centers . 

During  the  past  year  paired  serum  samples  were  obtained  from  203  mili¬ 
tary  dogs  upon  arrival  and  departure  from  the  procurement  center.  One 
hundred  seventy-eight  (87%)  were  devoid  of  parainfluenza  SV-5  antibody. 
The  serologically  positive  dogs  came  from  10  states,  representing  all 
areas  of  the  United  States.  None  of  the  serologically-negative  dogs 
developed  SV-5  antibody  during  their  stay  at  the  procurement  center, 
indicating  infections  with  this  virus  did  not  occur  at  this  time.  The 
87%  incidence  of  SV-5  serotest  susceptible  dogs  observed  this  year  was 
essentially  the  same  as  those  seen  in  the  previous  three  years. 

Tests  for  SV-5  antibody  also  were  done  on  serum  specimens  from  54  dogs 
at  Ft.  Benning,  Georgia.  The  dogs  were  bled  in  April -May  1973.  Forty- 
one  (76%)  dogs  were  serotest  positive.  Previous  test  for  SV-5  anti¬ 
body  had  been  done  on  19  of  these  dogs  and  only  4  were  serotest  posi¬ 
tive.  Ten  of  the  remaining  15  dogs  converted  to  positive  antibody 
status.  The  earlier  specimens  from  the  converting  dogs  were  obtained 
in  1969  and  early  1970.  Fcjr  of  the  5  dogs  which  did  not  convert  were 
bled  in  late  1970  and  1971.  The  time  of  trese  SV-5  infections  is  not 
known.  Infections  probably  occurred  in  1969  and  early  1970.  All  8 
dogs  bred  at  Biosensor  Unit  at  Edgewood  were  serotest  negative.  Past 
sero-surveys  of  these  dogs  Indicated  the  absence  of  SV-5  infections. 

7.  Pathogenicity  of  the  canine  coronavirus  isolate  in  neonatal  dogs 
and  swine’ 

The  recovery  of  2  canine  coronavirus  isolates,  L198R  and  1-71,  have 
been  previously  described  (Annual  Report  1971-1972).  The  L198R  iso¬ 
late  was  recovered  from  a  laboratory  dog  with  fatal  respiratory  dis¬ 
ease  and  the  1-71  virus  was  isolated  from  military  dogs  in  Germany 
with  diarrheal  disease.  These  viruses  were  found  to  be  anti geni cal ly 

related  but  neither  were  serologically  identical  to  transmissible 
gastroenteritis  virus  of  swine  (TGE).  The  TGE  virus  is  known  to  infect 
dogs  [39].  Initial  attempts  to  infect  pigs  with  the  L198R  virus  were 
unsuccessful  (Annual  Report  1971-72).  The  present  report  summarizes 
studies  on  the  pathogenicity  of  the  second  dog  isolate  1-71  for  pigs 
and  neonatal  dogs. 


1217 


V 


Pigs  free  of  TGE,  1-71  and  L198R  neutralizing  antibody  were  obtained 
from  the  WRAIR  farm  at  Ft.  Meade.  In  the  first  experiment  2  1/2 
month-old  pigs  were  given  approximately  25,000  TCID50  of  1-71  virus 
by  either  the  Intravenous  (2  pigs)  or  combined  oral -nasal  (4  pigs) 
routes.  No  signs  of  disease  were  observed  post-inoculation.  Follow¬ 
ing  inoculation  the  virus  could  not  be  recovered  from  rectal  swab 
specimens  over  a  10  da.,  period;  neither  could  specific  neutralizing 
antibody  be  detected  through  day  35.  When  pigs  were  autopsied  no 
gross  or  histopathologlcal  lesions  of  TGE  were  seen.  In  the  second 
experiment,  six  5-day-old  pigs  were  fed  approximately  250,000  TCID50 
of  1-71  virus.  Again  clinical  signs  of  disease  were  not  observed. 

The  virus  could  not  be  recovered  from  either  throat  or  rectal  swab 
specimens  through  12  days  post  exposure  and  there  was  no  detectable 
antibody  to  1-71,  TGE  or  L198R  on  day  19.  At  this  time  the  3-week- 
old  pigs  were  challenged  with  approximately  10,000  pig  ID50  of  viru¬ 
lent  TGE.  On  days  3,  4  and  5  all  of  the  pigs  had  acute  gastro¬ 
enteritis,  manifested  by  vomiting,  diarrhea,  weight  loss  and  anorexia. 
One  of  the  pigs  died  on  the  6th  day.  Two  other  pigs  were  killed  for 
histopathological  study.  One  of  these  had  histological  lesions  com¬ 
patible  with  TGE  infection.  The  other  baby  pig  had  no  signs  of  TGE 
infection.  The  remaining  pigs  began  to  improve  on  day  7  and  all  sub¬ 
sequently  recovered.  On  day  20  post  TGE  challenge  each  pig  had  de¬ 
veloped  TGE  neutralizing  antibody,  titers  ranging  from  1:2  to  1:32, 
but  no  antibody  to  the  canine  coronavi ruses  isolates  1-71  and  L198R 
were  found. 

The  response  of  neonatal  dogs  to  1-71  infection  were  studied  in  two 
litters.  Three  or  five  days  after  birth  all  but  1  or  2  pups  in  each 
litter  were  fed  1-71  virus.  Pups  in  the  two  litters  (G25  and  C80) 
were  given  30,000  TCID50  and  500,000  TCIP5Q  of  virus  respectively. 

The  remaining  pups  were  kept  as  contact  controls.  Three  to  five  days 
after  infection  the  pups  of  bitch  G25  had  clinical  signs  of  acute 
gastroenteritis  and  dehydration.  These  signs  persisted  for  1  to  6 
days  (Table  5).  Concurrent  with  disease  signs,  virus  was  recovered 
from  fecal  swab  specimens.  The  virus  was  usually  recovered  over  a  7 
to  8  day  period.  Neutralizing  antibody  to  1-71  virus  was  present  21 
days  post-infection.  Antibody  titers  to  TGE  and  L198R  were  often  4- 
fold  lower  than  1-71  virus.  The  response  of  the  second  litter  (C80) 
was  essentially  similar  to  that  of  G25  except  the  clinical  signs  were 
milder  and  the  antibody  titers  to  1-71  and  TGE  were  similar. 

The  experiments  indicate  that  1-71  virus  is  not  infectious  for  pigs 
but  infects  neonatal  dogs.  Mild  signs  of  gastroenteritis  were  seen 
in  the  puppies.  This  virus  may  be  an  important  cause  of  canine 
diarrheal  disease.  Further  studies  are  required  to  define  the  precise 
antigenic  relationships  of  1-71,  L198R  and  TGE. 


1218 


Table  5.  Observations  of  newborn  puppies  infected  with  Canine  Coronavirus  Isolate  1-71. 


v 


o 

CM 

o 

CM 

Q 

Q 

o 

Q 

o 

Q 

VO 

z 

Z 

z 

Z 

z 

z 

1 

CM 

CM 

o 

-) 

cm 

o 

o 

CM 

CM 

o 

o 

a: 

00 

cn 

f 

to 

I 

00 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

CM 

Q 

Q 

r- 

CM 

z 

— 1 

1 

C 

f— 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

CM 

s- 

<v 

<P 

•r— 

O 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

o 

a 

Q 

o 

o 

o 

h- 

VO 

■ 

z 

z 

z 

z 

z 

z 

>> 

1 

CM 

O 

00 

O 

CM 

00 

CO 

CM 

00 

00 

CM 

-O 

o 

UJ 

1 

-Q 

o 

00 

O 

O 

o 

O 

00 

CM 

00 

00 

00 

CM 

•f 

h- 

CM 

00 

•P 

1 

* 

c 

r— 

o 

CM 

o 

o 

CM 

CM 

CM 

CM 

o 

O 

< 

CM 

C7> 

C 

•r- 

col 

col 

col 

N 

O 

col 

col 

cm) 

ool 

CM 

ool 

col 

VO 

001 

ool 

r— 

1 

col 

ool 

*3 

CM 

col 

col 

cm) 

ool 

ool 

ool 

CM 

ool 

J- 

r— 

* 

oo| 

■P 

1 

cmI 

* 

i 

00 

cm| 

col 

cm| 

o 

a 

Q 

o 

o 

Q 

<U 

r— 

CM 

z 

z 

z 

z 

z 

Z 

Z 

f _L 

cm! 

cm] 

cm| 

cm| 

cm! 

cm| 

cm| 

cm| 

cm| 

o| 

CM 

CM 

r— 

r— 

* 

VO 

r* 

OO 

CM 

r— 

o 

o 

r— 

r— 

p— 

CO 

1 — 

r— 

f— 

tfl 

>> 

E 

CM 

r— 

1 

** 

1 

o 

f— 

t— 

V. 

3 

r — 

rv 

cr> 

cr> 

r— 

r— 

cn 

1 

0) 

■P 

o 

* 

CM 

a 

r— 

r— 

> 

U 

CT> 

LO 

r— 

CO 

a> 

1 

r— 

o 

<V 

1 

1 

1 

i 

i 

i 

1 

i 

1— 

p 

c 

>> 

cc 

ID 

LO 

CO 

^3" 

LO 

VO 

LO 

a 

03 

oc 

O 

-P 

to 

C 

<0 

3 

o 

o 

cn 

o 

03 

O 

O 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

i- 

u 

•r— 

sz 

> 

\- 

o 

<u 

VO 

f— 

-C 

>1 

CM 

* 

s- 

to 

r— 

cn 

f— 

s-  o 

#> 

* 

tM 

03 

l n 

a> 

cn 

<X> 

f — 

•r* 

c 

i 

t 

i 

i 

1 

r> 

1 

•s 

Q 

o 

** 

LO 

00 

LO 

VO 

r^. 

VO 

c 

4- 

o 

O 

*r- 

•P 

•P 

-p 

•P 

u 

u 

o 

03 

U 

«3 

03 

+-> 

0) 

-P 

r— 

1— 

r— 

r— 

r— 

r— 

•p 

-p 

3  4- 

C 

03 

to 

ftJ 

f0 

*3 

«3 

A3 

c 

c 

O 

c 

o 

S- 

u 

s- 

J- 

V- 

L- 

S- 

o 

o 

ac  hh 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

o 

O 

o 

u 

o 

CL 

3 

o 

fmm 

CM 

oo 

CM 

oo 

VO 

LO 

CL 

z 

1 

tv 

lo  xj 

O  TJ 

cn 

CM  00 

co  in 

< 

o  ^ 

1219 


( 


1 


i 


V 


less  than  1 :2 
ND  =  not  done 


8.  Recovery  of  Reovirus  Type  II  and  the  Toronto  A26/61  Canine 
Adenovirus  from  a  puppy  with  respiratory  disease. 

Reovi ruses  have  been  found  to  be  widely  distributed  in  mammalian 
species.  To  date  only  Reovirus  Type  I  has  been  recovered  from  dogs 
with  respiratory  disease  [40,41].  However,  serologic  evidence  of 
Type  II  infection  has  been  reported  [42].  The  present  study  substan¬ 
tiates  the  serologic  evidence  of  Reovirus  Type  II  infection  by  the 
recovery  of  this  virus  from  a  puppy  in  the  initial  stages  of  respira¬ 
tory  disease.  Subsequently  a  Toronto  A26/61  Canine  Adenovirus  was 
recovered  from  several  post-mortem  tissues. 

An  unvaccinated  puppy  (Z-4),  purchased  for  cell  culture  production, 
developed  a  cough  and  nasal  discharge.  The  signs  of  respiratory 
disease  continued  another  2  months  when  the  puppy  developed  bronchi o- 
pneumonia  and  gastroenteritis.  The  animal  was  killed  and  examined. 

Gross  lesions  were  evident  in  the  lung  and  small  intestine.  A  few 
yellowish  consolidated  areas  were  seen  in  the  lungs.  The  small 
intestine  was  focally  hyperemic  and  a  few  ascarid  nematodes  were  in 
the  lumen. 

A  severe,  diffuse,  subacute  interstitial  pneumonia  characterized  by 
thickening  of  alveolar  walls,  by  mononuclear  cell  infiltration  and 
hypertrophy  of  alveolar  septal  cells  were  revealed  by  histopathologic 
examination.  Scattered  throughout  the  lung  were  multifocal  areas  of 
polymorphonuclear  cell  infiltrate  in  terminal  air  passages  and  alveolar 
spaces.  This  latter  finding  coupled  with  a  subacute  tracheitis  in  this 
animal  are  suggestive  of  a  primary  viral  respiratory  infection  with 
secondary  bacterial  insult.  A  mild,  multifocal,  nonsuppurative 
meningoencephalitis  was  observed  in  the  posterior  portion  of  the  brain, 
i.e.,  cerebellar  peduncles,  pons  and  fourth  ventricle.  The  exact  cause 
of  this  lesion  is  unknown.  A  catarrhal  enteritis  caused  by  Coccidia  sp. 
was  present  in  the  small  intestine.  Specimens  for  virus  isolation  were 
obtained  from  nares,  throat  and  rectum  two  days  after  disease  onset. 

In  addition,  specimens  from  the  respiratory  tract  and  other  tissues 
were  obtained  during  post-mortem  examination.  Blood  for  serological 
tests  were  obtained  at  various  intervals  during  the  illness.  The  virus 
isolation  specimens  were  treated  with  antibiotics  and  centrifuged  as 
previously  described  [43 j .  The  specimens  were  inoculated  into  primary 
dog  kidney  (PDK)  and  into  the  Walter  Reed  Canine  cell  (WRCC)  line  [44]. 
Negative  specimens  were  subcultured  and  tested  for  hemadsorption  prop¬ 
erties  with  guinea  pig  erythrocytes.  Procedures  for  chemical,  physical 
and  serologic  tests  have  been  described  previously  [43,44].  Two  groups 
of  agents  were  recovered  from  this  puppy.  Toronto  A26/61  canine  adeno¬ 
viruses  were  recovered  from  the  nasal  turbinates,  lungs,  liver,  stomach 
and  small  intestine  of  the  post-mortem  tissues.  Virus  was  not  recovered 


1220 


V 


from  the  brain,  lymph  nodes,  adrenals,  myocardium,  pancreas,  uterus, 
spleen,  bladder,  kidney  and  colon.  Agents  were  isolated  from  lungs, 
small  intestine  and  nasal  turbinates  in  both  PDK  and  WRCC  cultures. 
The  other  agents  were  recovered  in  PDK  cell  cultures  inoculated  with 
specimens  obtained  2  days  post  disease  onset.  Cytopathic  effects 
(CPE)  were  seen  on  the  fourth  and  seventh  days  in  cultures  inocu¬ 
lated  with  rectal  and  throat  specimens,  respectively.  In  both  in¬ 
stances  the  CPE  were  similar,  the  infected  cells  appeared  more  gran¬ 
ular,  somewhat  "non-specific,"  and  detached  from  the  glass  surface. 
These  CPE  were  readily  transmissible.  The  rectal  isolate  designated 
14-72R  was  chosen  for  reference  purposes.  This  isolate  was  purified 
by  three  successive  terminal  dilutions  and  seed  virus  pools  were  pre¬ 
pared  for  identification  purposes.  Cytoplasmic  inclusions  were  evi¬ 
dent  in  stained  infected  cell  cultures.  They  were  eosinophilic  on 
hematoxylin  and  eosin  staining  and  were  green  in  acridine  orange 
stained  cultures.  The  latter  findings  indicated  the  presence  of  a 
double  stranded  viral  nucleic  acid. 

Results  of  studies  on  the  chemical  and  physical  properties  of  14-72R 
are  summarized  in  Table  6.  The  isolate  was  resistant  to  chloroform 
and  pH  3.0  treatment.  Growth  of  the  agent  was  not  inhibited  by  5- 
iodo-deoxyuridine  (IUDR)  and  the  agent  was  readily  filterable  through 
0.45,  0.22,  and  0.10  micron  millipore  filters.  However,  the  virus 
titer  was  markedly  reduced  following  passage  of  virus  through  the 
0.05  micron  filter.  These  findings  suggested  that  the  14-72R  agent 
is  naked,  contains  RNA  (probably  double  stranded)  and  is  less  than 
0.1  micron  in  size.  On  the  basis  of  these  findings  the  isolate  could 
best  fit  in  the  reovirus  group. 

To  identify  the  isolate  further,  negatively-stained  and  ultra-thin 
sections  of  infected  cell  cultures  were  examined  by  electron  micros¬ 
copy.  Dr.  A.  Strano  and  Mr.  W.  Engler  of  the  Armed  Forces  Institute 
of  Pathology  collaborated  in  these  studies.  Typical  reovirus  parti¬ 
cles  were  seen  in  phosphotungstic  acid,  negatively-stained  prepara¬ 
tions.  The  full  and  empty  virions  measured  approximately  72  nano¬ 
meters  in  diameters.  Full  and  empty  core  particles  of  reovirus,  54 
nanometers  in  diameter,  were  also  seen.  These  core  particles  are 
reported  to  be  infectious  and  thereby  explain  the  infectivity  of  the 
0.05  micron  filtrate  [45].  Typical  reovirus  particles  and  tubules 
in  the  cytoplasm  were  also  revealed  by  examination  of  the  ultra-thin 
sections  of  14-72R  infected  cell  cultures.  Full  and  empty  naked 
particles  of  approximately  75  nanometers  appeared  singly  and  in  large 
aggregates.  To  identify  the  reovirus  serotype,  hemagglutinating 
antigens  were  prepared  from  14-72R  infected  PDK  cultures  maintained 
in  serum-free  media.  The  antigen  agglutinated  human,  but  not  rhesus 
or  goose  erythrocytes. 


1221 


V 


Chemical  ana 
Reovirus  II  Isolate. 


Treatment 
Chloroform 

pH  3.0 

IUDR(-3.5M) 


14-72R 

ICH  (Cornell) 

Canine  herpes  (0004) 

14-72R 

ICH  (Cornell) 

Canine  herpes 

14-72R  (70  hrs)* 
SV-5  (Dusty 


^  ^lACDSO  { 

10) 

XT) 

UTtange^ 

Y mAI t  pH  f  A  ) 

Treated^ 

JfclL 

1  recic'j  s  f  - 

7.3 

6.3 

4.0 

6.7 

6.0 

41.0 

0.6 

0.3 

73.0 

6.3 

6.8 

5  5 

+0.5 

0.3 

5.8 

3.8 

4  2.0 

7  1.8 

4.8 

+0.7 

4.1 

4.3 

3.8 

4.9 

0.0 

+0 . 6 
3.8 

1222 


V 


Additional  antigens  were  prepared  from  the  throat  (1472T)  isolate 
and  from  the  14-72R  0.05  micron  filtrate.  Reference  reovirus  Types 
I,  II,  III  antigens  and  antisera  were  obtained  from  the  Reference 
Reagent  Branch  of  the  National  Institute  of  Health.  The  results  of 
the  hemagglutination-inhibition  (HI)  tests  are  summarized  in  Table  7. 
All  three  14-72  isolates  had  the  same  HI  patterns,  reacting  to  high¬ 
est  titer  to  the  Type  II  antiserum.  The  reaction  to  Type  II  was  at 
least  8-fold  higher  than  to  the  other  reovirus  types.  The  puppy  also 
developed  a  rise  in  titer  to  the  reovirus  Type  II,  14-72R  isolate 
and  to  reovirus  Type  III  (Table  8).  No  rise  in  titer  to  reovirus 
Type  I  was  found.  Other  serological  tests  did  not  indicate  infection 
with  parainfluenza  SV-5. 

The  findings  in  the  puppy  are  of  interest  for  several  reasons:  (a) 
this  is  the  first  recovery  from  a  dog  of  reovirus  Type  II;  (b)  it 
afforded  data  on  the  specificity  of  antibody  response  to  reovirus  II 
infection;  and  (c)  it  presented  another  case  of  a  multiple  viral 
respiratory  infection.  The  role  of  canine  distemper  virus  in  the 
observed  disease  signs  is  unknown.  From  the  histopathologic  exam’n- 
ation  secondary  bacterial  invaders  were  playing  a  role  in  the 
pneumonia. 

9.  Trachea  organ  cultures  as  potential  model  systems  for  study  of 
canine  viruses. 

The  tracheal  oryan  culture  (TOC)  system  appears  to  be  a  promising 
tool  for  the  isolation  of  some  of  the  more  fastidious  viruses,  i.e., 
coronavi ruses  and  rhi novi ruses ,  and  for  the  study  of  virus-cell 
interaction  in  fully  differentiated  cells. 

Canine  TOC  of  ciliated  epithelium  have  been  prepared  and  maintained 
in  plastic  petri  dishes  for  up  to  2  weeks  with  synthetic  medium 
(Leibovitz  Medium  No.  L-15  supplemented  with  30%  fetal  bovine  serum 
and  antibiotics).  Minor  modifications  of  the  methods  described  by 
Hoorn  and  Tyrrell  [46]  and  Kapikian  [47]  were  used.  Mucosal  cell 
viability  was  determined  by  observation  of  ciliary  activity  by  the 
method  of  Reed  [48];  cell  viability  or  Injury  on  the  mucosal  surface 
was  determined  by  the  use  of  tetrazolium-trypan  blue  test  of  Herbst- 
Laier  [49]. 

Pilot  studies  with  a  number  of  canine  viruses  have  been  completed. 

The  TOC  were  prepared  and  infected  with  canine  paramyxovirus  SV-5; 
canine  reovirus  14-72R;  canine  herpesvirus  D004;  and  canine  adeno¬ 
virus  Toronto  A26/61.  Virus  proliferation  was  assessed  by  inocula¬ 
tion  of  primary  dog  kidney  tissue  cultures  with  ten-fold  dilutions 
of  medium  harvests;  virus  titers  were  calculated  by  the  Reed  and 


1223 


V 


Table  7.  Serologic  Identification  of  the  14-72  Isolates 

Hemagglutination-inhibition  antibody  titer  to  antigen 

Reo virus  Type*  14-72  14-72R  14-72 

R  (0.05M  filtrate)  T 

Serum  tested  I  II  III _ 


Reovirus* 

Type  I 

1280 

0 

20 

20 

20 

20 

Type  II 

40 

640 

40 

160 

160 

160 

Type  III 

0 

0 

320 

0 

0 

0 

*  Reference  reagents  obtained  from  National  Institute  of  Health 


Table  8.  Antibody  response  of  puppy  Z-4  to  reoviruses  and  the 
14-72R  reference  isolate. 


Day  Post 

Hemagglutination-inhibition 

antibody  i;iter  to  antigen 

Onset  Sera 

Reovirus  Type 

14-72R 

I 

II 

III 

2 

0* 

0 

0 

0 

24 

0 

20 

0 

20 

31 

0 

160 

80 

160 

38 

0 

80 

40 

160 

45 

not  done 

80 

20 

80 

52 

0 

40 

20 

40 

*  less  than  1 : 20 


1224 


V 


Muench  method  [50].  Canine  TOC's  were  fixed  in  either  Bouin's  fixa¬ 
tive  or  buffered  formalin,  embedded,  sectioned  and  stained  with 
hematoxylin  and  eosin. 

The  results  of  virus  infection  indicated  that  all^  the  above  cited 
viruses  can  grow  or  persi^c  in  TOC  preparations.  In  these  pilot 
studies  each  of  the  viruses  were  recovered  from  the  TOC  media  for  at 
least  12  days.  Histopathology  changes  are  presently  being  evaluated. 

1 0 .  Summary  and  Conclusions. 

A.  To  elucidate  further  the  pathogenesis  of  tropical  canine 
pancytopenia  (TCP),  clinical  and  hematologic  responses  of  14  German 
Shepherd  dogs  were  evaluated  following  Ehrlichia  canis  infection, 
tetracycline  therapy,  and  challenge  inoculation.  Following  an  acute 
phase  illness  in  all  dogs,  nine  developed  severe  chronic  TCP  (SCTCP) 
characterized  by  severe  pancytopenia,  hemorrhage,  and  secondary 
bacterial  infection,  while  five  had  non-severe  chronic  TCP  (NCTCP) 
with  only  mild  pancytopenia.  In  spite  of  tetracycline  therapy,  four 
SCTCP  dogs  died  while  five  survived.  Hematologic  values  in  surviving 
SCTCP  dogs  improved  very  gradually,  thrombocytopenia  and  leukopenia 
persisting  for  at  least  120  days  post  treatment.  NCTCP  dogs  showed 
only  minor  hematologic  changes  following  treatment.  E.  canis  could 
not  be  recovered  from  the  blood  of  any  treated  dog.  Six  surviving 
treated  dogs,  when  challenged  with  the  homologous  strain  of  E.  canis, 
became  reinfected  and  two  developed  severe  disease.  Results  indicate 
that  tetracycline  is  effective  in  clearing  dogs  chronically  infected 
with  £.  canis  and  that  cleared  dogs  are  susceptible  to  reinfection. 
Persistence  of  pancytopenia  following  treatment  suggests  that  aplastic 
anemia  may  be  important  in  the  pathogenesis  of  SCTCP. 

B.  Serum  antibody  and  percent  gammaglobulin  were  evaluated  in 
German  Shepherd  dogs  during  acute  and  chronic  infection  with  Ehrlichia 
canis,  following  treatment  with  tetracycline,  and  after  a  challenge 
inoculation  of  the  homologous  microorganism.  Antibody  titers,  is 
determined  by  the  indirect  fluorescent  antibody  (IFA)  technique,  were 
detected  7  to  20  days  postinfection  and  continued  to  increase  for  more 
than  2  months  to  a  geometric  mean  titer  (GMT)  of  1:120.  Mian  percent 
serum  gammaglobulin  doubled  by  26  days  postinfection  and  rtmained 
elevated  until  treatment  was  initiated.  Following  administration  of 
tetracycline,  GMT  values  decreased  to  1:56  within  100  days,  while  per¬ 
cent  gammaglobulin  returned  to  normal.  Increases  in  IFA  titers,  as 
well  as  hypergammaglobulinemia,  were  observed  following  challenge 
inoculation.  Titers  in  dogs  that  had  developed  severe  disease  follow¬ 
ing  initial  infection  remained  elevated  following  challenge,  whereas 
titers  of  dogs  not  originally  having  severe  disease  did  not.  Results 


1225 


V 


suggest  that  increasing  I  FA  titers  and  hypergammaglobulinemia  reflect 
persistent  infection  with  E.  canis  and  may  be  related  to  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  severe  disease.  Differences  in  response  to  challenge  may  re¬ 
flect  underlying  immunologic  differences  between  dogs  with  and  with¬ 
out  severe  disease. 

C.  Dogs,  cats,  and  nonhuman  primates  were  successfully  infected 
with  an  ehrlichial  agent  recovered  from  horses  in  California.  In¬ 
fection  was  characterized  by  a  mild,  transient  disease  and  the  pres¬ 
ence  of  morulae  in  granulocytic  cells. 

D.  Rickettsia  rickettsi  was  isolated  and  propagated  in  primary 
cell  cultures  derived  from  experimentally  infected  guinea  pigs. 
Organisms  were  recognized  as  early  as  3  days  after  cultures  were 
initiated. 

E.  Nearly  88%  of  military  dogs  procured  in  1972-73  were  devoid 
of  SV-5  antibody.  During  the  past  year  no  SV-5  infections  have  been 
detected  at  the  procurement  center.  Approximately  76%  of  the  54  dogs 
at  Ft.  Benning  were  serotest  positive  for  SV-5  antibody.  Para¬ 
influenza  SV-5  vaccines  for  use  in  dogs  are  undergoing  commercial 
development.  The  high  degree  of  susceptibility  of  dogs  at  the  pro¬ 
curement  center  may  warrant  the  trial  of  this  product  to  prevent  SV-5 
respiratory  disease  in  military  dogs.  Dogs  at  the  Biosensor  Unit  at 
Edgewood  were  found  to  be  also  highly  susceptible  to  SV-5  infection. 
Experimental  vaccine  trials  are  recommended  in  German  Shepherd  dogs 
to  evaluate  the  safety  and  potency  of  commercial  product  for  this 
breed . 

F.  Canine  coronavirus  isolate  1-71  produced  mild  gastroenteritis 
in  neonatal  dogs.  The  virus  was  shed  from  the  rectum  for  approxi¬ 
mately  1  week  and  the  puppies  developed  antibodies  to  1-71  and  TGE. 

In  contrast,  neonatal  and  young  pigs  were  resistant  to  1-71  virus. 
Following  TGE  challenge  pigs  developed  higher  titers  to  TGE  than  1-71 
virus.  The  1-71  isolate  thus  appears  to  be  distinct  from  TGE  and  may 
be  a  causative  agent  for  diarrheal  disease  in  dogs. 

G.  Reovirus  Type  II  was  recovered  from  throat  and  rectal  speci- 
ments  obtained  from  a  puppy  in  the  acute  stage  of  respiratory  disease. 
This  virus  had  not  been  previously  reported  in  dogs.  The  puppy  de¬ 
veloped  an  antibody  rise  to  the  isolate  and  to  reovirus  Types  II  and 
III.  A  Toronto  A26/61  canine  adenovirus  was  recovered  from  the  post 
mortem  tissues  of  this  puppy. 


1226 


H.  Canine  trachea  organ  cultures  (TOC)  have  been  prepared  and 
were  maintained  for  2  weeks.  Initial  growth  studies  of  other  canine 
viruses  were  also  carried  out.  The  TOC  system  appears  to  be  a 
valuable  system  for  studying  the  pathogenesis  of  canine  viruses  and 
further  studies  with  this  system  will  be  carried  out. 


V 


Project  3A062110A830  BIOSENSOR  SYSTEMS 
Task  00  Biosensor  Systems 
Work  Unit  056  Diseases  of  military  animals 
Literature  Cited. 


References: 

1.  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Amyx,  H.  I.,  Hemelt,  I.  E.,  Hildebrandt,  P.K., 
Nims,  R.  M. ,  Gochenour,  W.  S.:  Laboratory  studies  of  tropical  canine 
pancytopenia.  Exp.  Parasitology  3]_:  53-59,  1972. 

2.  Ewing,  S.  A.:  Canine-ehrlichiosis.  Adv.  Vet.  Sci.  Comp.  Med. 
'13:  331-353,  1969. 

3.  Walker,  J.  S.,  Rundquist,  0.  D.,  Taylor,  R. ,  Wilson,  B.  L., 
Andrews,  M.  R.,  Barck,  J.,  Hogge,  A.  L.,  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Hildebrandt, 
P.  K.,  Nims,  R.  M.:  Clinical  and  clinicopathologic  findings  in 
tropical  canine  pancytopenia.  J.  Amer.  Vet.  Med.  Assoc.  157:  43-55, 
1970. 

4.  Wilkins,  J.  H.,  Bowden,  R.  S.  T.,  Wilkinson,  G.  T.:  A  new 
canine  disease  syndrome.  Vet.  Rec.  81_:  57-58,  1967. 

5.  Burghen,  G.  A.,  Beisel,  W.  R.,  Walker,  J.  S.s  Nims,  R.  M., 
Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Hildebrandt,  P.  K. :  Development  of  hypergamnaglo- 
bulinemia  in  tropical  canine  pancytopenia.  Amer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  32: 
749-756,  1971. 

6.  Hildebrandt,  P.  K.,  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Nims,  R.  M.,  Walker, 

O.  S.:  The  pathology  of  canine  tropical  pancytopenia.  Lab.  Invest. 
22:  500  (abstr.)  1970. 

7.  Hildebrandt,  P.  K.,  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Nims,  R.  M.:  Experimental 
ehrlichiosis  in  young  beagle  dogs.  Fed.  Proc.  29:  754  (abstr.)  1970. 

8.  Van  Dijk,  J.  E.:  Sadies  on  Ehrlichia  cam's.  Zbl .  Vet.  Med. 
18:  787-803,  1971. 

9.  Ristic,  M.,  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Weisiger,  R.  M. ,  Hildebrandt, 

P.  K.,  Nyindo,  M.  B.  A.:  Serological  diagnosis  of  tropical  canine 
pancytopenia  by  indirect  immunofluorescence.  Infection  and  Immunity. 
6:  226-231,  1972. 


1228 


10.  Amyx,  H.  L.,  Huxsoll ,  D.  L.,  Zeiler,  D.  C.,  Hildebrandt, 

P.  K,:  Therapeutic  and  prophylactic  value  of  tetracycline  in  dogs 
infected  with  the  agent  of  tropical  canine  pancytopenia.  J.  Amer. 
Vet.  Med.  Assoc.  159:  1428-1432,  1971. 

11.  Wintrobe,  M.  M.:  Clinical  hematology,  6th  ed.  Lea  and 
Febiger,  Philadelphia,  1967. 

12.  Conrad,  M.  E.:  Hematologic  manifestations  of  parasitic 
infections.  Seminars  in  Hematology  8:  267-303,  1971. 

13.  Vincent,  P.  C.,  DeGruchy,  G.  C.:  Complications  and  treat¬ 
ment  of  acquired  aplastic  anemia.  Brit.  J.  Haemat.  13:  977-999, 

1967. 

14.  Erslev,  A.  J.:  Aplastic  anemia.  In  W.  J.  Williams,  E. 
Beutler,  A.  J.  Erslev,  R.  W.  Rundles.:  Hematology.  McGraw-Hill 
Book  Company,  New  York,  p.  207-227,  1972. 

15.  Best,  W.  R. :  Chloramphenicol -associated  blood  dyscrasias, 
a  review  of  cases  submitted  to  the  American  Medical  Association 
registry.  J.A.M.A.  201.:  181-188,  1967. 

16.  Yunis,  A.  A.,  Bloomberg,  G.  R.:  Chloramphenicol  toxicity: 
Clinical  features  and  pathogenesis.  Prog.  Hematol.  4:  138-159,  1964. 

17.  Levy,  R.  N.,  Sawitsky,  A.,  Florman,  A.  L.,  Rubin,  E.:  Fatal 
aplastic  anemia  after  hepatitis.  Report  of  five  cases.  N.  Eng.  J. 
Med.  273:  1118-1123,  1965. 

18.  Schwarz,  E.,  Baehner,  R.  L.,  Diamond,  L.  K.:  Aplastic 
anemia  following  hepatitis.  Pediatrics.  37;  681-683,  1966. 

19.  Knospe,  W.  H.,  Blom,  J.,  Crosby,  W.  H.:  Local  irradiation 
of  bone  marrow.  I.  Long  term  changes  in  the  rat  with  particular 
emphasis  upon  vascular  and  stromal  effects.  Blood.  28^  398-415, 
1966. 

20.  Knospe,  W.  H. ,  Blom,  J.,  Crosby,  W.  H.:  Regeneration  of 
locally  irradiated  bone  marrow.  II.  Induction  of  regeneration  in 
permanently  aplastic  medullary  cavities.  Blood.  31;  400-405,  1968. 

21.  Chertov,  J.  L.,  Novikova,  M.  N.,  Hemenova,  N.  M. ,  Malanina, 

V.  N.:  Hematopoiesis  in  long-term  survival  following  supralethal 
irradiation  and  bone  marrow  transplantation  in  dogs.  Blood.  32; 
895-907,  1968. 


V 


22.  Knospe,  W.  H.,  Crosny,  W.  H.:  Aplastic  anemia:  a  disorder 
of  the  bone-marrow  sinusoidal  microcirculation  rather  than  stem^cell 
failure?  Lancet.  U  20-22,  1971. 

23.  Snyder,  J.  C.:  Typhus  fever  rickettsiae.  Iji  F.  L.  Horsfall, 
Jr.,  and  I.  Tamm  (ed.)„  Viral  and  rickettsial  infections  of  man. 

4th  ed.  J.  B.  Lippincott  Company,  Philadelphia,  1965,  p.  1059-1094. 

24.  Leeflang,  P.:  Relation  between  carrier-state  oxytetracycline 
administration  and  immunity  in  Ehrlichia  canis  infections.  Vet.  Rec. 
89:  703-704,  1971. 

25.  Eklund,  C.  M.,  Hadlow,  W.  J.,  Kennedy,  R.  C.,  Boyle,  C  C. , 
Jackson,  T.  A.:  Aleutian  disease  of  mink:  properties  of  the 
etiologic  agent  and  the  host  responses.  J.  Infect.  Dis.  118: 

510-526,  1968. 

26.  Porter,  D.  D.,  Larsen,  A.  E.,  Porter,  H.  G.:  The  patho¬ 
genesis  of  Aleutian  disease  of  mink.  I.  In  vivo  viral  replication 
and  the  host  antibody  response  to  viral  antigen.  J.  Exp.  Med.  130: 
575-589,  1969. 

27.  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Hildebrandt,  P.  K. ,  Nims,  R.  M. ,  Amyx,  H.  L., 
Ferguson,  J.  A.:  Epizootiology  of  tropical  canine  pancytopenia.  J. 
Wildl .  Dis.  6:  220-225,  1970. 

28.  Oldstone,  M.  B.  A.,  Tishon,  A.:  The  immune  response  of  mice 
persistently  infected  with  LCM  virus  to  non-vi ral  antigens  (abstr.) 
Fed.  Proc.  29:  435,  1970. 

29.  Pan,  I.  C.,  De  Boer,  C.  J.,  Henschele,  W.  P.:  Hypergamma¬ 
globulinemia  in  swine  infected  with  African  swine  fever  virus  (abstr.) 
Fed.  Proc.  29:  435,  1970. 

30.  McGuire,  T.  C.,  Perryman,  L.  E.,  Henson,  J.  B.:  Immuno¬ 
globulin  composition  of  the  hypergammaglobulinemia  of  equine 
infectious  anemia  (abstr.).  Fed.  Proc.  29:  435,  1970. 

31.  Gribble,  D.  H.:  Equine  Ehrlichiosis.  J.  Amer.  Vet.  Med. 
Assoc.  155:  462-469,  1969. 

32.  Ewing,  S.  A.,  Roberson,  W.  R.,  Buckner,  R.  G.,  Hayat,  C.  S.: 

A  new  strain  of  Ehrlichia  canis.  J.  Amer.  Vet.  Med.  Assoc.  159: 
1771-1774,  1971. 


1230 


33.  Krauss,  H.,  Davies,  F.  G.,  Odegaard,  0.  A.,  Cooper,  J.  E.: 

The  Morphology  of  the  Causal  Agent  of  Bovine  Petechial  Fever  (Ondiri 
Disease).  J.  Comp.  Path.  82:  241-246,  1972. 

34.  Frown,  J.  L.,  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Ristic,  M.,  Hildebrandt,  P.  K.: 

In  vitro  cultivation  of  Neorickettsia  helminthoeca,  the  causative 
agent  of  salmon  poisoning  disease.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  33:  1965-1700, 

1972.  ~ 

35.  Nyindc,  M.  B.  A.,  Ristic,  M. ,  Huxsoll,  D.  L.,  Smith,  A.  R.: 
Tropical  canine  pancytopenia;  in  vitro  cultivation  of  the  causative 
agent  -  Ehrlichia  cam's.  Am.  37  Vet.  Res.  32:  1651-1658,  1971. 

36.  Binn,  L.  N . ,  Lazar,  E.  C.,  Rogul ,  M. ,  Shepler,  V.  M. ,  Swango, 
L.  J.,  Claypoole,  T.,  Hubbard,  D.  W.,  Asbill,  S.  G. ,  and  Alexander, 

A.  D.:  Upper  Respiratory  disease  in  military  dogs:  Bacterial, 
mycoplasma  and  viral  studies.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  2£:  1809-1815,  1968. 

37.  Crandell,  R.  A.,  Brunslow,  W.  R.,  Davison,  V.  E.:  Isolation 

of  a  parainfluenza  virus  from  sentry  dogs  with  upper  respiratory 
disease.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  29:  2141-2147,  1968. 

38.  Binn,  L.  N.,  Lazar,  E.  C.:  Comments  on  epizootiology  of 
parainfluenza  SV-5  in  dogs.  J.A.V.M.A.  156:  1774-1777,  1970. 

39.  Haelterman,  E.  0.:  Epidemiological  Studies  of  Transmissible 
Gastroenteritis  of  Swine.  Proc  66th  Ann  Meet.  U.  S.  Sam  Livestock 
Assn.  305-315,  1962. 

40.  Lou,  T.  Y.,  Wenner,  H.  A.:  Natural  and  experimental  infection 
of  the  dog  with  reovirus  type  I;  Pathogenicity  of  the  strain  for  other 
animals.  Am.  J.  Hyg.  T7_:  294-304,  1963. 

41.  Massie,  E.  L.,  Shaw,  E.  D.:  Reovirus  type  I  in  laboratory 
dogs.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  27:  783-787,  1966. 

42.  Fairchild,  G.  A.,  Cohen,  D.:  Serologic  Study  of  reovirus 
infection  in  dogs.  Am.  J.  Vet.  Res.  28:  1487-1490,  1967. 

43.  Binn,  L.  N.,  Eddy,  G.  A.,  Lazar,  E.  C.,  Helms,  J.,  Murnane, 

T.  Viruses  recovered  from  laboratory  dogs  with  respiratory  disease. 
Proc.  Soc.  Exptl  Biol  &  Med  126:  140-145,  1967. 

44.  Binn,  L.  N.,  Lazar,  E.  C.,  Eddy,  G.  A.,  Kajima,  M.: 

Recovery  and  Characterization  of  minute  virus  of  canines.  Inf.  & 

Imm.  1:  503-508,  1970. 


1231 


45.  Joklik,  W.  K.:  Studies  on  the  Effect  of  Chymotrypsin  on 
Reovirus.  Virology  49:  700-715,  1972. 

46.  Hoorn,  B.,  0.  A.  J.  Tyrrell.:  On  the  growth  of  certain 
"newer"  respiratory  viruses  in  organ  cultures.  Br.  J.  Exp.  Path. 

46:  109-118,  1965. 

47.  Kapikian,  A.  Z.:  Coronaviruses  in  Diagnostic  Procedures  for 
Viral  and  Rickettsial  Infections  (E.  H.  Lennette,  N.  J.,  Schmidt,  eds.) 
Am.  Pub.  Health  Assoc.  Inc.,  New  York,  H.Y.,  931-946,  1969. 

40.  Reed,  S.  E.:  Persistent  Respiratory  Virus  Infection  in 
Tracheal  Organ  Cultures.  Br.  J.  Exp.  Path.  50:  378-388,  1969. 

49.  Herbst-Laier,  R.:  A  novel  technique  for  in  situ  demonstration 
of  cell  viability  and  cell  injury  on  respiratory  surface  of  trachea 
explants.  Archiv.  ges.  Virusfcrsch,  28:  248-251,  1970. 

50.  Lennette.  E.  H.:  General  principles  underlying  laboratory 
diagnosis  of  viral  and  rickettsial  infections  in  Diagnostic 
Procedures  for  Viral  and  Rickettsial  Infections  (E.  H.  Lennette,  N.  J., 
Schmidt,  eds.)  Am.  Pub.  Health  Assoc.,  Inc.,  New  York,  N.  Y.  1-65, 

1969. 

Pub! ications: 

1.  Amyx,  N.L.  and  Huxsoll,  D.L.,  Red  and  Gray  Foxes-Potenti al 
Reservoir  hosts  for  Ehrlichia  canis.  J.  Wildlife  Dis.  9:  47-50,  1973. 

2.  Brown,  J.L.,  Huxsoll,  D.L.,  Ristic,  M.,  and  Hildebrandt,  P.K.: 

In  Vitro  Cultivation  of  Neorickettsia  helminthoeca.  the  causative 
agent  of  Salmon  Poisoning  disease.  Timer.  J.  Vet.  Res.  33:  1695- 
1700,  1972.  — 

3.  Buhles,  W.C.  Jr.,  Huxsoll,  D.L.,  and  Elisberg,  B.L.: 

Isolation  of  Rickettsia  rickettsi  in  primary  bone  marrow  cell  and 
circulating  monocyte  cultures  derived  from  experiment?. ly  infected 
Guinea  Pigs, Infection  and  Immunity.  7_:  1003-1005,  15/3.' 

4.  Hildebrandt,  P.K.,  Conroy,  T.S.,  McKee,  A.E.,  Nyindo,  M.8.A., 
and  Huxsoll,  D.L.:  Ultrastructure  of  Ehrlichia  canis.  Infection 
and  Immunity  _7:  265-271  ,  1973. 

5.  Jamison,  R.K.,  Lazar,  E.C.,  Binn,  L.N.  and  Alexander,  A.D.: 
Survey  for  antibodies  to  canine  viruses  in  selected  wild  mammals. 

J.  Wildlife  Dis.  9:  2-3,  1973. 


6.  Pineiro,  M.S.,  Cutchins,  E.C.,  and  Binn,  L.N.:  Observations 
on  canine  herpes  virus  infection  on  primary  cultures  of  dog  thymus. 
Abstracts  of  Ann.  Meet.  Am.  Soc.  Microbiol,  page  273.,  1973. 

7.  Ristic,  M. ,  Huxsoll,  D.L.,  Weisiger,  R.M.,  Hildebrandt,  P.K., 
and  Nyindo,  M.B.A.:  Seroloqical  Diagnosis  of  Tropical  Canine 
Pancytopenia  by  indirect  immunofluorescence.  Infection  and  immunity, 
o:  226-231,  1972. 

8.  Smith,  R.D.,  Anderson,  J.J.R.,  Ristic,  M. ,  and  Huxsoll,  D.L.: 
The  use  of  Cerenkov  Radiation  in  32p  Labeled  Platelet  Survival 
Studies.  International  J.  of  Applied  Radiation  and  Isotopes.  23: 
513-517,  1972. 


PROJECT  3A062110A833 
BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 


Task  00 

Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 


V 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

I  AOfRCV  ACCESSION* 

DA  OB  6491 

1  OAT*  or  SUMMARY*  REPORT  CONTROL  I VMBOL 

73  07  01  DlUWhhtAHibSb 

1  0  A  T  C  PREV  iUM'RY 

72  07  01 

•  kind  or  summary 

D.  Change 

S  SUMMARY  ICTY*  S  WORK  SE  CU  Rl  T  Y* 

u  u 

T  REGRADING*  •*  nsrN  INSTR'N  SB  SPECIFIC  DATA*  •  LEVEL  Of  Sum 

CONTRACTOR  ACCESS 

NA  NL  (3  to  □  ho  *■  ">•' UM,T 

10  NO  COOES*  PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

TASK  AREA  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

*.  primary 

621101A 

3A062110A833 

00 

“TOT 

b  CONTRIBUTING 

‘xseooeooe 

CDQC  UiLO 

M  TlTut  mlih  fcutlty  C#P«J* 


(U)  Drug  Abuse  Methodology 

12  SC  1C  N  T  If  1C  *NO  TECHNOLOGICAL  Ml*? 


002300  Biochemistry 


IS  START  OAT1  14  tlTINATEO  COMPLETION  DATE 

72  07  Cont 

IS  ruNOING  AGENCY 

DA 

IS  PCRrORMANCE  method 

C.  In-House 

U  CONTRACT  GRANT 

A  PATES/E  r  FECTIVC  NA  EIPIRATION 

Tv  numb e  n  * 

i.  type  4  amount 

«.  KINO  or  AWARO  (.CUM.  AMT. 

IS  RESOURCES  ESTIMATE 

A  PROVISIONAL  man  yrs 

tL  ruNDS  On  Vv.Lj.aff  P.J 

riSCAL 

YEAR 

73 

12 

425 

■njWRI'WY 

74 

7 

280 

It  MESPONSIRLe  OOCJ  ORO  ANI  I  ATlON  j  j 

K  PCREORMING  ORGARIIATIOM 

_ 

"‘“’Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

RISPONSIBLC  INDIVIDUAL 

«««.  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
telc.hohc  202-576-3551 

NA"B*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
division  of  Biochemistry 

A00,,,“  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  fPvNH/.A  ISAM  II  V  S  4 taSmmlt  /R •  Iffwljpffj 

rame*  Beach,  LTC  D.  J. 

telephone  202-576-2211^^^^^^^^ 

It  GENERAL  USE 

Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

name  Demaree,  LTC  G.  E. ,  Kazyak,  L.  ,BS 
name  Bass, B. f. , MS  Tripp,  MAJ  C.  H.  DA 

11  K  E  r  Wil’.DS  fpr.e.4*  tACH  »!*•  immumltf  CIpmIBcpMkR  Crn4m)  .. 

(U)  Mass  spectrometry 

TU)  Drugs  of  abuse;  (U)  Toxicology;  fUl  ESR;  (U)  Chromatography;  fU)  Immunoassay 

21  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  24  APPROACH.  IS  PROORISS  In4l*l4»ml  paragraph*  14 mlllla4  •?  him  Pf»r.*»  l»il  ml  *.rA  »)*>  ,.<u*Hr  C<Ntllt»l(«i  > 

23.  (U)  To  develop  and  assess  analytical  techniques  for  the  detection,  identification 
and  quantitation  of  drugs  of  abuse  in  biological  fluids  for  use  in  the  military 
population. 

24.  OH  Efforts  will  be  concentrated  on  the  development  and  optimization  of  simple, 
rapid  and  accurate  systems  of  drug  detection  for  operational  laboratory  use.  Some  of 
the  techniques  utilized  will  be  thin  layer  chromatography  (TLC) ,  gas  liquid  chromato¬ 
graphy  (GLC) ,  high  pressure  liquid  chromatography  (HPLC) ,  free  radical  assay  technique 
(FRAT),  mass  spectrometry  (MS),  radioiimiunoassay  (RIA) ,  hemagglutination  inhibition 
(HI),  and  enzyme  multiplied  immunoassay  technique  (EMIT).  Use  of  appropriate  quality 
control  measures  will  be  stressed. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Drug  screening  methodology  development  and  quality  control 
assessment  of  commercial  contract  laboratories  continued.  An  organic  chemistry  labora¬ 
tory  to  synthesize  drugs  and  metabolites  of  interest,  was  established.  Use  of  HFLC 
was  initiated.  Use  of  RIA,  EMIT,  and  HI  was  investigated.  Drug  screening  was  per¬ 
formed  in  collaboration  with  other  WRAIR  divisions  to  examine  various  ding  abuse 
parameters.  For  technical  report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual 
Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  June  73. 


DD,r:j498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ART.  OBSOLETE  DO  FORMS  149BA 
AND  14SS-1  <  MAR  01  iFOR  ARMV  USE)  ARE  OBSOLETE 

1234  CL 


[Pll  Redacted] 


1 


NOV  QS 


V 


I 


Project  3A062110A833  BICMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  101  Drug  abuse  methodology 
Investigators. 

Principal:  COL  Charles  R.  Angel,  MSC 

Associate:  PVT  Kenneth  P.  Arnold,  B.S.;  Billy  G.  Bass,  M.S.; 

LTC  Douglas  J.  Beach,  MSC;  Betty  J.  Boone,  Ph.D. ; 

John  I.  Davis,  B.S.;  Larissa  deBaare,  M.D. ; 

LTC  Gale  E.  Demaree,  MSC;  Clarence  E.  Emery,  B.S.; 

SP4  David  F.  Farler,  B.S. ;  Arthur  L.  Foy,  B.S. ; 

Seymour  Gar  son,  Ph.D.;  SFC  Johnnie  L.  Harvey; 

Laurence  R.  Hilpert,  B.S.;  SP5  John  A.  Howard,  B.S. ; 
SSG  Frank  E.  Johnson,  B.A. ;  Leo  Kazyak,  B.S.; 

SP4  George  A.  Locko,  B.S.;  Robert  T.  Lofberg,  Ph.D.; 
Jean  E.  Matusik,  B.S.,  PVT  Burton  L.  Markham,  B.S. ; 

PVT  James  P.  McGrath,  B.S.;  SSG  Evelyn  Moore; 

PVT  Howard  Nelson,  B.S.;  Robert  C.  Permisohn,  M.S. ; 

PFC  Michael  Pogue,  B.S.;  PFC  Lloyd  B.  Salt,  III,  B.A.; 
Helen  C.  Sing,  M.S.;  H.  Kenneth  Sleeman,  Ph.D.; 

MAJ  Charles  H.  Tripp,  MSC;  SP4  Steven  J.  Weise,  B.S.; 
SP5  John  P.  Zygo,  B.S. 

The  technical  objectives  of  this  work  unit  are  to  develop  and  evaluate 
analytical  methods  for  the  detection,  identification  and  quantitation 
of  drugs  of  abuse  in  biological  fluids  and  to  exploit  these  techniques 
for  application  to  mass  screening  and  rehabilitation  in  military  pop¬ 
ulations. 

Efforts  were  concentrated  in  these  areas. 

1 .  Free  Radical  Assay  Technique  (FRAT) . 

2.  Thin  Layer  Chromatography  (TLC). 

3.  Testing  of  Comnercial  Kits  and  Systems. 

4.  Screening  for  drug  abuse  in  selected  military  populations. 

5.  Quality  Control  Support  for  the  Army  Urine  Screening  contracts. 

1.  FRAT 


FRAT  analysis  utilizes  an  electron  spin  resonance  (ESR)  spectro¬ 
meter  which  has  been  modified  for  the  testing  of  drugs  in  protein-free 
biological  fluids.  Various  factors  can  influence  morphine  detection  by 
this  procedure  and  have  been  investigated.  The  investigation  of  the  use 
of  the  FRAT  to  detect  drugs  other  than  morphine  was  continued. 

Reducing  agents  normally  present  in  urine  can  decrease  the  signal 
response  obser/ed  by  modifying  the  spin  label.  Therefore,  sodium  di¬ 
chromate  is  added  to  negate  the  effect  of  the  reducing  agents.  Studies 

1235 


conducted  to  determine  the  optimum  amount  of  dichromate  to  be  added 
indicated  optimum  concentration  of  dichromate  for  most  assays  to  be 
0.2  M.  Concentrations  of  dichromate  above  0.4  M  were  shown  to  decrease 
the  signal  and  hence  invalidate  the  quantitation  of  morphine. 

a.  Aqueous  solutions  of  90  commonly  used  drugs  were  analyzed  for 
possible  reactivity  in  the  FRAT  assay  for  morphine.  Of  the  drugs  tested, 
18  gave  positive  reactions.  They  were  quinine,  methadone,  codeine, 
meperidine,  diphenylhydantoin,  cocaine,  propoxyphene,  meprobamate, 
oxymetazoline,  chloropromazine,  chloroquine,  heroin,  penicillin  G, 
procaine  penicillin,  mephentermine ,  hylidrin,  ephedrine,  haloperidol, 
and  benzathine.  Efforts  are  being  made  to  obtain  urine  from  individuals 
taking  commonly  used  drugs  to  determine  if  the  parent  compound  and/or 
metabolites  give  morphine  equivalent  values. 

b.  The  use  of  newly  developed  reagents  for  the  FRAT  to  determine 
other  drugs  of  abuse  was  investigated. 

1)  Amphetamines.  The  assay  for  amphetamines  in  urine  was 
unsatisfactory  because  normal  urinary  amines  react  with  the  antibody. 

This  limits  the  usefulness  of  the  test  for  screening. 

2)  Amphetamine -cocaine  metabolite  combined  assay  was  technically 
difficult  to  perform.  The  test  is  subject  to  large  numbers  of  false 
positive  responses. 

3)  Methadone  reagents  react  with  the  parent  compound  but  not 
its  metabolites  with  a  detection  limit  of  0.50  ug/ml.  Propoxyphene, 
chloroquine,  primaquine,  procaine  penicillin  and  chloropromazine  react 
with  the  antibody.  Methadone  was  detected  in  human  urine  for  up  to  3 
days  after  a  50  mg  dose. 

4)  The  methadone -barbiturate  combined  assay  was  technically 
difficult  to  perform  and  the  stability  of  the  two  spin-labeled  drugs 
employed  were  not  the  same.  No  reliable  quantitation  of  drug  concen¬ 
tration  could  be  made  since  the  ESR  signals  ot  the  two  drugs  are  in¬ 
distinguishable  and  the  antibodies  have  different  binding  kinetics. 

5)  Work  was  initiated  to  automate  drug  analysis  using  ESR 
spectrometry.  Preliminary  design  of  the  instrumentation  and  evaluation 
of  reagents  are  in  progress.  Application  of  the  Varian  computer  to 
control  and  collect  data  produced  by  the  ESR  spectrometer  is  being 
evaluated.  Preliminary  indications  are  that  the  Varian  (VEM  620) 
computer  obtained  for  use  in  this  project  lacks  flexibility  for  optimum 
utilization.  Additional  core  memory  will  be  required  for  realization 
of  the  full  potential  of  this  system. 


V 


6)  Characterization  of  FRAT  antibody  to  morphine. 

a)  Two  titrations  of  the  SYVA  antibody  to  morphine  were 
performed  using  spin* labeled  morphine  (SIM)  and  ESR  spectrometry.  When 
SIM  was  added  to  500  pi  (2.2  mg  protein)  of  FRAT  antibody  an  equivalence 
point  of  1.7  x  10"8  moles  SIM/mg  protein  was  observed.  These  data 
indicated  an  antibody-SIM  dissociation  constant  of  1.5  x  10‘10.  The 
reverse  titration  (antibody  added  to  2.6  x  10 "3  ymoles  SIM)  indicated 

an  equivalence  point  of  1.8  x  10 '9  moles  SLM/mg  protein  and  a  dissoci¬ 
ation  constant  of  2.1  x  10_10. 

b)  The  competitive  reaction  between  SIM  and  free  morphine 
for  a  binding  site  on  morphine -specific  antibody  binding  constant,  K, 
then  batch-to-batch  comparisons  should  be  possible  if  either  the  associ¬ 
ation  constant,  or  Kp  respectively,  for  each  lot  of  antibody  is  known. 

The  association  of  the  hydrophobic  fluorescent  probe,  2-p- 
toluidinyl -6-naphthalene  sulfonate,  (TNS) ,  with  the  SYVA  antibody  pre¬ 
paration  was  studied.  Protein  concentration  of  the  antibody  solution 
was  found  to  be  4.4  mg/ml  as  determined  by  the  Lowry  method.  Agar  gel 
electrophoresis  showed  the  gamma  globulin  concentration  to  be  3.8  mg/ml 
or  87%  of  the  total  protein.  Immunodiffusion  using  human  serum  antibody 
identified  the  ganma  fraction  as  IgG. 

TNS  binding  data  gave  the  total  number  of  binding  sites,  n, 
and  the  statistical  thermodynamic  dissociation  constant,  Kp  25: 

n  =  1.66  x  10’^  moles /ml  total  protein 
10 

■  9.99  x  10  sites/mg  total  protein 
Kp  *  1.23  x  10"^  moles 


2.  TLC 

TLC  is  a  versatile  technique  for  the  rapid  detection  of  a  wide  range 
of  drugs  in  human  urine.  The  TLC  method  employed  for  urine  screening 
was  a  modification  of  one  proposed  by  Davidow,  Petri  and  Quame  using  an 
organic  solvent  extraction  (chloroform- isopropanol)  of  urine  buffered 
to  pH  9.5.  Amphetamines,  barbiturates,  morphine,  codeine,  methadone 
and  other  drugs  are  detected  by  using  several  visualizing  sprays. 

a.  An  evaluation  of  solvent  systems  revealed  that  with  urine 
buffered  with  ammonium  chloride/ammonium  hydroxide  at  pH  9.0-9. 5, 
chloroform  alone  extracted  barbiturates  and  amphetamine  and  extracted 
less  interfering  substances.  This  modification  reduces  the  sensitivity 
for  detection  of  morphine  and  codeine  below  levels  of  1.0  yg/ml. 

Opiates  are  screened  by  FRAT,  thereby  eliminating  the  dependence  on  TLC 
for  opiate  screening.  Investigations  of  various  identifying  sprays  and 
developing  solvents  are  proceeding. 


1237 


b.  Selected  prescription  and  over-the-counter  drugs  are  being 
studied  to  determine  which  are  excreted  into  urine  and  may  interfere 
with  this  TLC  system.  Urines  from  humans  currently  taking  antihista¬ 
mine,  analgesic,  sedative,  stimulant,  tranqualizer,  and  others  are 
being  examined  by  TLC.  The  Rf's  and  colors  produced  by  the  identifying 
sprays  are  recorded  and  tabulated  for  reference  in  drug  screening 
studies.  Comparative  studies  using  urine  from  animals  have  been 
initiated. 

c.  The  investigation  of  TLC  procedures  for  the  detection  of  metha- 
qualone  was  initiated.  The  methods  developed  to  date  lack  sensitivity 
or  reproducibility  for  use  in  drug  screening  laboratories. 

3.  Testing  of  Commercial  Kits  and  Systems. 

Upon  direction  of  TSG  and  CG,  USAMRDC,  commercial  kits  were 
evaluated  for  application  to  mass  urine  screening  and  for  use  in  re¬ 
habilitation  laboratory  support.  Kits  were  evaluated  for  cost, 
reliability,  sensitivity,  specificity,  logistical  requirements,  and 
technical  applicability.  Kits  and  systems  presently  under  investigation 
.  elude  Narco  Med  Pack,  Esco  Kit,  Toxi  X,  EMIT,  FRAT,  HI,  and  RIA.  HI 
and  RIA  are  presently  restricted  to  morphine  screening;  FRAT  and  B1IT 
are  claimed  to  be  effective  for  amphetamines ,  barbiturates,  methadone, 
and  cocaine  metabolites.  RIA  for  morphine  is  supplied  for  either  H-3 
or  1-125  label.  These  evaluations  are  still  in  progress.  At  this  time 
no  kits  or  systems  appear  to  offer  advantages  that  would  warrant  replace¬ 
ment  of  the  FRAT  system. 

4.  Screening  for  Drugs  of  Abuse  in  Selected  Military  Populations. 

a.  A  time-motion  study  was  conducted  using  807  urine  specimens 
collected  from  Fort  Lee,  Va.,  and  41  quality  control  samples  that  were 
inserted  at  random  among  the  urine  samples.  FRAT,  RIA,  HI,  TLC,  and 
GLC  were  compared. 

1)  HI  is  the  fastest  for  opiate  screening. 

2)  HI  requires  no  special  equipment  and  is  simple  to  perform. 

3)  The  RIA  results  were  similar  to  those  of  HI.  RIA  requires 
a  large  time  expenditure  compared  to  FRAT  or  HI. 

4)  All  three  screening  tests  for  opiates  (FRAT,  HI,  RIA) 
respond  to  codeine  and  they  can  be  expected  to  respond  to  all  opiate¬ 
like  substances. 

5)  Confirmation  of  drugs  is  based  on  the  use  of  GLC  -  a  slow 
and  cumbersome  technique. 

6)  TLC  is  cumbersome  and  it  is  at  the  limit  of  its  capability 
as  a  screening  technology. 


1238 


V 


7)  Both  RIA  and  HI  can  be  used  in  segments  of  the  urine 
screening  program.  RIA  could  be  used  effectively  where  counting  equip¬ 
ment  is  already  available,  particularly  in  large  hospitals  having  a 
rehabilitation  and  treatment  program.  HI,  because  of  its  simplicity 
and  low  equipment  requirements  can  be  used  in  small  medical  facilities 
and  for  the  survey  of  isolated  units. 

b.  TVo  experimental  serological  assays  for  opiates,  RIA  and  HI 
were  compared  with  two  established  methods,  FRAT  and  TLC  on  the  basis 
of  cost,  efficiency,  and  efficacy  using  the  samples  from  an  operational 
screen  verified  by  GLC  for  comparison. 

1)  Samples  for  this  study  were  withdrawn  from  the  sample  bank 
maintained  by  the  U.S.  Air  Force  Drug  Screening  Laboratory,  Epidemiology 
branch,  School  of  Aerospace  Medicine,  Brooks  Air  Force  Base,  Texas. 

All  samples  were  screened  by  TLC  and  positive  samples  were  shipped  to 
WRAIR  for  analysis. 

2)  All  three  serological  tests  exceeded  99%  performance  in  the 
detection  of  samples  containing  opiates.  RIA  had  a  lower  rate  of  cross¬ 
reactivity  with  other  drugs  than  HI  or  FRAT.  It  was  concluded  that  any 
of  the  three  immunoassay  methods  is  satisfactory  for  use  in  screening 
for  opiates  in  urine  and  that  they  all  offer  operational  advantages  over 
TLC. 


c.  Urine  specimens  collected  in  RVN  under  the  direction  of  MAJ 
M.  G.  Robinson,  MC,  were  analyzed  for  opiates  by  FRAT  approximately  6 
months  after  collection.  They  were  re-analyzed  at  12  months  following 
collection  to  determine  opiate  stability.  The  urine  was  stored  frozen 
in  plastic  bottles  but  had  been  thawed  and  refrozen  numerous  times. 

Of  the  original  354  samples,  342  were  available  for  comparative  analyses 
at  6  and  12  months  after  collection.  A  comparison  of  the  FRAT  results 
6  and  12  months  post-collection  revealed  that  2.9%  of  the  original 
positive  samples  were  analyzed  as  negative  after  12  months.  Nine  per 
cent  of  the  positive  specimens  retained  the  original  response  and  91% 
of  the  positive  responses  gave  relative  decreases  in  the  morphine 
response  after  storage.  The  reasons  for  this  decrease  are  being 
investigated. 

d.  In  a  collaborative  study  with  the  Division  of  Neuropsychiatry, 
WRAIR,  urines  collected  at  Fort  George  G.  Meade,  Md. ,  and  an  appropri¬ 
ate  number  of  controls  were  analyzed  by  FRAT  and  TLC.  Of  the  3956 
urines  collected,  3567  were  negative  by  both  methods,  268  were  positive, 
and  120  were  designated  as  +  by  FRAT.  Some  urines  gave  positive 
responses  or  +_  responses  for  more  than  one  drug.  The  total  number  of 
urines  found  positive  for  each  drug  and  the  percentage  of  the  total 
urines  is  shown  in  the  following  table. 


1239 


Drug  or  Test 

No.  , 
Positive1 

% 

Positive 

No.  +2 

%  + 

FRAT 

92 

2.3 

134 

3.4 

Amphetamine 

12 

0.3 

0 

- 

Barbiturate 

42 

1.0 

0 

- 

Morphine  (TLC) 

18 

0.4 

0 

- 

Codeine 

32 

0.8 

0 

- 

Methadone 

10 

0.2 

0 

- 

Others 

72 

1.8 

0 

“ 

Minimum  detection: 
^Minimum  detection: 


100  ng/ml 
50  ng/ml 


1)  HI  was  performed  on  3832  of  the  samples.  There  were  73 
positive  urines  and  2  +_  responses.  All  morphine  and  codoine  quality 
control  specimens  were  positive  by  the  HI  test. 

2)  The  RIA  (Abuscreen)  test  was  performed  on  1127  selected 
Fort  Meade  samples,  27  gave  positive  responses  and  14  gave  ^responses. 
Morphine  and  codeine  quality  control  urine  samples  were  identified  41 
out  of  42  times.  The  RIA  test  gave  one  positive  response  with  a  metha¬ 
done  quality  control  specimen. 

3)  The  FRAT,  HI  and  RIA  were  compared  in  1125  Fort  Meade 
specimens  of  which  103  were  positive  by  one  or  more  of  these  tests. 

The  results  found  for  the  positive  urines  are  shown  in  the  following 
table. 

Response 


Test 

- 

+ 

+ 

1  Positive 

FRAT 

21 

50 

32 

2.7 

HI 

75 

2 

26 

2.2 

RIA 

61 

14 

28 

2.4 

Since  the  sensitivity  and  specificity  of  the  methods  are  different, 
direct  comparison  of  reactivity  is  difficult.  However,  the  HI  test 
appears  to  be  the  most  specific,  and  the  FRAT  the  least  specific  of 
these  methods  when  the  +  responses  are  considered  at  these  levels. 

e.  Urine  from  patients  who  were  given  heroin  or  morphine  were 
obtained  from  the  Addiction  Research  Center,  Lexington,  Ky.  The 
samples  were  collected  between  March  and  August  1971 ,  and  were 
analyzed  by  FRAT  in  December  1971.  The  same  samples  were  re-analyzed 
in  March  1973.  In  general,  the  values  of  morphine  equivalents 
reported  in  1973  are  lower.  In  1971,  fluctuating  low  levels  of  morphine 


V 


were  observed  by  FRAT  in  urine  collected  48  hours  and  longer  after 
administration  of  the  drug.  In  1973,  only  three  samples  gave  any 
positive  responses  after  48  hours.  Selected  samples  were  analyzed  by 
GLC  or  GC-MS  in  March  1973,  for  the  presence  of  morphine.  These  values 
gave  excellent  agreement  with  the  FRAT  values  of  March  1973,  and  in 
general,  failed  to  detect  urinary  morphine  after  a  lapsed  time  of 
greater  than  48  hours  after  a  single  5  mg  dose  of  heroin. 

5.  Quality  Control  Support,  for  the  Army  Urine  Screening  Contracts. 

The  Division  of  Biochemistry  was  given  the  responsibility  for 
setting  up  a  quality  control  assurance  laboratory  in  support  of  the  U.S. 
Army  Medical  Department's  contracted  drug  screening  effort.  This 
responsibility  involved  the  preparation,  analysis,  shipment  and  post¬ 
analysis  of  urine  specimens  used  by  the  contracting  office  to  determine 
the  level  of  compliance  of  the  various  commercial  laboratories  under 
contract  for  drug  screening  efforts.  This  laboratory  has  been  operat¬ 
ing  for  the  past  year  in  response  to  the  needs  of  the  contract  program. 
Approximately  4,000  specimens  were  prepared  and  distributed. 


V 


Project  3A062110A833  BICMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  101  Drug  abuse  methodology 
Literature  Cited. 


References : 

1.  Davidow,  B. ,  Petri,  N.  L.,  and  Quame,  B. :  A  thin  layer 
chromatographic  screening  procedure  for  detec.ting  drug  abuse.  Am.  J. 
Clin.  Path.,  50:  714-719,  1968. 

Publications : 

1.  Powell,  J.  B. ,  Tripp,  C.  H. ,  Jr.,  Davis,  J.  I.,  and  Angel, 

C.  R. :  An  evaluation  of  the  AutoAnalyzer  II  morphine  procedure. 

Advances  in  Automated  Analysis,  Vol.  6,  1972. 

2.  Miller,  W.  L. ,  Kullberg,  M.  P. ,  Banning,  M.  E.,  Brown,  L.  D., 
and  Doctor,  B.  P. :  Studies  on  the  quantitative  extraction  of  morphine 
from  urine  using  nonionic  XAD-2  resin.  Biochem.  Med.,  7_:  No.  1, 

Feb.,  1973. 

3.  Miller,  W.  L.,  Kullberg,  M.  P. ,  and  Doctor,  B.  P.:  Studies  on 
the  single  extraction  of  morphine,  amphetamine  and  phenobarbital  from 
urine  using  XAD-2  resin.  Fed.  Proc.  32;  720,  1973. 

4.  Kullberg,  M.  P.,  Miller,  W.  L.,  McGowan,  F.  J. ,  and  Doctor, 

B.  P. :  Studies  on  the  single  extraction  of  amphetamine  and  phenobarbital 
from  urine  using  XAD-2  resin.  Biochem.  Med.  7:  145,  1973. 


1242 


w 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 


».  DATE  Mtv  luWRV  «  KIND  OF  1UMMARY 

A .  New 


10  HO  COOKS*  PROORAM  CLCMKN  T 


b  CONTRIBUTING 


cxooinnNnioc 


62110A 


GD00 


I  iumwany  »ct y4 


•  ■oi»k  iecuritv' 


PNOJICT  NUMBER 


3A062i10A833 


I  titlI  rF'»c»M,  ■ni  l*eunh>  c iMilttstta*  C»d*>* 

(U)  Military  Performance  a nd  Drug  Abuse 


DA  OB6492 


7  RE  OR  AD4NG* 

NA 


^^A^^^UNMARY^ 

73  07  01 


k  04«rN  INITR'N 

NL, 


TASK  AREA  NUMICA 


THT 


* SPORT  COKTWOL  ItHBUL 

DD  DKbF<AR)ti.U, 


So.  i  A  SC  |P  IC  Data  ■ 
CONTRACTOR  ACCIII 

Itn  D  mo 


•  LlWlL  OF  low 
A.  VOH  UMI7 


•  OAK  UNIT  NUN  BCR 


w 


J  SCIENTIFIC  ANQ  TECHNOLOGICAL  AR  E  *•* 


013400  Psychology  012600  Pharmacology  012900  Physiology  003500  Clinical  Medicine 


It  REJPONIIBLE  OOO  ORCARI  I  ATlON 


nake*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
AODAitti*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


RESPONSIBLE  INOIVIOUAL 

nabc.  Buescher,  COL  E.  L. 
TELEPHONE.  202-576-3551 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

naae  Kegge,  F.  W.  ,  Ph.D. 

CL)  Delta-9-THC;  (U)  Heroin;  (U)  Drug  Abuse;  (U)  Performance;  ^U)  Withdrawal; 
(U)  Addiction;,.,.  (U)  Tolerance (U)  Drug  Secretion - 


II  |T*NT  DATE 

72  07 

CONTRACT  QUANT  NA" 

A  DATEI/tFf KCTIWK 


A.  ESTIMATED  COMPLETION  OATt" 

73  06 


C  TYPE 

•.  KIND  OP  AVARO 


EXPIRATION 


4  AMOUNT: 
f.  CUM.  AMT. 


It  FUNOlNG  AGENCY 

DA  I 


ft  RE  SOU  ACES  ESTIMATE 
MlflftlHl - 


GENERAL  USE 


fiscal 

YEAR 


73 

TUMtM* 


i  74 


It-  performance  method 

C.  In-House 


A  PROFESSIONAL  man  VMS 


00 


10 


tk  funds  ri"  hui«*) 


400 


IO  Hk  ^rOHMiPf  o*:«amiif  TIOM 


ie*  V, ’alter  Reed  Armv  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
ADOR.tr*  Was!  u non,  D.  C.  20012 


PRINCIPAL  IN  VESIU.  OR  'F«cN*A  UAM  ft  U  *  iUR«l«  iNUNlfMj 

name*  Ho  uway ,  COL  H.  C. 

TELEPHONE  202-576-3556^^^^^^ 
SOCIAL  l,  uR'Tv  ACCOUNT  NUMBER  BR;  *  ****** 

ASSOCIATE  IN VE  OATORS 

NAME:  Socctz  ,  CPT  F .  J . 

NAME. 


DA 


I)  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  IA  APPROACH.  IS  PROOREtS  fFuml«fc  InMf WAb«/^r»#*RpA«  IMmI'NkF  tp  nunAnt  FniiR  Nil  #1  #n«A  wllft  ■•(mtIIt  •(/«*  C«M  ) 

23.  (U)  The  mission  of  this  unit  is  to  identify  environmental,  behavioral,  and  physiological 
factors  associated  with  the  abuse  of  drugs  which  lead  to  ineffective  military  performance, 
prolonged  addictive  disease,  or  dangerous  toxic  effects. 

24.  (U)  Research  methods  of  psychology ,  psychophysiology,  physiology,  biochemistry, 
neuropharmacology,  and  clinical  evaluation  are  used  to  identify  and  correct  the  untoward 
effects  of  drug  abuse  upon  the  performance  and  health  of  military  personnel. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  In  usual  dosage  ranges,  chronically  administered  Delta-9-THC,  the 
principal  agent  in  hashish  and  marihuana,  produces  transient  deficits  in  performance 
under  conditions  which  produce  disadvantageous  consequences  for  the  organism;  drug 
induced  changes  are  sustained  when  they  cause  no  immediate  disadvantage.  The  behavior 
decrement  due  to  marihuana  will  vary  in  response  to  the  immediate  consequences  of 
environmental  reinforcement.  The  time  course  of  brain  self-stimulation  and  neurochemical 
changes  accompanying  acute  euphoriant  effect  of  heroin  has  been  partially  analyzed. 
Although  very  high  doses  of  pure  heroin  were  consumed  by  addicts,  the  resultant  acute 
withdrawal  syndrome  was  mild.  Potentially  important,  prolonged,  subtle  physiological 
effects  are  present.  The  probable  persistence  of  heroin  and/or  its  metabolites  over  a  14-day 
period  following  withdrawal  has  been  established.  These  findings  modify  concepts  of  the 
nature  of  early  opiate  addiction  in  humans.  For  technical  report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army 
Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 


dd.:«*:j498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARC  OEtOLETE  DO  FORMS  1  491 A .  I  NOV  ft 
AND  I4M-1.  »  MAR  *•  (FOR  ARMY  US^j^E  OBSOLETE 


[Pll  Redacted] 


fa1 


V 


V 


Project  3A062110A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Fetors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  102  Military  performance  and  drug  abuse 
Investigators. 

Principal:  COL  Harry  C.  Holloway,  MC 

Associate:  CPT  Frank  J.  Sodetz,  MSC;  Timothy  F.  Elsmore,  Ph.D.; 

Frederick  W.  Hegge,  Ph.D.;  MAJ  Malcolm  G.  Robinson, 
MC;  CPT  Richard  R.  Howe,  MSC;  CPT  John  Varni,  MSC; 
CPT  Frederick  J.  Manning,  MSC;  CPT  Steven  R.  Hursh, 
MSC;  Mary  Carol  P.  Boren,  Ph.D.;  LTC  Norman  Ream, 

MC;  CPT  John  R.  Jennings,  MSC;  James  C.  Bonbright, 
M.A.;  T.  Daryl  Hawkins,  M.A. 

Description. 

Under  this  work  unit,  the  work  conducted  concerned  the  impact  of  drugs 
of  abuse  upon  human  performance  and  health.  This  research  has  been 
carried  out  in  clinical  and  laboratory  situations  on  human  patients,  primate 
laboratory  models  and  in  experimental  systems  utilizing  other  species . 
During  the  last  year,  work  concentrated  on  the  effects  of  heroin  and  delta- 
9-tetrahydrocannabinol,  the  principal  ingredient  of  marijuana  and  hashish. 
Studies  have  concerned  themselves  with  critical  environmental  and  physiol¬ 
ogical  changes  which  are  likely  to  lead  to  disruptions  of  performance  or 
sickness.  (See  also  Work  Units  102,  077,  122  and  025)  . 

I.  HEROIN  DEPENDENCE  AND  WITHDRAWAL  IN  THE  MILITARY  HEROIN 
USER  IN  THE  U.S.  ARMY,  VIETNAM  (USARV)  . 

Following  the  data  collection  phase  of  studies  of  heroin  use,  depen¬ 
dence  and  abstinence  syndrome  in  Vietnam  (April  through  June  of  1972) , 
data  analysis  has  been  undertaken,  allowing  presentation  of  preliminary 
findings .  Data  were  collected  on  a  24-hour  basis  in  a  controlled  environ¬ 
ment  at  tne  L.S.  Army  Hospital,  Long  Binh,  Vietnam,  on  31  heroin  users 
and  5  non-he'uui  users  (control  group)  .  By  design,  the  object  of  this 
study  was  in  characterize  tne  pharmacophysiologic  response  of  recently 
addicted  i  year  or  less)  individuals  to  heroin  and  withdrawal.  Most  data 
are  uer've  ’  from  \  sample  of  10  individuals  who  met  the  study  criterion 
ant  5  controls.  Intense  observations  included  24-hour  electrophysiologic 
an  J  clinical  monitoring  and  were  made  for  approximately  7  days;  other 
less  intense  sampling  procedures  (e.g. ,  regular  blood  and  urine  sampling) 
continued  for  a  tola.'  of  14  days . 


1244 


Biochemical  and  Behavioral  Findings  During  Acute  Heroin 
Abstinence  in  Vietnam. 


t  \ 


Differences  between  heroin  users  in  Vietnam  and  those  classically 
described  in  civilian  reports  were  documented.  Such  findings  included 
the  following  distinctive  parameters  for  the  military  heroin  abuser  in 
USAR7:  youth,  relatively  brief  exposure  to  opiates,  good  general  health, 
use  of  nasopulmonary  routes  of  heroin  administration  rather  than  intra¬ 
venous  or  other  hypodermic  self-injection,  remarkably  mild  withdrawal 
symptomatology  (especially  when  evaluated  relative  to  the  tolerance  of 
many  01  these  pci  is t it.-;  s  very  large  quantities  of  heroin) ,  and  the  ability 
to  evaluate  witho  .v  ■:  ..ihout  the  need  for  therapeutic  pharmacological 
intervention.  Gross  clinical  scaling  of  withdrawal  (abstinence  syndrome) 
severity  confirmed  the  previously  unsubstantiated  impression  of  its  be¬ 
nignity  and  brevity .  Free  Radical  Assay  Technique  (FRAT)  measurement 
of  "morphine  equivalents"  in  24-hour  urine  collections  from  withdrawing 
patients  established  an  index  of  drug  excretion  neve*  previously  avail¬ 
able  in  a  comparable  study  population.  At  least  by  this  general  immuno¬ 
chemical  technique,  early  morphine  and  metabolite  excretion  fell  from 
initial,  extremely  high  levels  in  an  exponential  pattern,  reaching  a  vari¬ 
able  "plateau"  after  5-6  days.  Of  particular  importance  is  the  observa¬ 
tion  that  morphine  or  morphine  metabolite  excretion  continued  to  be  found 
as  late  as  14  days  following  the  last  dose  of  heroin.  Pupillometry  per¬ 
formed  3  times  daily  during  the  course  of  abstinence  documented  the  pat¬ 
tern  of  early  miosis  and  late  mydriasis  typical  of  classical  opiate  with¬ 
drawal;  however,  along  with  morphine  excretion,  pupil  size  remained  ab¬ 
normal  well  beyond  other  signs  and  symptoms  of  abstinence. 

B .  Acute  Heroin  Withdrawal  In  Vietnam;  Biochemical  and  Clinical 

Findings:  A  Preliminary  Peport. 

1.  The  extreme  urity  of  heroin  in  Vietnam  (92-98%)  has  been 
stressed  along  with  the  freedom  of  the  study  group  from  concomitant  use 
of  other  illicit  drugs  (except  marijuana)  .  Modification  of  the  FRAT  for 
determination  of  "morphine  equivalents"  at  levels  below  100  nanograms 
per  milliliter  was  accomplished  by  the  Division  of  Biochemistry,  WRAIR; 
and  the  utility  of  the  techniques  has  been  documented .  The  estimate  of 
heroin  dose  by  clinical  history  can  be  substantiated  by  such  assays  of 
total  immunologically  recognizable  morphine  and  metabolite  excretion . 
Preliminary  morphine  excretion  data  suggest  that  the  insufflation  of 
heroin  intranasally  (snorting,  sniffing)  results  in  absorption  of  heroin 


1245 


of  approximately  the  same  magnitude  as  that  associated  with  intravenous 
injection .  Smoking  of  heroin  results  in  somewhat  lower  initial  excretion 
of  morphine  equivalents  in  the  patient's  urine  (a  finding  in  accord  with 
earlier  studies  of  the  heroin-using  civilian  population  in  Hong  Kong  by 
Quock  and  Way,  1968) .  Of  interest,  no  consistent  overall  difference  in 
morphine  equivalent  excretion  can  be  attributed  to  route.  The  definition 
of  possible  qualitative  differences  (e.g.,  metabolite  patterns)  awaits 
development  of  appropriate  analytical  techniques  aside  from  the  several 
immunochemical  approaches  applied  to  date. 


2.  Although  the  subjects  studied  reported  high  heroin  intake 
(which  was  documented  by  immunochemical  urinalysis) ,  the  abstinence 
symptomatology  in  Vietnam  had  a  total  duration  of  less  than  half  the 
period  reported  in  civilian  "cold  turkey"  withdrawal.  Further,  the 
specific  signs  and  symptoms  observed  in  the  withdrawing  Vietnam  sol¬ 
dier  were  considerably  less  severe  than  those  commonly  reported  in 
civilian  heroin  addicts.  These  clinical  findings  support  an  "uncoupling" 
of  tolerance  and  physiological  dependence .  If  this  is  supported  by  fur¬ 
ther  analysis,  the  previous  assumptions  about  the  interdependence  of 
tolerance  and  addiction  must  be  revised . 

C.  Pupillary  Responsivity  During  Acute  Heroin  Withdrawal  In 
Viet  Nam. 

Further  analysis  of  pupiilary  measurement  data  from  Vietnam  has 
provided  clearer  indices  of  this  physiological  response  to  opiates  and 
their  withdrawal .  The  miosis  of  acute  heroin  intoxication  did  not  increase 
with  light-stimulation  or  in  response  to  accommodation.  In  the  12-18 
hours  following  the  self-administration  of  the  patients'  last  doses  of 
heroin,  mydriasis  gradually  developed  (all  measurements  considered  in 
relation  to  concurrently  evaluated  drug-free  controls) .  Pupillary  dilata¬ 
tion  persisted  throughout  five  days  of  measurement,  therefore  extending 
beyond  the  2-3  days  of  symptomatic  clinical  abstinence  syndrome.  Al¬ 
though  the  dilated  pupils  of  withdrawing  patients  did  respond  to  light 
with  some  constriction,  divergence  from  similarly  simulated  controls 
also  persisted .  A  Linquist  Type  VI  analysis  of  variance  indicated  a  con¬ 
sistent  circadian  variation  in  both  patients  and  controls,  maximum  pupil 
diameter  occurring  in  the  late  evening  and  minimum  size  in  the  early  morn¬ 
ing  .  This  finding  has  not  previously  been  reported  in  the  English  lang¬ 
uage  scientific  literature . 


V 


D.  Hemagglutination  Inhibition  Assay  For  Morphine. 

In  collaboration  with  Dr.  Frank  L.  Adler  (Chief,  Department  of  Immu¬ 
nology,  Public  Health  Research  Institute  of  the  City  of  New  York)  more 
than  5 , 000  samples  of  urine  and  serum  from  Vietnam  have  been  assayed 
for  morphine  equivalents  by  the  hemagglutination  inhibition  technique. 

This  technique  is  complementary  to  FRAT  and  has  allowed  independent 
assessment  of  morphine  equivalent  kinetics  in  Vietnam  studies.  Hemagglu¬ 
tination  inhibition  can  be  used  to  measure  morphine  equivalents  in  serum 
or  plasma.  This  allows  preliminary  formulation  of  a  schema  for  morphine 
metabolism  in  this  patient  population,  which  is  critical  for  design  of  more 
specific  -  hemical  analyses  of  these  specimens.  Preliminary  results  of  such 
assays  in  selected  RVN  patients  indicate  the  continued  intermittent  pres¬ 
ence  of  circulating  morphine  equivalents  for  more  than  two  weeks  following 
the  last  dose  of  heroin .  All  hemagglutination  inhibition  assays  have  been 
done  under  "double  blind"  conditions  with  a  minimum  of  three  dependent 
replications  of  each  sample.  Continued  collaboration  is  planned  in  the 
analysis  of  existing  data. 

E.  Clinical  Chemistries  In  Vietnam  Heroin  Users  And  Control 
Subjects . 

1 .  Blood  Chemistries. 

Tests  have  been  performed  at  Hycel  Corporation  in  collaboration  with 
LTC  Douglas  Beach,  MC,  Director,  Division  of  Biochemistry,  on  the  first 
series  of  clinical  chemistries  from  the  Vietnam  invest*  jations.  Tests  com¬ 
pleted  include:  creatinine,  calcium,  phosphorus,  LDH,  CPK,  SGPT,  SGOT, 
alkaline  phosphatase,  total  bilirubin ,  sodium,  potassium,  cholesterol,  uric 
acid,  total  protein,  globulin,  BUN  and  glucose.  Although  findings  are 
still  preliminary,  some  differences  between  the  heroin  users  and  controls 
have  emerged.  Heroin  users  have  significantly  lower  serum  values  for: 
creatinine,  cholesterol,  uric  acid  and  BUN.  This  may  well  be  secondary 
to  impaired  nutrition  and  decreased  lean  muscle  mass  among  the  drug 
users.  Heroin  users  have  higher  phosphorus  and  CPK  than  controls. 

There  is  also  an  apparent  tendency  toward  lowered  serum  sodium  and 
slightly  increased  blood  glucose  among  the  heroin  users  (hyperglycemia 
has  been  described  as  a  physiological  effect  of  the  narcotic  drugs) .  Fur¬ 
ther  evaluations  of  present  data  and  additional  clinical  laboratory  studies 
are  underway. 


Vr 


1247 


2.  Urinary  Chemistries. 


Sequential  urine  specimens  from  31  heroin  users  and  5  controls  have 
been  analyzed  in  collaboration  with  Dr.  James  Low  of  the  Metabolism 
Section ,  Walter  Reed  General  Hospital .  Over  400  samples  have  been 
assayed  for  sodium,  potassium,  creatinine  and  osmolarity  (in  duplicate) . 
Data  analysis  is  underway  to  correlate  urinary  clearances  of  electrolytes 
and  creatinine  with  morphine  excretion  and  with  the  course  of  abstinence 
syndrome. 

3.  Hematological  Findings. 

On  the  study  population  and  controls,  data  are  available  for  white 
blood  cell  count,  differential  percentages  of  leucocyte  types,  blood  cell 
morphology,  hematocrit,  prothrombin  times  and  sedimentation  rate.  Most 
cases  provide  values  three  times  daily  during  withdrawal.  Initial  evalu¬ 
ation  of  results  indicates  a  persisting  leucocytosis  during  withdrawal; 
however,  the  normal  circadian  pattern  of  white  cell  count  seems  to  be 
preserved  (maximum  during  the  evening  and  minimum  during  the  morn¬ 
ing  hours)  . 

F .  The  Analysis  Of  Continuous  Heart  Rate,  Respiration  Rate, 

Electroencephalogram  And  Gross  Eye  Movements. 

1 .  Electrophysiologic  data  were  collected  by  telemetry  on  a  24-hour 
basis  for  5  to  7  days .  Techniques  have  been  developed  for  decomposing 
two  channels  of  recorded  electrophysiological  data  into  their  constituent 
signals.  Signals  from  a  pair  of  transdiaphragmatic  electrodes  were  fil¬ 
tered  to  produce  electrocardiograms  (ECG)  and  rheopneumograms  (RPG) . 
Signals  from  scalp  electrodes  were  filtered  to  produce  electroencephalo¬ 
grams  (EEG)  and  electro-oculograms  (EOG)  .  Magnetic  data  tapes  were 
played  at  faster-than-recording  speed  to  provide  time  compression,  there¬ 
by  shortening  analysis  time. 

2.  The  preliminary  analysis  done  to  date  has  concentrated  on  the 
gross  characteristics  of  these  signals,  i.e. ,  on  the  statistical  descriptors 
specifying  rate  of  occurrence  and  signal  variability.  These  data  are  from 
long  time-series  that  extend  from  5  to  7  days  in  duration.  The  manipula¬ 
tion  of  the  long  data  files  required  the  development  of  special  analytic  and 
graphical  presentation  techniques .  Sufficient  material  has  been  examined 
to  date  to  permit  a  preliminary  characterization  of  the  differences  between 
addicts  undergoing  withdrawal  and  yoked  normal  controls. 


i 


1248 


'V 


3 .  Gross  eye  movements  are  considered  to  be  related  to  the  general 
activity  of  a  subject.  Normal  subjects  exhibit  a  clear  diurnal  pattern  of 
activity  with  3  or  4  subsidiary  activity  periods  between  0600  and  2400. 
Addicts  differ  markedly  from  controls  in  that  the  diurnal  activity  pattern 
disappears  and  is  replaped  by  higher  levels  of  activity  that  continue 
throughout  the  day .  The  normal  diurnal  patterns  are  not  reestablished 

by  day  6  of  withdrawal,  although  overall  activity  levels  return  virtually 
to  normal  levels.  These  data  provide  a  precise  means  of  analyzing  the 
temporal  structure  of  activity  during  withdrawal  from  heroin.  These 
analyses  are  proceeding. 

4 .  Little  has  been  done  with  the  respiration  data  to  date  other  than 
to  digitize,  filter  and  store  signals  for  subsequent  analysis.  An  adaptive 
peak  detector  program  has  been  written  and  debugged  for  that  analysis. 
The  program  samples  noise  levels,  and  on  the  basis  of  the  statistical  prop¬ 
erties  of  the  noise,  sets  variable  threshold  values  which  reduce  the  prob¬ 
ability  that  spurious  signals  will  be  classified  as  breaths .  This  step  was 
necessary  because  the  recording  technique  is  extremely  sensitive  to 
changes  in  electrode  pressure  such  as  occur  during  the  monitoring  of  free- 
ranging  subjects. 

5 .  The  analysis  techniques  for  the  ECG  data  are  most  highly  devel¬ 
oped  and  have  been  employed  most  extensively .  Each  individual  cardiac 
interbeat  interval  is  collected  over  10-minute  periods.  Within  each  10- 
minute  period  the  intervals  are  partitioned  directly  into  frequency  distri¬ 
butions,  or  they  are  converted  to  instantaneous  heart  rate  and  then  parti¬ 
tioned.  Descriptive  statistics  are  calculated  on  each  of  the  10-minute 
distributions  and  their  values  become  time  series  subjected  to  further 
analysis .  Normal  subjects  show  clear  and  expected  circadian  and  ultra- 
dian  variation  in  interbeat  interval.  The  addicts,  on  the  other  hand, 
show  a  marked  suppression  in  both  circadian  and  ultradian  activity  early 
in  withdrawal.  Ultradian  activity  returns  before  circadian  activity. 

These  findings  have  important  implications  for  our  understanding  of 
central  neural  control  mechanisms  and  heroin  detoxification. 

G.  Miscellaneous  Continuing  Investigations. 

In  collaboration  with  the  Division  of  Biochemistry,  arrangements  for 
quantitative/qualitative  analyses  of  our  biological  specimens  for  morphine 
and  other  metabolites  have  been  planned .  In  collaboration  with  the  Depart¬ 
ment  of  Neuroendocrinology,  serial  urine  samples  and  plasma  specimens 
are  being  assayed  for  an  endocrine  battery  to  define  the  effects  of  narcotic 

1249 


*>27-B2fi  O  74  -  37 


V 


usage  and  withdrawal  in  this  population  and  setting  on  the  hypothalamic- 
pituitary -ad  renal  axis ,  endocrine  pancreas ,  thyroid  and  gonadotrophic- 
gonadal  hormone  systems.  (Work  Unit  077,  Influence  of  stress  on  hormone 
response,  performance  and  emotional  breakdown  in  the  military) . 

D.  CLINICAL  STUDIES  PERTAINING  TO  HEROIN  USE  IN  USARV. 

A.  Medical  histories  on  approximately  2500  USARV  soldiers,  non¬ 
heroin  users  and  a  similar  number  of  heroin  users,  were  obtained.  Fre¬ 
quency  analyses  of  these  data  are  being  prepared.  In  addition,  data  per¬ 
tinent  to  admissions  to  USARV  Drug  Treatment  Centers  are  being  studied 
and  correlated  with  aspects  of  demographic  variables  including  items 
pertinent  to  heroin  history. 

B .  A  frequency  analysis  of  signs  and  symptoms  associated  with  heroin 
abstinence  is  being  prepared  on  approximately  500  soldiers  who  were  ad¬ 
mitted  to  USARV  Drug  Treatment  Centers.  One  hundred  forty  of  this  group 
in  addition  underwent  careful,  daily  neurological  examinations  during  with¬ 
drawal  . 

C.  A  review  of  medical  complications  associated  with  heroin  use  and 
a  review  of  autopsy  data  pertinent  to  drug  and  alcohol  abuse  in  USARV  in 
1970,  1971  and  the  first  half  of  1972  have  been  completed  and  are  now  being 
further  evaluated . 

III.  LABORATORY  STUDIES  ON  HEROIN  USING  SOLDIERS  IN  USARV. 

A.  Hematology  Studies. 

Peripheral  blood  smears  obtained  in  USARV  for  the  study  of  white  cell 
morphology  in  230  heroin  users  and  a  similar  number  of  non-users  are 
being  carried  out  cooperation  with  the  Department  of  Hematology,  WRAIR . 

B .  Hepatitis  Associated  Antigen  Studies. 

Sera  from  300  heroin  users  and  200  non-heroin  users  from  USARV  have 
been  studied  for  presence  of  HBAg  and  HBAb  by  RIA  in  the  Department  of 
Hematology .  Results  are  being  correlated  with  pertinent  demographic  and 
drug  use  data . 

C.  Immunological  Studies. 

Immunoelectrophoretic  patterns  are  being  carried  out  on  sera  from 
100  USARV  heroin  users.  This  is  being  done  because  of  previous  reports 

1250 


of  IGM  elevations  in  CONUS  heroin  users .  It  is  also  planned  to  study 
these  same  sera  for  presence  of  morphine  antibody.  These  studies  are 
being  done  in  cooperation  with  the  Division  of  Biochemistry,  WRAIR  and 
the  Department  of  Pathology ,  WRGH . 

D.  Morphine  Excretion  Studies. 

To  document  metabolic  and  excretion  patterns,  sera  and  urines  were 
collected  at  frequent,  regular  intervals  from  75  individuals  who  smoked, 
insufflated,  and  injected  heroin.  These  specimens  will  be  analyzed  for 
heroin  and  its  metabolites . 

E.  Pulmonary  Function  Studies  In  Vietnam  Heroin  Users  And 
Control  Subjects. 

Pulmonary  function  testing  was  performed  on  145  identified  heroin 
users  and  drug-free  staff  members  in  the  Long  Binh  Drug  Treatment 
Center  and  Crossroads  Rehabilitation  Center .  One-second  forced  expira¬ 
tory  volume,  3-second  forced  expiratory  volume,  peak  expiratory  flow, 
and  total  vital  capacity  were  measured.  Height,  weight,  age,  drug  his¬ 
tory  (including  marijuana  use) ,  medical  history,  and  demographic  infor¬ 
mation  were  obtained  for  all  subjects .  Blood  was  obtained  from  each  parti¬ 
cipant  at  the  time  of  pulmonary  function  testing  for  morphine/metabolite 
level  determination,  clinical  chemistries,  hepatitis  antigen  determination, 
hepatitis  antibody  determination  and  immunoglobulin  assay.  Preliminary 
pulmonary  function  test  results  indicate  impairment  of  expiratory  flow 
correlated  with  recent  use  of  heroin.  Further  data  analysis  will  include 
assessment  of  pulmonary  function  in  relation  to  serum  morphine  level, 
smoking  history,  heroin  route,  height,  weight,  length  of  tour  in  Vietnam 
and  tendency  toward  recovery  of  "normal"  pulmonary  function  values  on 
follow-up  testing . 

IV.  PERFORMANCE  EFFECTS  OF  DELTA-9-TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL 

(THC)  . 

A.  Effects  Of  THC  On  Timing  Behavior:  Acute  And  Chronic 
Administration . 

Rhesus  monkeys  were  trained  to  lever  press  for  food  reinforcement 
on  a  differential  reinforcement  of  low  rates  (DRL)  schedule,  then  given 
six  different  doses  of  THC  ranging  from  .07  to  2.86  mg/kg  at  weekly 
intervals .  Relative  to  controls ,  all  six  doses  produced  increases  in  both 
the  number  of  unreinforced  responses,  that  is,  errors  and  the  time  re- 


quired  to  obtain  60  reinforcements,  as  well  as  decreases  in  the  median 
interresponse  time  (IRT) .  In  addition,  marked  pausing  occurred  after 
higher  doses .  These  performance  changes  were  occasionally  evident 
24  hours  later ,  but  more  often  were  less  prominent  in  the  second  half 
of  the  session  and  were  followed  the  next  day  by  sessions  with  exception¬ 
ally  long  interresponse  time,  and  exceptionally  few  errors.  Starting 
sessions  four  hours  after  THC  ingestion,  rather  than  three  hours  after¬ 
wards,  altered  neither  number  nor  distribution  of  errors.  Apparently, 
it  is  the  opportunity  to  practice  performance  under  the  influence  of  THC 
since  last  drug  dose  that  is  responsible  for  improvement  seen  during 
drug  sessions .  This  suggestion  is  supported  by  the  ease  with  which  drug- 
induced  performance  changes,  within  session  recovery,  and  subsequent 
improved  performance  can  be  mimicked  by  merely  increasing  the  minimum 
reinforced  interresponse  time  from  60  to  72  seconds .  Upon  completion  of 
the  procedure  described  above,  the  same  animals  were  given  daily  doses 
of  1  mg  of  THC .  At  least  partial  tolerance  to  the  effects  described  above 
was  seen  in  all  animals.  In  addition,  on  discontinuation  of  daily  THC, 
after  complete  tolerance  or  thirty  days ,  a  marked  rebound  was  observed . 
Tolerant  monkeys  showed  interresponse  times  significantly  longer  during 
the  initial  few  post-drug  sessions  than  in  the  pre-drug  baseline  period. 
Continued  post-drug  testing  resulted  in  a  return  to  the  IRTs  typical  of  the 
baseline  period .  These  studies  on  the  effects  of  THC  on  spaced  respond¬ 
ing  demonstrate  that  behavioral  effects  can  be  seen  in  the  monkey  at  doses 
typical  of  human  usage,  that  DRL  schedules  provide  especially  sensitive 
baselines  for  investigating  this  drug,  and  that  at  least  under  some  condi¬ 
tions  rapid  behavioral  compensation  for  drug  induced  decrements  in  per¬ 
formance  is  both  possible  and  likely. 

B .  Effects  Of  Chronic  Administration  Of  THC  On  Work  Rate  Of 
Accuracy  Of  Performance  And  Timing  Behavior. 

A  series  of  studies  were  completed  during  which  three  chimpanzees 
were  required  to  work  on  a  task  that  required  precise  timing  behavior, 
as  well  as  sustained  performance  for  nearly  16  hours  each  day  in  order 
to  obtain  their  daily  ration  of  food .  THC  was  administered  orally  on  each 
of  the  35  successive  days .  Doses  of  THC  comparable  to  those  reported 
effective  in  humans  resulted  in  over-estimation  of  time  and  a  reduction 
of  work  output.  Gradual  recovery  from  this  deficit  occurred  during  the 
first  14  successive  days  of  THC  administration;  throughout  the  remainder 
of  the  administration  period,  behavior  was  essentially  normal.  When 
the  drug  administration  ceased,  a  marked  decrement  in  performance  was 
observed  which  lasted  approximately  14  days .  This  decrement  was  grad¬ 
ually  eliminated  with  successive  post-drug  sessions.  Thus,  with  chronic 


administration  of  THC,  a  deficit  in  performance  is  observed  that  is  grad¬ 
ually  eliminated  as  the  organism  continues  to  perform  in  a  matter  consis¬ 
tent  with  the  schedule  of  reinforcement .  When  the  drug  is  no  longer  ad¬ 
ministered,  another  deficit  in  performance  occurs  which  is  also  eliminated 
with  continued  exposure  to  the  schedule  of  reinforcement.  These  obser¬ 
vations  suggest  that  tolerance  to  THC  occurs  when  the  effect  of  the  drug 
leads  to  disruption  or  decrement  in  performance,  but  does  not  occur  in 
those  special  situations  in  which  performance  enhancement  is  seen  follow¬ 
ing  drug  administration .  Both  phenomena  are  consistent  with  the  notion 
that  behavioral  tolerance  to  THC  may  reflect  the  continued  operation  of 
the  schedule  cf  reinforcement  used  to  maintain  performance. 

C.  Tolerance  To  The  Effects  Of  THC  On  Free-Operant  Avoidance. 

Eight  animals  were  trained  to  lever  press  to  avoid  shock  in  a  free- 
operant  situation  with  an  response-shock  interval  of  20  seconds  and  shock- 
shock  interval  of  2.5  seconds.  Asymptotic  performance  ranged  from  near¬ 
perfect  avoidance  to  mere  post-shock  responding .  THC  given  orally  4  hours 
before  testing,  initially  produced  an  increase  in  the  number  of  shocks  re¬ 
ceived.  With  continued  daily  exposure  ^  the  drug,  this  increase  waned, 
disappearing  within  seven  days  for  all  subjects.  In  addition,  with  Lhe 
exception  of  two  extreme  subjects,  shock  rates  continued  to  decline  un¬ 
til  substantially  lower  than  the  pre-drug  baseline.  This  reduction  was 
not  accompanied  by  an  increase  in  response  rate,  but  was  due  primarily 
to  a  change  in  response  spacing.  More  importantly,  this  improvement 
did  not  disappear  until  drug  administration  was  discontinued  14  days 
after  the  first  sign  of  improved  performance.  At  this  point,  performance 
returned  to  pre-drug  levels . 

D.  Circadian  Variation  In  The  Effec.s  Of  THC  On  The  Temporal 
Control  Of  Performance. 

Monkeys  are  being  trained  on  a  multiple  schedule  with  both  fixed- 
interval  and  DRL  components.  Four  sessions  are  run  daily,  two  in  the 
lighted  portion  of  the  day  and  two  in  the  dark.  THC  in  doses  from  .5 
to  2  mg/kg  are  being  given  two  hours  before  each  session  in  an  attempt 
to  determine  the  relationship  between  performance  decrements  attendant 
to  use  of  the  drug,  and  the  time  at  which  the  drug  is  administered.  No 
preliminary  data  are  available  at  this  time . 


E.  Time  Course  Of  The  Effects  Of  THC  On  Fixed-Interval  Responding. 


Methodologically,  one  of  the  most  difficult  problems  facing  research¬ 
ers  in  the  field  of  behavioral  pharmacology  is  assessment  of  the  time  course 
of  drug  action.  The  technical  difficulty  of  this  area  of  research  stems  from 
the  need  to  control  a  variety  of  variables  which  might  confound  data  ob¬ 
tained  relative  to  the  time  course  of  drug  effects.  In  the  present  study, 
animals  were  trained  to  lever  press  for  food  delivered  on  a  fixed -interval 
(FI)  schedule  of  reinforcement.  Each  subject  performed  in  two  separate 
30-minute  sessions  daily .  After  stabilization  of  behavior ,  the  animals 
were  administered  either  THC  or  vehicle  placebo  once  each  week.  The 
test  schedule  allowed  for  collection  of  data  from  sessions  beginning  3,  8, 

24  and  80  hours  after  drug  or  placebo  administration .  Response  output 
was  generally  decreased  by  the  doses  of  THC  employed.  The  extent  of 
this  decrease  was  dependent  on  both  dose  and  time  elapsed  between  ad¬ 
ministration  and  testing .  The  lowest  three  doses  had  their  greatest  effect 
at  24  hours  following  administration,  and  the  highest  dose  depressed  re¬ 
sponding  at  30  hours  after  administration .  Because  behavior  supported 
by  fixed-interval  schedules  appears  to  be  one  of  the  most  sensitive  assays 
for  behaviorally  active  drugs ,  these  data  argue  strongly  for  a  careful  re¬ 
assessment  of  the  literature  relative  to  the  effects  of  THC  on  performance. 
Failure  to  recognize  the  heretofore  unexpected  duration  of  behavioral 
effects  of  THC  may  render  much  of  the  available  data  uninterpretable . 

F.  Time  Course  Of  Oral  THC  Effects. 

As  indicated  in  the  study  above,  in  determining  the  behavioral  effect 
of  a  drug ,  time  from  administration  is  an  important  determinant  of  the  re¬ 
sults  obtained.  In  the  present  study,  animals  were  run  on  a  variable- 
interval  (VI)  schedule  for  one-hour  sessions.  Sessions  began  2,  6  or 
24  hours  following  drug  administration,  and  doses  of  4,  8,  16  and  32  mg/ 
kg  were  used.  Low  doses  produced  increases  in  r  ponse  rate  at  two 
and  six  hours  post-administration,  but  no  effect  at  24  hours.  As  a  follow¬ 
up,  animals  were  l  un  continuously  one  session  every  four  hours  for  65 
hours  following  a  dose  of  32  mg/kg .  Response  rate  was  markedly  sup¬ 
pressed  at  eight  hours  and  recovered  sharply  between  25  and  30  hours 
post-drug .  These  studies  are  in  general  agreement  with  the  study  re¬ 
ported  above  in  that  the  benavioral  effects  of  THC  appear  to  be  of  longer 
duration  than  had  previously  been  thought.  However,  the  data  also 
strongly  suggest  that  not  all  of  the  effects  of  the  drug  endure  for  the 
same  period  of  time.  With  the  variable-interval  schedule  employed  in 
the  present  study,  low  dose  effects  had  dissipated  within  six  hours, 


1254 


V 


while  in  the  fixed -interval  study  presented  above  effects  were  still 
being  obtained  at  these  same  dose  levels  some  24  hours  following  ad¬ 
ministration  . 

G.  A  Comparison  Of  Behavioral  And  Pharmacological  Tolerance 
To  THC. 

The  purpose  of  this  study  was  to  assess  the  relative  contributions 
of  pharmacological  tolerance  and  learning  to  the  concept  of  behavioral 
tolerance .  Previous  work  has  shown  that  an  oral  dose  of  32  mg/kg  of 
THC  decidedly  affects  behavior  two  hours  later  while  not  affecting  be¬ 
havior  48  hours  later .  Well-trained  animals  running  on  a  Sidman- 
Avoidance  procedure  were  paired  on  the  basis  of  their  initial  response 
to  a  32  mg/kg  dose  of  THC  given  two  hours  prior  to  their  work  sessions . 
Subsequently,  each  member  of  the  pair  received  THC  either  two  hours 
or  48  hours  prior  to  the  avoidance  session.  After  behavior  stabilizes, 
THC  will  be  administered  two  hours  prior  to  the  final  sessions  for  both 
groups.  Pharmacological  tolerance  should  be  comparable  because  both 
groups  will  have  received  the  same  number  of  drug  administrations. 
Thus,  any  differences  between  the  groups  during  the  final  sessions  can 
be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  the  two-hour  group  had  an  opportunity  to 
practice  its  performance  under  the  influence  of  the  drug .  These  results 
confirm  previous  observations .  During  the  first  THC  sessions ,  all  ani¬ 
mals  avoided  fewer  shocks  than  during  placebo  sessions.  This  initial 
disruption  in  performance  has  been  seen  before.  However,  in  the  pres¬ 
ent  study  it  was  possible  to  determine  that  the  increase  in  shock  rate 
was  not  correlated  with  the  baseline  number  of  shocks  received,  indi¬ 
cating  that  baseline  shock  rate  does  not  predict  initial  disruption  of  a- 
voidance  behavior  by  large  doses  of  THC . 

H.  Effects  Of  Chronic  THC  Administration  On  Complex 
Discrimination  Behavior . 

Two  experiments  are  being  conducted  in  an  attempt  to  develop  a  be¬ 
havioral  assay  that  can  yield  data  on  the  development  of  pharmacological 
tolerance  to  THC  without  confounding  by  the  concomitant  development 
of  behavioral  tolerance.  In  order  to  develop  such  an  assay,  it  has  been 
necessary  to  adopt  a  strategy  of  confronting  the  organism  with  complex 
discrimination  problems .  This  is  because ,  in  most  simple  tasks ,  the 
organism  learns  to  compensate  for  any  disruptive  effect  of  the  drug; 
thus ,  the  disa  opearance  of  drug  effects  over  time  are  completely  con¬ 
founded  with  a  pharmacological  tolerance  that  might  develop  and  the 
opportunity  of  the  animal  to  learn  to  compensate  for  the  deficit .  The 


1255 


V 


present  study  takes  advantage  of  the  fact  that  no  behavioral  compensa¬ 
tion  occurs  for  certain  kinds  of  complex  discriminations  and  then  ex¬ 
poses  the  animals  to  :  jssions  occurring  throughout  a  24-hour  day.  A 
single  dose  of  THC  will  be  administered  at  the  same  time  each  day,  and 
the  effect  of  the  drug  on  each  session  interposed  in  the  24-hour  period 
preceding  the  next  drug  administration  will  be  examined .  Any  changes 
in  the  time  course  of  the  effects  of  the  drug  should  become  apparent  with 
this  method.  If  with  repeated  administrations  of  the  drug,  the  duration 
of  a  drug  effect  changes,  this  change  may  reflect  increase  rate  of  metab¬ 
olism  or  some  other  form  of  pharmacologic  tolerance.  To  date,  no  proce¬ 
dure  exists  that  offers  the  advantages  of  the  present  study  for  the  be¬ 
havioral  assay  of  pharmacological  tolerance  to  drugs .  In  the  first  ex¬ 
periment,  the  animals  will  work  and  live  unrestrained  in  cages  inside 
isolation  booths.  Work  panels  at  the  end  of  each  cage  contain  four  levers 
and  four  stimulus  display  units .  Sessions  will  be  run  around  the  clock 
with  a  session  beginning  every  four  hours.  A  matching-to-sample  pro¬ 
cedure  will  be  in  effect.  The  stimulus  will  be  complex,  that  is,  a  form 
and  a  color.  On  each  trial,  a  sample  stimulus  will  be  presented  on  one 
of  the  stimulus  display  units.  Then,  all  lights  will  be  turned  out  for 
20  seconds.  This  procedure  is  referred  to  as  delayed  matching-to- 
sample.  Following  the  delay  period,  three  stimulus  choices  will  be 
presented  to  the  animal .  All  three  will  be  colors  or  all  three  will  be 
forms .  The  animal  will  have  to  pick  the  choice  that  corresponds  to  the 
previously  displayed  sample .  This  task  requires  that  the  animal  re¬ 
member  two  pieces  of  information  during  the  20-second  dela}  interval: 
the  color  of  the  sample  and  the  form  of  the  sample.  Correct  matches 
will  be  followed  by  food  on  an  intermittent  schedule  of  reinforcement . 

Tne  second  experiment  also  involves  a  matching-to-sample  procedure, 
but  one  of  increased  complexity.  In  this  procedure,  all  samples  and 
all  choices  will  be  made  up  of  both  forms  and  colors.  A  tone  ’n  the 
chamber  will  signal  the  animal  whether  to  match  on  the  basis  of  color 
or  on  the  basis  of  form.  This  is  known  as  a  conditional  discrimination. 

V.  SELECTIVE  BREEDING  FOR  ALCOHOL  INTAKE. 

Work  continued  on  the  developmeat  of  rat  strains  which  show 
differential  alcohol  intakes  under  a  preferential  alcohol  drinking  test. 
Production  of  the  fourth  filial  generation  in  both  the  high-drinker  and 
low-drinker  strain  was  completed.  The  average  difference  in  alcohol 
intakes  between  these  strains  showed  a  small  increase  above  that  re¬ 
corded  for  the  third  generation  animals .  Fourth  generation  low-drinkers 
consumed,  on  the  average,  only  5  cc  of  10%  alcohol  per  day.  There  were 
no  intake  differences  between  the  males  and  females.  By  contrast,  high 

1256 


V 


drir  ner  males  consumed  30  cc  of  the  same  solution  per  day  and  females 
consumed  25  cc  per  day.  Continued  selection  should  produce  even  highe 
alcohol  intakes  since  increases  have  been  achieved  with  each  successive 
generation .  Utilization  of  these  rat  strains  may  facilitate  the  development 
of  improved  laboratory  models  of  chronic  alcohol  consumption. 


Project  3A062110A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 


Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  102  Military  performance  and  drug  abuse 
Literature  Cited. 


References: 

Quock,  C.P.;  Cheng,  J.;  Chans,  S.C.;  and  Way,  E.L.:  The  absti¬ 
nence  syndrome  in  long-term  high  dose  narcotic  addiction.  Br.  J.  Addict. 
63:261-270,  1968. 

Publications: 

1.  Elsmore,  T.F.:  Effects  of  delta-9-THC  on  temporal  and  auditory 
discrimination  performances  of  monkeys.  Psychopharmacologia  26:62-72, 
1972. 

2.  Elsmore,  T.F.:  Saccharine  aversion  induced  by  delta-9-THC: 
Effects  of  repeated  doses  prior  to  pairing  with  saccharine.  Pro.  Amer. 
Psychol.  Assn.  7: 817-818,  1972. 

3.  Howe,  R.C.;  Robinson,  M.G.;  Siegel,  H.W.;  and  Hegge,  F.W.: 
Alterations  in  circadian  and  ultradian  biorhythms  during  withdrawal  from 
heroin  (abstract)  .  Assoc.  Psychophysiol  Study  of  Sleep,  San  Diego,  Cali¬ 
fornia,  May  1973. 

4.  Krasnegor,  N.K.  and  Elsm<  re,  T.F.:  Effects  of  chronic  administra¬ 
tion  of  delta-9-THC  on  Sidman-avoidance  performance  of  monkeys.  Proc 
Amer.  Psychol.  Assn.  7:819-820,  1972. 

5.  Manning,  F.J.  and  Elsmore,  T.F.:  Delta-9-THC  effects  on  operant 
responding  maintained  by  nutritive  and  non-nutritive  reinforcers.  Proc. 
5th  Inter.  Cong.  Pharrrac.  148,  1972. 

6.  Robinson,  M.G.;  Siegel,  H.W.,  Howe,  R.C.,  Ream,  N.W.;  and 
Hegge,  F.W.:  Biochemical  and  behavioral  findings  during  acute  heroin 
withdrawal  in  Vietnam  (abstract).  Second  Inti.  Symposium  of  Drug  Addic¬ 
tion,  New  Orleans,  March  1973. 


1258 


7.  Sodetz,  F.J.:  Delta-9-THC:  Behavioral  toxicity  in  laboratory 
animals.  In  Lewis,  M.F.  Current  Research  in  Marihuana.  Academic  Press, 
New  York,  25-48,  1972. 


1259 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1.  AOINCV  ACCEUMM* 

nA  nFU.iQi 

73  07  01 

Ripopr  com  not  trmmi 

DD  DR*E(AN)bJ6 

1.  0  A  TC  MIV  tUM*RV 

4  KIND  OF  IUMMANV 

A  .  New 

1  ftUMMAftV  »CTV* 

u 

0  NORN  IICURIT V* 

u 

1  NC4NAMN0* 

NA 

it  ottr*  initn* n 

NL 

at  ipicific  data  a  civil  of  bum 

contnacton  acc t »• 

Sr,,  □  ijQ  a-  *©« 

10  NO  COOK t  * 

PROGRAM  ELEMENT 

PROJECT  NUMBER 

WORK  UNIT  NUMBER 

62110A 

3A062110A833 

00 

103 

*  .ONT  MINUTING 

rXOOOQMMJQKK 

CMC  HMD 

I  Tilt*  I  wit h  $*ruHtr  C*N*j* 

(U)  Drug  Abuse  Prevention  in  Military  Personnel 

I  ECUnTIFiC  AND  Tf CMNOLOOICAL  A*(A|* 

013400  Psychology  003500  Clinical  Medicine  012900  Physiology  012600  Pharmacology 


1  1  ETAKT  DAT! 


72  07 


11  CON1IMCT  OMNI  NA 

A  0*T«/|MICTtVl 
h.  nuuk  n  • 

c.  ir« 

«.  KIND  Or  ANAMD 


U  CITIMATCO  COMPLf  TION  DATE 

CONT 


4  AMOUNT 
I.  CUM.  AMT. 


It  KClFONilNLt  DOO  OROANIIATION 


name*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
)«»»•  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 


MClPONtINLC  INDIVIDUAL 
AMI. 


Buescher,  COLE.  L. 
tel iphon c :  202-576~3551 


;«  qcninal  uie 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 


l»  FUNOINQ  AOINCY 


DA 


*•  KCtOUttCCt  1 1  TIN A  Tt 


r  I1C  AL 

V  l  AN 


II  P  t  N  r  6  AM  ANCt  miThoo 

C .  In-House 


A  FAOFCIIIONAL  MAN  VRI  b.  FUNOt  (In  Ah* u.anla) 


wirmnwi - 

73 

00 

0 

cunre:  V 

74 

100 

3000 

10  PtftFONMIMO  OROANIlATIOT 


nami*  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Neuropsychiatry 
AOON.U*  Washington,  D.  C.  20012 

PRINCIPAL  IN  VC  1  T  10  A  TON  fFuflMaA  MAN  If  1/  S  Affmtt  /mUNIIM) 

nam«*  Holloway,  COL  H.  C. 

TKLKNMONC  202-576-5210^^^^^^ 
ftOCIAL  IKCUNITV  ACCOUNT 
A IIOCI A  T  (  INVtlTIOATOm 

nami:  Marlowe,  D.  H.,  Ph.D. 
n ami  Sodetz,  CPT  r.  J.  DA 


nr  itRrS  (??*<•*•  jiTVrffi  i*MAifr  truUmIR* 

gJj  Dru^A^bu^e  Prevention;  (U)  Addiction;  (U)  Epidemiology;  (U)  Military  Psychiatry; 


.  r  arapky- 

Jt  TIC.NICAL  QttfAffvt.  U  ANNUO  ACM.  11  PROOftl  U  i*RW4U*l  *•*•#*•»*•  JManlJN*#  Ar  m*Mr  fftt,*  mi  tl  m<*  >IA  ifcmiir  Clwilltdlw  C*Nj 

23.  (U)  This  unit  examines  social,  environmental,  psychological,  and  organizational 
factors  that  influence  the  spread  of  drug  abuse,  its  prevention  and  treatment. 

24.  (U)  The  methods  of  clinical  psychiatry,  social  psychology,  experimental  analysis 
of  behavior,  anthropology,  epidemiology,  physiology,  and  toxicology  are  used  to 
identify  and  modify  factors  which  contribute  to  drug  abuse  in  the  military. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  Soldiers  addicted  in  RVN  possess  characteristics  which  place  them  in 
the  most  prognostically  favorable  group  of  addicts,  Comparisons  of  heroin  users  entering 
treatment  before  and  after  the  introduction  of  urine  screening  reveal  a  shorter  addiction 
history  and  less  deviant  characteristics  in  the  soldiers  referred  as  a  result  of  chemical 
detection.  Survey  of  soldier  population  in  Vietnam  and  in  the  CONUS  reveals  that  drug 
users  have  similar  demographic  characteristics,  but  different  drug  use  patterns.  They 
may  be  characterized  as  a  poly-drug  using  population  who  use  heroin  and  other  addicting 
drugs  on  opportunistically  socially  determined  occasions.  The  factors  influencing  the 
acquisition  and  behavioral  treatment  of  addiction  is  under  study,  using  experimental  primate 
systems;  analysis  of  choice  behavior  in  the  presence  of  available  heroin  is  being  studied  in 
an  environment  characterized  by  qualitatively  different  reinforcers.  The  detailed  study  of 
the  epidemiology  of  drug  abuse  at  a  CONUS  army  post  continues  concentrating  on  explication 
of  the  mechanisms  of  transmission  and  methods  ot  effectively  preventing  and  treating  drug 
abuse.  The  analysis  of  characteristics  of  a  large  population  of  treated  Vietnam  heroin 
users  continues.  For  technical  report,  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual 
Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72-30  Jun  73. 


DD  F0"“ 

M  mama, 


1496 


(Pll  Redacted] 


PREVlOUt  EDITION*  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORM*  1  40B  A  1  NOV  •• 
AND  I  4BI-  I  1  MAR  Bt  IFOR  ARM*  K  08,0LlTE 


Project  3A062110A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 


Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  103  Drug  abuse  prevention  in  military  personnel 

Investigators . 

Principal:  COL  Harry  C.  Holloway,  M.D. 

Associate:  David  H.  Marlowe,  Ph.D.;  MAJ  William  H.  Hollinshead, 
MC;  MAJ  Daniel  L.  Funkenstein,  MC;  CPT  Larry  H. 
Ingraham,  MSC;  MAJ  Donald  R.  Bardill,  MSC; 

MAJ  Rodney  V.  Burbach,  MC;  LTC  James  L.  Collins,  MC; 
James  L.  Meyerhoff,  M.D.;  MAJ  Robert  H.  Lenox,  MC; 
CPT  Frank  J.  Sodetz,  MSC;  Timothy  F.  Elsmore,  Ph.D.; 
CPT  Frederick  J.  Manning,  MSC;  CPT  Steven  R.  Hursh, 
MSC;  Mary  Carol  P.  Boren,  Ph.D.;  Donald  G.  Conrad, 
M.A.;  Gordon  V.  Fletcher,  B.S.;  N.H.  Spector,  Ph.D.; 
CPT  George  F.  Koob,  MSC;  LTC  Norman  Ream,  MC 

Description . 

The  purpose  of  this  work  unit  is  to  determine  those  individual,  environ¬ 
mental,  social  and  biologic  factors  which  can  be  modified  to  decrease  the 
l.kelihood  of  the  initiation  of  drug  use,  disrupt  its  maintenance,  and/or 
treat  its  consequences.  Jn  order  to  accomplish  this  task,  information 
has  been  collected  concerning  the  social/psychological  makeup  of  drug 
abusers  in  Vietnam;  a  study  of  the  epidemiology  of  drug  abuse  in  a 
CONUS  military  population  has  been  initiated;  laboratory  studies  which 
examine  the  environmental  contingencies  related  to  maintenance  of  drug 
abuse  have  been  evaluated;  and  the  associated  neurochemical  and  phys¬ 
iological  changes  which  are  associated  with  the  reinforcing  properties 
of  drugs  have  been  studied.  In  order  to  obtain  a  full  appreciation  of  the 
nature  of  this  effort,  it  is  recommended  that  the  reader  consult  progress 
reported  under  Work  Unit  102.  (See  also  077,  030  and  122) . 

I.  STUDIES  IN  U.S.  ARMY  VIETNAM  (USARV) :  THE  SOCIO-PSYCHO- 
LOGICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HEROIN  USE  IN  USARV . 

Studies  related  to  heroin  use  by  soldiers  in  USARV  were  initiated  in 
September  1971.  The  collection  of  data  and  biological  specimens  perti¬ 
nent  to  these  studies  was  terminated  in  September  1972.  In  January  1973, 
a  study  of  the  epidemiology  of  drug  abuse  among  soldiers  was  initiated 
at  a  large  CONUS  post.  Evaluation  and  analyses  of  these  data  and  speci¬ 
mens  are  being  carried  out  at  the  WRAIR . 

1261 


A.  Demographic  characteristics,  including  personal,  family,  education, 
military  and  illicit  drug  use  histories  were  collected  on  4,000  heroin-using 
soldiers  by  means  of  questionnaire.  The  same  instrument  was  administered 
to  3,800  soldiers  who  denied  experience  with  heroin  in  the  spring  of  1972  at 
DEROS .  Seven  hundred  additional  soldiers  who  admitted  to  experience  with 
heroin  in  RVN  were  also 'studied  at  DEROS  using  the  same  instrument.  This 
information  is  currently  being  prepared  for  frequency  analysis  and  for 
cross-tabulated  comparisons . 

B.  Demographic  and  historical  personal  data  were  obtained  in  a 
USARV  Drug  Rehabilitation  Center  by  means  of  detailed  interviews  con¬ 
ducted  by  a  physician  with  50  heroin-using  soldiers. 

C.  A  study  to  evaluate  demographic  characteristics  of  USARV  soldiers, 
both  heroin  users  and  non-heroin  users,  and  to  further  assess  their  past 
and  present  patterns  of  illicit  drug  use,  attitudes  toward  illicit  drug  use 
ai.d  knowledge  of  iLict  drugs,  was  conducted  in  July  1972  by  use  of  a  self- 
report  instrumen'  designed  by  COMPSY  -  WRGH.  This  study  was  carried 
out  on  1100  UbARV  soldiers  by  LTC  Morgan,  Dr.  Frenkel  and  MAJ  Greden 
of  COMPSY  -  WRGH  and  LTC  Ream,  WRAIR .  Initial  evaluation  of  data  is 
completed  and  is  currently  being  considered  for  publication . 

II.  EPIDEMIOLOGY  OF  DRUG  USE. 

A.  A  study  of  the  epidemiology  of  drug  use  and  abuse  at  a  large 
CONUS  post  was  initiated  during  the  course  of  the  past  year .  Phase  I  of 
this  study  involved  a  mass  urine  screening  procedure,  which  was  com¬ 
pleted  in  March  1973.  Over  a  one-month  period,  approximately  3208 
individual  urine  specimens  were  collected  from  personnel  at  a  CONUS 
post.  In  addition  to  the  urine  specimens,  drug  use  questionnaires  were 
collected  from  these  persons  at  the  time  of  the  urine  screen .  The  urine 
specimens  have  since  been  analyzed  by  FRAT  and  TLC  for  drug  metab¬ 
olites  by  the  Division  of  Biochemistry,  WRAIR .  Data  from  the  urine 
screen  and  from  the  drug  use  questionnaire  have  been  used  to  provide 
an  operative  model  of  the  patterns  of  drug  use  and  abuse  at  the  post. 

Further  analysis  is  presently  in  progress. 

B .  The  second  phase  of  the  project--the  collection  of  mass  sociometric 
information  (an  aid  in  determining  the  possible  relationships  of  friend- 


1262 


ship  pattern.1;  to  drug  use  and  abuse)  was  completed  during  the  months 
of  March  and  April  1973.  A  sociometric  questionnaire  was  mailed  to  all 
enlisted  personnel  at  the  post.  This  questionnaire  resulted  in  a  return 
rate  of  approximately  35%,  better  than  the  expected  limits  of  such  rates 
for  mail  sociometric  questionnaires.  The  patterns  of  relationships  ex¬ 
hibited  by  the  respondents  are  presently  undergoing  analysis. 

C.  The  third  phase  of  the  project  was  also  completed  in  fiscal  year 
1973.  Pursuant  to  the  project  protocol,  an  attempt  was  made  to  inter¬ 
view  both  individuals  who  had  come  up  as  unconfirmed  positives  for 
drug  use  in  the  urine  screen,  as  well  as  a  sample  of  urine  screen  nega¬ 
tives  who  represented  a  stratified  cross  section  of  the  post . 

1 .  All  in  all,  some  460  interviews  designed  to  elicit  information 
on  standard  demography,  social  indicators  and  patterns  of  drug  use, 
were  administered  by  the  team.  These  data  are  presently  undergoing 
their  initial  analysis . 

2 .  A  number  of  preliminary  conclusions  may  be  drawn  from  the 
initial  phases  of  this  research.  The  data  indicate  that  drug  use  and 
abuse,  rather  than  being  a  diffuse  problem  equally  affecting  the  post 
as  a  whole,  are  differentially  distributed  through  the  various  units, 
companies  and  detachments  stationed  at  the  post.  Our  convergent  in¬ 
formation-gathering  techniques  show  that  companies  are  either  high, 
i.e.,  above  10%  in  apparent  regular  drug  use,  or  low,  i.e.,  below  5%. 

Such  use  appears  to  be  organized  on  a  company-by-company  basis. 

Drugs  are  distributed  by  low-level  user-dealers  within  each  military 
unit  and  appear  to  be  used  with  one's  fellows  from  the  same  company 
or  barracks . 

3.  The  data  further  indicate  that  the  present  "drug  scene"  in¬ 
volves  20%  to  25%  of  enlisted  peronnel  grade  E-5  and  under.  This  popula¬ 
tion  appears  to  use  a  number  of  different  drugs  on  an  irregular  but  re¬ 
current  basis .  Heroin  is  the  drug  of  choice  for  a  small  majority  (no  more 
than  2%  of  lower  ranking  enlisted  men  population) .  The  basic  drugs  of 
choice  are  marijuana  and  hashish  taken  with  alcohol.  In  addition  to  these 
agents,  most  other  agents,  i.e.,  hallucinogens,  soporifics,  amphetamines, 
heroin  and  cocaine,  are  used  opportunistically  when  available  and  when 
they  can  be  afforded.  A  further  dichotomy  may  be  noted  in  that  drug  use 
is  primarily  limited  to  younger  troops  living  in  or  assigned  to  barracks . 
Married  enlisted  personnel  living  in  quarters  or  off-post,  are  a  low-risk 
group  insofar  as  use  of  drugs  other  than  alcohol  is  concerned. 


1263 


a.  While  areas  of  the  initial  data  collected  have  been  subjected  to 
preliminary  analysis,  it  is  too  early  to  report  findings  for  publication. 
However,  it  is  clear  that  polydrug  use  exists  at  levels  high  enough  to 
remain  an  area  of  major  concern  to  the  Army.  The  mechanism  by  which 
this  polydrug  use  is  acquired  and  spread  is  being  studied  by  use  of 
direct  observation  in  the  field  as  well  as  by  the  use  of  multiple  survey 
methodologies . 

b .  Studies  of  the  drug  treatment  facility  and  the  alcohol  treatment 
facility  at  a  CONUS  post  are  in  progress.  In  addition  to  the  observational 
procedures,  patient  and  staff  personnel  are  interviewed.  The  study  will 
provide  an  in-depth  description  of  the  facilities  and  information  relating 

to  the  performance  of  men  receiving  treatment  and  the  consequences  of 
their  treatment. 

III.  ANALYSIS  OF  THE  CONTINGENCIES  UNDERLYING  PREVENTION, 
ESTABLISHMENT,  MAINTENANCE  AND  ELIMINATION  OF  SELF¬ 
ADMINISTRATION  OF  DRUGS  IN  LABORATORY  PRIMATES . 

During  the  reporting  period,  a  laboratory  was  established  for  the 
behavioral  analysis  of  the  problem  of  drug  abuse .  Research  in  that 
laboratory  is  directed  at  identifying  those  variables  which  contribute 
to  the  establishment  and  maintenance  of  drug  self -administration,  and  to 
using  that  information  to  begin  a  systematic  analysis  directed  at  the 
problem  of  prevention  and  elimination  of  drug  self-administration  be¬ 
havior.  During  the  reporting  period,  10  baboons  were  obtained  and 
trained  to  perform  in  the  laboratory  setting  and  5  of  these  have  been 
prepared  to  self-infuse  heroin.  Instrumentation  permits  continuous 
sampling  of  blood  for  radioimmunological  assay  of  blood  morphine  levels . 
The  five  animals  that  have  heroin  available  in  one  of  three  different  dose 
levels  are  now  working  to  self-administer  the  drug.  In  every  case,  ini¬ 
tiation  of  drug  self-administration  resulted  in  a  precipitous  drop  in  both 
food  and  water  intake.  No  animal  has  yet  shown  recovery  to  pre-drug 
levels  of  food  and  water  intake .  All  three  doses  of  heroin  used  were 
effective  in  establishing  drug  self-administration  behavior.  However, 
self-administration  behavior  was  more  readily  established  in  the  two 
animals  receiving  the  highest  dose  (0.25  mg/kg  per  infusion) .  In  one 
animal,  infusion  rates  totaling  500  mg  in  a  24-hour  period  were  observed 
within  five  days  of  initial  exposure  to  the  drug.  A  second  animal  is 
reliably  administering  between  250  and  400  mg/kg/day,  fewer  than  20 
days  following  initial  exposure  to  the  drug . 


1264 


F 


IV.  EFFECTS  OF  PERFORMANCE  DEMANDS  ON  HEROIN  SELF¬ 
ADMINISTRATION  . 

Two  monkeys  are  performing  in  a  procedure  for  which  lever  presses 
produce  intravenous  infusions  of  .05  ml/kg  of  heroin.  To  date,  one  ani¬ 
mal  has  beer  un  tnrough  'in  ascending  sequence  of  ratios  from  1  to  240. 
The  highest  itio  did  not  entirely  eliminate  heroin  intake,  although  it  was 
reduced  to  about  20%  of  the  fixed  ratio  one  level.  The  two  current  objec¬ 
tives  of  this  study  are:  (1)  to  ascertain  the  degree  to  which  heroin  self¬ 
administration  can  be  modulated  by  manipulating  the  number  of  responses 
required  to  produce  an  infusion;  and  (2)  to  compare  heroin-reinforced 
and  morphine-reinforced  behavior  in  an  effort  to  establish  a  full  link  to 
the  body  of  literature  available  on  morphine  reinforcement. 

V.  ESTABLISHMENT  OF  ORAL  HEROIN  SELF-ADMINISTRATION. 

The  bulk  of  the  data  and  literature  related  to  morphine  has  been 
developed  in  studies  of  the  laboratory  rat.  To  date,  no  method  has 
existed  for  producing  reliable  self-administration  of  either  morphine 
or  heroin  in  these  animals.  During  the  reporting  period,  a  method  was 
developed  for  inducing  ingestion  of  large  amounts  of  heroin  by  rats . 

The  need  for  tedious  injection  regimens,  elaborate  instrumentation  for 
venous  cannulation,  or  surgical  trauma  for  the  rat  have  all  been  allevi¬ 
ated  by  this  method.  Large  numbers  of  animals  can  be  cared  for  easily 
and  the  rats  regulate  their  own  daily  intake  of  heroin.  The  final  ver¬ 
sion  of  the  method  involves  a  recycling  three-day  sequence,  two  days 
of  which  the  only  fluid  available  to  the  animal  is  a  0.10%  solution  of  so¬ 
dium  saccharine,  containing  0.17  gm  heroin  per  milliliter  followed  by  a 
choice  day,  during  which  two  bottles  are  simultaneously  available,  one 
containing  saccharine  solution  and  one  containing  saccharine  solution 
with  heroin  added.  Initial  reaction  to  saccharine  solution  is  usually  a 
two-  to  three-fold  increase  in  daily  fluid  intake .  Intake  typically  falls 
to  near  zero  when  heroin  is  added,  and  rats  have  overwhelmingly  pre¬ 
ferred  the  plain  saccharine  solution  to  the  drug  solution.  Within  a  week, 
there  is  some  recovery  of  fluid  intake  on  single  bottle  days;  however, 
several  weeks  are  required  before  substantial  amounts  of  heroin  are 
taken  on  choice  days.  Neither  of  these  procedures  were  speeded  by 
prior  or  concurrent  intraperitoneal  injections  of  heroin.  Eight  percent 
of  rats  tested  thus  far  have  ultimately  come  to  take  a  majority  of  their 
choice-day  fluid  in  the  form  of  heroin  solution .  The  portion  of  total 
fluid  intake  taken  as  a  heroin  solution  also  served  as  a  highly  reliable 
prediction  of  weight  loss  on  subsequent  withdrawal  from  the  drug.  The 
amount  of  heroin  solution  consumed  showed  only  a  modest  correlation 


1265 


with  wfeight  loss.  In  another  experiment,  a  30-day  period  of  enforced 
abstinence  eliminated  drug  preferences  in  addicted  animals.  Preferences 
were  successfully  reestablished,  but  no  faster  than  they  were  established 
the  first  time  or  in  controls  treated  identically  to  this  point  except  for  the 
use  of  plain  saccharine  solution  on  single  bottle  day . 

VI .  HEROIN  AND  CONDITIONED  AVERSION  . 

An  argument  frequently  proposed  to  account  for  the  difficulty  in 
managing  the  abuse  of  heroin  has  involved  the  claim  that  heroin  has  in¬ 
herent  reinforcing  properties.  The  conditioned  aversion  technique 
offers  a  means  of  evaluating  the  aversiveness  of  an  exposure  to  an  a- 
gent,  such  as  any  abuse  compound.  Recent  studies  in  this  laboratory 
have  demonstrated  that  THC,  metha  nphetamine,  pentabarbital  and 
ethanol,  all  are  capable  of  inducing  a  conditioned  aversion  which  sug¬ 
gests  that  these  compounds  do  not  have  inherently  reinforcing  properties . 
However,  heroin,  even  at  doses  32  mg/kg,  administered  intraperiton- 
eally  to  laboratory  rats,  failed  to  produce  a  significant  aversion  even 
though  studies  in  other  laboratories  have  demonstrated  an  aversion  to 
morphine .  A  second  study  is  in  progress ,  attempting  to  evaluate 
whether  route  of  administration  would  be  the  critical  variable  in  deter¬ 
mining  the  failure  to  obtain  a  conditioned  aversion .  It  is  important  to 
evaluate  this  methodological  consideration  before  drawing  any  conclu¬ 
sions  regarding  differences  in  the  reinforcing  properties  of  abuse  com¬ 
pounds  . 

VII.  DRUGS  OF  ABUSE  ON  BRAIN  CHEMISTY  AND  ON  BEHAVIOR. 

A .  Studies  are  in  progress  on  the  mechanism  of  action  of  various 
drugs  of  abuse  on  brain  chemistry  and  on  behavior .  These  include  the 
acute  and  chronic  effects  of  opiates,  stimulants,  alcohol,  and  barbiturates 
on  neurotransmitter  chemicals  in  brain  and  cerebrospinal  fluid.  Second¬ 
arily,  the  pharmacological  modification  of  pathological  behavior  is  being 
evaluated.  Research  methods  employed  include  neurochemistry,  neuro¬ 
anatomy,  pharmacology,  neuroendocrinology  and  physiological  psychia¬ 
try.  Specific  approaches  include: 

1 .  Effects  of  drugs  of  abuse  on  intracranial  self-stimulation. 

2.  Effects  of  drugs  of  abuse  on  neurotransmitter  changes  in 
brain  regions. 

3.  Cerebrospinal  fluid  neurotransmitters  and  metabolites  as 
monitors  of  CNS  effects  of  acute  and  chronic  administration  of  drugs  of 
abuse. 


1266 


4.  Protein  synthesis  pattern  in  brain  as  Indicator  of  development 
of  tolerance . 

5.  The  differential  behavioral  effects  of  optical  isomers  of  drugs 
of  abuse. 

B .  An  experiment  has  been  completed  demonstrating  that  daily 
injections  of  heroin  produce  a  300%  increase  in  intracranial  self-stimu¬ 
lation  (ICSS)  by  the  fifth  injection .  The  latency  of  onset  of  effect  de¬ 
creases  with  successive  injections.  Pre-treatment  with  naloxone,  a 
specific  opiate  antagonist  attenuates  the  heroin-induced  facilitation  by 
75%.  Daily  saline  injections  produced  no  change  in  ICSS .  Ir.  this  experi¬ 
ment  food  and  water  intake  remained  unchanged  during  the  course  of 
heroin  administration.  This  work  has  been  done  in  collaboration  with 
CPT  George  Koob  and  Dr.  N.  Herbert  Spector,  Chief,  Department  of 
Neurophysiology. 

C.  A  number  of  projects  have  been  initiated  to  test  the  effects  of 
drugs  of  abuse  on  neurotransmitters  and  cyclic  nucleotides  in  specific 
brain  regions .  A  method  has  been  established  which  permits  assay  of 
gamma-aminobutyric  acid  (GABA) ,  glutamic  acid  (GLU) ,  cyclic  adeno¬ 
sine  3  5  monophosphate  (cAMP) ,  and  cyclic  guanosine  3'5'  monophos¬ 
phate  (cGMP)  in  the  same  sample  of  brain  tissue  after  microwave  inacti¬ 
vation  of  enzymes,  thereby  increasing  the  amount  of  information  obtain¬ 
able  from  a  single  experiment.  Two  experiments  demonstrated  that 
cGMP  is  markedly  decreased  in  brainstem  following  acute  heroin  admin¬ 
istration  .  GABA  and  GLU  remain  unchanged .  This  is  significant  in  that 
cGMP  is  thought  to  be  involved  in  cholinergic  transmission  (Ferrendelli, 
1972)  and  there  are  indications  that  opiates  impede  release  of  acetyl¬ 
choline  (Beleslin,  1965). 

1.  GABA  and  GLU  are  considered  to  be,  respectively,  inhibitory 
and  excitatory  transmitters  (Krnjevic,  1966)  .  The  tentative  implication 
(Schumann,  1962)  of  GABA  deficiency  in  convulsions  suggests  that  it 
will  be  an  important  variable  to  monitor  in  studies  involving  administra¬ 
tion  of  ethanol  or  barbiturates.  Under  various  conditions,  brain  tissue 
cAMP  is  stimulated  by  norepinephrine,  dopamine,  serotonin  and  hista¬ 
mine  (Huang,  1972;  Brown,  1972).  Within  the  next  two  years ,  empha¬ 
sis  in  the  field  will  shift  to  cAMP/cGMP  ratios,  and  the  capacity  to  study 
both  will  become  essential. 


1267 


2.  A  new  assay  for  catecholamines  (CA)  has  been  set  up  which 
has  one  hundred  times  the  sensitivity  of  other  methods  (Coyle,  1973) . 
This  enzymatic-radioisotope  method  permits  reliable  assay  of  CA  assay  as 
little  as  1  x  10" 9  gram  of  brain  tissue,  and  makes  it  possible  to  study 
changes  in  CA  levels  and  turnover  in  discrete  brain  regions .  Previous 
studies  of  effect  of  drugs  of  abuse  on  transmitter  turnover  have  not 
been  able  to  focus  on  discrete  brain  regions.  In  addition,  the  extreme 
sensitivity  of  this  assay  may  permit  measurement  of  NE  and  DA  in  csf 
where  existing  techniques  have  failed . 

D.  Cerebrospinal  fluid  neurotransmitters  and  their  metabolites  as 
monitors  of  effects  on  brain  of  acute  and  chronic  administration  of  drugs 
of  abuse . 

1 .  Logistic  and  technical  problems  have  been  solved  and  we  are 
now  sampling  cerebrospinal  fluid  (csf)  continuously,  collecting  hourly 
samples  over  successive  24-hour  periods .  Studies  are  in  progress  to 
determine  baseline  parameters  and  possible  circadian  or  ultradian  varia¬ 
tions  prior  to  initiating  drug  studies .  We  are  monitoring  csf  levels  of 
several  neurotransmitter  metabolites: 

a.  Homovanillic  acid  (HVA) -major  metabolite  of  dopamine 
(Ashcroft,  1968) . 

b.  Five-hydroxyindole  acetic  acid  (5  HIAA)  -major  metabolite 
of  serotonin,  (Ashcroft) . 

r.  Three-methoxy ,  four-hydroxyphenylethylglycol  (MHPG)- 
major  metabolite  of  norepinephrine  in  brain  (Schanberg,  1968;  Gordon, 
1971) . 


2.  The  csf  monitoring  model  has  the  advantage  that  each  subject 
can  te  followed  through  a  course  of  acute  and  chronic  drug  administra¬ 
tion  and  acute  abstinence .  cAMP  and  cGMP  levels  in  csf  will  also  be 
monitored . 

3 .  Recently  completed  studies  include  determination  of  storage 
parameters  of  5  HIAA  and  HVA  under  various  experimental  collecting 
conditions,  and  establishing  a  csf  pool  to  control  for  interassay  reliability. 
We  have  determined  that  at  25°C,  csf  values  do  not  change  over  a  24-hour 
period  and  at  4°C  they  are  unchanged  after  one  week .  Asocorbic  acid  is 
not  required  for  storage  up  to  four  months  at  -70°C.  Standards  in  water 
can  be  stored  no  longer  than  one  week.  Recent  experiments  have  demon¬ 
strated  that  ascorbic  acid  interferes  with  the  assay .  This  is  significant  in 


1268 


that  some  published  methods  routinely  collect  csf  with  ascorbic  acid  add¬ 
ed  before  storage  (Gordon,  1971) .  Csf  levels  of  cAMP  and  cGMP  have 
been  shown  to  De  stable  up  to  24  hours  at  25°C. 

E .  Protein  synthesis  pattern  in  brain  as  indicator  of  development  of 
tolerance  to  drugs  of  abuse. 

Recently  completed  work  studies  the  pattern  of  incorporation  of 
amino  acids  into  polypeptides  by  brain  polysomes .  Since  development 
of  tolerance  to  opiates  is  blocked  by  cyclohexamide  (Loh,  1970) ,  an  inhib¬ 
itor  of  protein  synthesis,  it  is  hypothesized  that  the  phenomenon  of  toler¬ 
ance  may  be  mediated  by  a  process  requiring  protein  synthesis .  Current 
experiments  are  examining  the  effect  of  opiates  on  incorporation  ratios  oi 
leucine  and  phenylalanine  into  polypeptide . 

F .  Differential  effects  on  behavior  of  optical  isomers  of  amphetamine . 

In  collaboration  with  Dr.  Solomon  Snyder  of  Johns  Hopkins  University, 
a  study  was  completed  on  effects  of  amphetamine  isomers  on  Gilles  de  la 
Tourette's  disease,  a  tic  disorder  that  often  involves  compulsive  uttering 
of  obscenities  and  on  the  hyperactivity  associated  with  minimal  brain 
dysfunction.  d-Amphetamine  markedly  increased  the  frequency  of  tics 
while  1-Amphetamine  did  not  alter  the  tics.  By  contrast,  both  isomers 
decreased  the  patient's  hyperactivity  to  a  similar  extent. 


1269 


Project  3A062110A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  103  Drug  abuse  prevention  in  military  personnel 
Literature  Cited. 


References . 

1.  Ashcroft,  G.W.:  Brit.  J.  Pharmacol.  Chemother.  33:441-456, 
1968. 

2.  Beleslin,  D.:  Depression  by  morphine  and  chloralose  of  acetyl 
choline  release  from  cat's  brain .  J.  Physiol.  177: 412-419,  1965. 

3.  Brown,  J.H.:  Stimulation  by  dopamine  of  adenylate  cyclase  in 
retinal  homogenates  and  of  adenosine  3' 5'  cyclic  monophosphate  formation 
in  intact  retina.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  69 (3) :  539-543,  March  1972. 

4.  Coyle,  T.T.:  Neurochem.  (In  press) 

5.  Ferrendelli,  D.A.;  et  al:  The  effect  of  oxotremorine  and  atropine 
on  cGMP  and  cAMP  levels  in  mouse  cerebral  cortex  and  cerebellum .  Bio¬ 
chemical  and  Biophysical  Rsch  Communications  41  (4) :  1061-1067,  1970. 

6.  Gordon,  E.K.:  Clin.  Chim.  Acta.  35: 145-150,  1971. 

7.  Huang,  M.J.:  Accoumulation  of  cyclic  adenosine  monophosphate 
in  incubated  slices  of  brain  tissue.  Medicinal  Chem.  1_5:  458,  1972. 

8.  Krnjevic,  K.:  An  inhibitory  process  in  the  cerebral  cortex. 

J.  Physiol.  (London),  184:  16-48,  1966. 

9.  Loh,  H.M.;  Shen,  F.M.;  Way,  E.L.:  Biochem.  Pharmacol. 
18:2711,  1970. 

10.  Schanberg,  S.M.:  Biochem.  Phar.  17:247-254,  1968. 

11.  Schumann,  E.L.:  The  synthesis  and  gamma  amnobutyric  acid 
transaminase  inhibition  of  aminoxy  acids  and  related  compounds .  J .  Med . 
Pharm.  Chem.  5:464-477,  1962. 


lz:i 


Publications: 


1.  Ingraham,  L.H. :  The  social  dimensions  of  drug  use.  Proceedings 
of  the  First  Annual  Ohio  Studies  Institute,  Bureau  of  Drug  Abuse,  Colum¬ 
bus,  Ohio,  1972. 

2.  Ingraham,  L.H.:  The  Vietnam  heroin  epidemic:  a  descriptive 
profile  of  the  army  returnee.  Third  Annual  Proc.  of  Psychology  in  the 
Air  Force  199-203,  1972. 

3.  Lenox,  R.L.  and  Frazier,  T.W.:  Methadone  induced  mortality 
as  a  function  of  ihe  circadian  cycle.  Nature  239(5372) :  397-398,  October 
13,  1972. 

4.  Meyerhoff,  J.L.  and  Snyder,  S.H.:  Gilles  de  la  Tourette's 
disease  and  minimal  brain  dysfunction:  amphetamine  isomers  reveal 
catecholamine  correlates  in  an  affected  patient.  Psychopharmacologia 
79:211-220,  1973. 

5.  Meyerhoff,  J.J  .  and  Snyder,  S.H.:  Catecholamines  in  Gilles 
de  la  Tourette's  disease:  a  clinical  study  with  amphetamine  isomers. 
Advances  in  Neurol.  1:  123-134,  Raven  Press,  New  York,  1973. 


1271 


RESEARCH  ANP  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  .MIX.  .CCIUW^ 

DA  0B  6494 

73  07  01 

JtfRO«r  control  inrsN 
DDDR*B(AR  )*J« 

k  OATK  PREV  EUM*RV 

KIND  OF  EUMMARY 

A.  New 

*  EUMMARY  »CTV* 

u 

A  WORM  lECURtTV* 

u 

T  RISRAMN0* 

NA 

•A  OfSrR  INfTR'N 

NL 

fk  SPECIFIC  DATA-  s  LEVEL  OF  SUM 

contractor  access 

(Dm  D  ho  4  *ow  U**IT 

»«  NO  CODES:* 

PROGRAM  CLEMENT 

RROJCCT 

number 

TASK  ARIA  NUMCCR 

WORN  UNIT  NUMMR 

4.  PRIMARY 

6371 3A 

3A067"'  10a83j 

00 

mr 

fc.  CONTRIBU1  'NO 

CD0G  114(f) 

(U)  Drug  Tests  Systems 

II.  tCIENTIFIC  AMO  TECHNOLOGICAL  AREAS* 

002600  Biology 

TTirT 


t7S7  BAfk 

72  07 


i»  contract  grant 

A  OATEf/f  FFSCTtVI  NA 

h.  NUMHM  * 

C.  TYPE. 

•.  KINO  Of  AWAMD: 


1  4  4lTiM AY*~0  COMPLETION  0  A  T I 

CONT 


d  AMOUNT : 
t.  C  UM.  AMT. 


If 


LA  OOD  ORGANIZATION 


L 


If  RESOURCES  Cl  TIMA  TE 

A  RRO  FKIIIONAL  MAN  YRI 

k  funds  (t*  4$) 

FISCAL 

YEAR 

imnnn 

73 

3 

105 

CURRENT 

74 

3 

105 

N  AMC  :*  Waller  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
,  Washington,  D.C.  20012 

IREtl:*  °  1 


RESPONSIBLE  INDIVIDUAL 

Buescher,  E.  L.,  COL 

TELEPHONE; 


202/576-3551 


II  GENERAL  USE 

Foreign  Intelligence  Notr  Considered 

It  KEYWORDS  MACH  ■'in*  Jaruflly  CTmJTJ  TSflSH  C» 


IS  FUN04N0  AOKNCT 

DA  I 


IS  PERFORMANCE  miVhod 

In-House 


10.  PC  A  FORMING  OROANllAT  ion 


NAME  *  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicinal  Chemistry 
aodress:*  Washington,  D.C.  20012 


'ITIGATOR  rfuNUA*  S|  AM  ti  U%. 

Kinnamon,  iC.  E.,  LTC 
202  Z576-2292 


RRINCIPAL  INVESTIGATOR  fP-HU* A  If 
NAME* 

TELEPHONE  _ 

SOCIAL  SECURITY  ACCOUNT  NUMBER 
ASSOCIATE  INVESTIGATORS 

mti  Atherton,  B.  T.,  1 LT 

,Mf;  Wolf,  C.  R.,  2LT 


DA 


Vu )  Antagonists;  (U)  Drug  Abuse;  (U)  Drug  Addiction; 

^  Barbiturates;  (U)  Amphetamines;  (U)  Drug  Dependence 


IS  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE.*  IS  APPROACH*  IS  PROGRESS  (Pumtah  lr*4i  rl+Mtl  ilwliW*!  Af  numbs*  «•*!•/  »sch  with  Security  Clm*HU<mll&n  ) 

23.  (U)  To  develop  test  systems  and  test  compounds  which  act  as  antagonists  to 
drugs  for  which  a  tolerance  has  been  developed. 

24.  (U)  The  use  of  methadone  and  cyclazocine  to  maintain  or  antagonize  the 
pharmacodynamic  effects  of  opioid  addiction  point  to  the  potential  application  of 
pharmacological  antagonists  of  drugs  of  abuse  in  the  treatment  of  addiction. 

25.  (U)  72  07  -  73  06  The  problem  of  drug  addiction  is  a  great  problem  in  the 
U.S.  Army.  Although  no  clinical  applicable  antagonists  have  been  developed  foi  use 
in  treating  barbiturate  or  amphetamine  dependence,  demonstrations  of  antagonisms 
have  been  successful.  An  extensive  literature  search  has  been  conducted.  The 
methods  of  approach  to  the  problem  will  involve  the  use  of  selective  screening  oi 
existing  compounds  in  animal  test  models.  These  models  will  be  a  variation  of  the 
systems  used  to  demonstrate  tolerance  and  dependence  potentials  of  new  drugs. 
Development  and  standardization  of  these  test  systems  are  considered  as  an  integral 
part  of  the  total  scope  of  this  project.  For  technical  report  see  Walter  Reed 
Army  Institute  of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  l  Jul  72  -  30  Jun  73. 


to  conffclQTA  upon  origin* tor* •  RRpfgWff 


[Pll  Redacted] 


DD,:rj498 


PREVIOUS  EDITIONS  OF  THIS  FORM  ARE  OBSOLETE.  OO  FORMS  HBBA  1  NOV  6S 
AND  I  488  I  t  MAR  68  (FOR  ARMY  USEl  ARE  OBSOLETE 


1272 


Project  3A062110A833  Biomedical  Factors  In  Drug  Abuse 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 
Work  Unit  104  Drug  Test  Systems 
Investigators: 

Principal:  LTC  Kenneth  E.  Kinnamon,  VC 

Associate:  1LT  Hair  T.  Atherton,  MSC 

The  use  of  methadone  and  cyclazocine  to  maintain  or  antagonize  the 
effects  of  opioid  addiction  point  to  the  potential  application  of  pharmaco¬ 
logical  antagonists  of  drugs  of  abuse  in  the  treatment  of  drug  addiction. 
Though  no  clinically  applicable  antagonists  have  been  developed  for  use  in 
treating  barbiturates  or  amphetamine  dependence,  laboratory  demonstrations 
of  such  antagonisms  have  been  successful.  The  foregoing  provides  the 
practical  justification  for  attempting  to  develop  new  drugs  for  potential 
clinical  use  to  antagonize  dependence  on  drugs  of  abuse. 

An  extensive  literature  search  has  been  conducted.  The  methods  of 
approach  to  the  problem  will  involve  the  use  of  selective  screening  of 
existing  compounds  in  animal  test  models.  These  models  will  be  a 
variation  of  the  systems  used  to  demonstrate  tolerance  and  dependence 
potentials  of  new  drugs.  Development  and  standardization  of  these  test 
systems  are  contemplated  as  an  integral  part  of  the  total  scope  of  this 
project. 


1273 


/i 


1 


RESEARCH  AND  TECHNOLOGY  WORK  UNIT  SUMMARY 

1  »•««»  KCIIIW1 

DA  OB  6498 

1  DATE  OP  IU  SMART* 

73  07  01 

REPORT  COR  mot  tPMSOL 

DO  DR*E(AH)iJ* 

1  OATS  N  RE  v  tuM>  AT 

4  RIND  OP  SUMMARY 

A.  New 

»  tUMMART  ICTT* 

u 

A  NORM  It  CL'  M  T  T* 

u 

>  RIOR  A  MNO* 

NA 

14  DMrN  INITR’N 

NL 

•  k  INtCIPlC  data  • 

contractor  acccii 

EQm  □  ho 

A.  *0*1  UNIT 

10  MO  CODI *  • 

RROORAM  KLI MINT 

NROjfCT NUMBER 

A.  NR  IM*  NT 

62110A 

3A062110A833 

00 

105 

fc  CONT  RIRuTINO 

f  XK*X*XX£ 

CD0G  114(f) 

II  TITLI  IRM.R  »HA  J.rv/I tf  C CN<|' 

(U)  Cellular  Aspects  of  the  Metabolism  of  Drugs  of  Abuse 

**  ICtCMTiriC  AND  TICMNOLO01CAL  ancai* 


Pharmacology ;  OfflflO JMslffom,  016^00  Jojtigology 

DA 


TrrnitT 

72  10 


T  IMA  T  t 

CONT 


*  'wr|  kiYmOO 

C.  In-House 


It  RMOURCI*  tlTMATI 

4  NROPttSIONAL  MAN  VMS 

k  FUNDS  ff"  Mmw.anR.1 

fiscal 

V*  AR 

!  1 

1 

hRTcTDTnI 

73 

2 

125 

PURI4UT — - - 

74 

1 

2.9 

94 

n  CONTNACt  OMAN T 

A  OATII/t  PFtCTlVt 

h.  NUMKR  * 

t  Tr« 

A  KINO  or  ARARO 


NA 


d  AMOUNT 
f.  CUM  AMT. 


I 


If  AttNONURLC  0OO  ONOANI  1ATION 


M  NtRPORtHNG  OROANHATION 


1'  giniral  u»C 


Foreign  Intelligence  Not  Considered 

ii  Kcvooftot  IaTJTSTI  ESrffr  yiSSJTIRJiJRrcSX) 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 

ADONCII  * 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 


MlKONtiavE  individual 

"*«.  Buescher,  COL  E.L. 
ftllAHONI.  202-576-3551 


Walter  Reed  Army  Institute  of  Research 
Division  of  Medicine 

AOORtM  * 

Washington,  D.C.  20012 

NRINCINAL  INVtlTIOATON  MAN  If  V  I  4»<Mi Is 

"*“•*  Clinos,  A.D. ,  MD 
202-576-5284 

•OCIAL  ItCuNiTr  ACCOUNT  NUM|(  N  ItL*1  j| 

AIIOCIATf  IN  Vt  I  TIO  A  TORI 

Bartos,  E.M.,  Ph.D. 

t* ami :  Vail,  J.M.,  Ph.D. DA 


(U)  Acetylcholinesterase  Regulation;  (U)  Cell  Culture; 
(U)  Cellular  Pharmacology;  (U)  Morphine  Tolerance;  (U)  Phenotypic  Reprogramming. 


1  TECHNICAL  OBJECTIVE,*  *4  ANNUO  ACM,  It  NROONCIt  fNvT"#«A  l«M  >IA*l  p  .  JNml  1/1.4  N  aiaUf  |ftdN  ml  >1  MlA  »IR  ft**  tty  CIm./RcaUmi  C*N*  ; 

23.  (U)  To  investigate  the  alterations  of  cellular  metabolism  underlying  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  tolerance  to  and  dependence  on  drugs  of  abuse. 

24.  (U)  A  cell  culture  system  with  well  defined  density  dependent  physiological  re¬ 
sponses  is  used  in  reproducing  and  analyzing  selected  actions  of  narcotic  drugs. 

25.  (U)  72  10  -  73  06  Continuous  exposure  of  WRL-1QA  mouse  fibroblasts  to  rrxrphinc 
sulfate  elicited  a  dose  dependent  response  involving  generation  time  (T),  cytopath- 
ology  and  viability.  Thus,  with  .25mM  morphine  the  only  effect  was  a  transient  in¬ 
crease  of  T  from  24  to  28  hrs;  with  .50mM,  T  rose  to  46  hrs  while  the  cells  exhibited 
progressive  granularity,  vacuolation,  irregular  surface  and  variable  size  and  shape 
with  cell  death  occurring  at  47  days;  with  l.OraM,  T  was  extended  almost  indefinitely, 
there  was  pronounced  early  cytopathology  and  cell  death  occurred  at  14  days.  When 
cells  cultured  in  the  presence  of  .25mM  morphine  for  4  months  were  shifted  up  to 
.50mM  oni.>  the  transient  increase  of  T  to  28  hrs  was  noted  and  a  further  shift  up  to 
l.OmM  morphine  6  months  later  showed  the  cells  viable  at  40  days  with  T-41  hrs  and 
only  slight  granularity  and  vacuolation.  These  results  indicate  development  of  toler¬ 
ance  to  morphine  and  suggest  the  possibility  that  WRL-10A  fibroblasts  contain  recep¬ 
tors  normally  present  only  in  neuronal  and  related  cells.  It  was  found  that  acetyl¬ 
cholinesterase  (AChE)  is  present  in  small  amounts  in  low  density  exponentially  growing 
cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells  and  increases  100X  in  high  density  populations  where  DNA 
synthesis  and  cell  division  are  inhibited.  Regulation  of  AChE  in  this  fashion  has 
hitherto  been  described  only  in  nerve  and  muscle  cells;  its  presence  in  cells  of 
fibroblastic  origin  indicates  phenotypic  reprogramming.  This  finding  is  currently 
exploited  in  investigating  the  possible  role  of  the  cholinergic  system  in  the  develop¬ 
ment  of  tolerance  to  morphine.  For  technical  reports  see  Walter  Reed  Army  Institute 
of  Research  Annual  Progress  Report,  1  Jul  72  -  30  Jun  73. 

to  CANlfAcIf  a  MRU  ARNrv*4)  .  _  _ _  _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ 


DD,:*VJ498 


PMVtOUt  EDITION*  ON  THIS  FOAM  ARE  OBSOLETE  DO  FORM*  1«MA.  I  NJV  •• 
And  I  4**  I  t  MAR  *•  (FOR  ARM  V  USE)  ARC  OBSOLETE 

1274 


[Pll  Redacted] 


Project  3a062110A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task.  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  105  Cellular  aspects  of  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 
Investigators . 

Princip.il:  Andre  D.  Glinos,  M.D. 

Associate:  Edwin  M.  Bartos,  Ph.D.;  Robert  J.  Werrlein,  M.S.; 

Richard  C.  Robbinson,  B.A.;  James  M.  Vail,  Ph.D. 


Description 

Attempts  to  reproduce  the  phenomena  of  drug  tolerance  and  dependence 
in  cultured  cells  thus  paving  the  way  for  the  eventual  uncovering 
of  the  metabolic  processes  involved  in  drug  abuse  are  not  new.  Be¬ 
ginning  with  the  prewar  heroic  period  of  tissue  culture1  and  up  to 
the  present  time2  a  sizeable  number  of  reports  on  the  subject  has 
accumulated  with  an  approximately  equal  distribution  of  positive  and 
negative  results.  Thus,  it  is  characteristic  that  in  the  course  of 
the  last  year  one  group  of  investigators  reported  that  levorphanol 
prevented  the  induction  of  acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  in  cultures 
of  mouse  neuroblastoma  cells  without  development  of  either  tolerance 
or  dependence2,  a  second  group  claimed  that  morphine  sulfate  induced 
a  multifold  increase  of  AChE  with  development  of  limited  tolerance 
and  total  dependence  in  cultures  of  human  neuroblastoma3,  while  a 
third  found  that  morphine  s  ilfate  increased  AChE  activity  by  only  50% 
and  induced  tolerance  but  no  dependence  in  cultured  chick  embryo 
brain  cells4.  The  multitude  of  cell  types,  culture  methods,  treat¬ 
ment  schedules  and  observational  criteria  used  as  well  as  the  rather 
large  variance  inherent  in  long-term  linear  tissue  culture  experiments 
are  undoubtely  responsible  fcj  these  inconsistencies.  It  follows  that 
to  answer  unequivocally  the  question  as  to  whether  it  is  possible  to 
reproduce  the  phenomena  of  drug  tolerance  and  dependence  in  vitro 
there  is  an  urgent  need  to  use  a  well  characterized  cell  culture 
system  in  conjunction  with  a  rigorously  standardized  methology.  At 
this  point,  the  system  does  not  need  to  be  neuronal  as  opiate  toler¬ 
ance  and  dependence  have  been  reported  in  other  cell  types''  with  no 
greater  inconsistency6  than  described  above  for  neuronal  cells. 
Accordingly,  we  undertook  a  feasibility  study  of  tolerance  to  morphine 
in  cell  culture  using  L-929  mouse  fibroblasts. 

Progress  and  Results 

The  origin  and  karyology  of  L-929,  clone  WRL-10A  cells  and  their 
utilization  in  developing  a  suspension  culture  system  with  well 


1275 


defined  density  dependent  metabolic  regulation  have  been  described 
previously7i8>*»^.  To  determine  the  sensitivity  of  the  system  to 
morphine,  50  ml  suspension  cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells  were  maintained 
at  population  densities  below  10^  cells/ral  through  daily  centrifuga¬ 
tion  and  resuspension  of  the  appropriate  number  of  cells  in  fresh 
media.  The  growth  of  these  cultures  was  estimated  on  the  basis  of 
cell  counts  performed  at  the  beginning  and  the  end  of  the  daily 
media  renewal  cycle  and  expressed  either  as  the  factorial  increase  or 
the  generation  time  oi  the  cell  population. 

In  a  first  series  of  experiments,  morphine  sulfate  was  added  to  the 
media  of  the  cultures  during  their  daily  renewal  at  a  final  concentra¬ 
tion  ranging  from  10"^  to  10"%.  It  was  found  that  the  drug  affected 
the  growth  rate,  morphology  and  viability  of  the  cells,  in  that  order, 
to  a  degree  which  depended  on  its  concentration.  Thus,  at  10~% 
there  was  no  measurable  effect  of  the  drug  on  any  of  the  three  para¬ 
meters  mentioned,  at  .25  X  10"%  there  was  only  a  20-30%  depression 
of  the  daily  factorial  increase  of  the  population,  while  at  .50  X 
10“%  the  daily  factorial  increase  was  depressed  by  approximately  50% 
and  the  cells  showed  slight  cytoplasmic  granularity,  formation  of 
small  vacuoles,  cell  membranes  with  somewhat  frayed  appearance  and 
variable  cell  size  and  shape.  These  morphological  changes  are  typi¬ 
cal  manifestations  of  cytotoxicity  and  were  classified  as  cytopath- 
ology  Grade  I.  At  10“%  the  daily  factorial  increase  of  the  popula¬ 
tion  was  depressed  by  approximately  90%  and  the  morphological  changes 
being  considerably  more  pronounced  were  classified  as  cy topathology 
Grade  III. 

During  the  first  3  days  of  exposure  to  morphine,  the  viability  of  the 
cells,  as  evaluated  by  the  uptake  of  nigrosin,  remained  normal  and 
all  the  effects  described  above  were  readily  reversible  upon  with¬ 
drawal  of  the  drug.  Prolongation  of  exposure  beyond  this  time,  how¬ 
ever,  resulted  in  marked  differences  among  the  cultures.  Thus,  while 
there  was  no  effect  on  cell  morphology  and  viability  at  the  0.25mM 
level,  cultures  exposed  to  .50  and  l.OmM  morphine  showed  progres¬ 
sively  increasing  cy  topathology  eventually  reaching  Grade  IV,  charac¬ 
terized  by  extreme  granularity  and  vacuolation  of  the  cytoplasm, 
ectopic  nuclei,  ruptured  cell  membranes,  cell  clumping  and  ghost  cell 
formation.  This  progression  was  accompanied  by  decreased  viability 
indicated  by  increase  of  the  fraction  of  cells  staining  with  nigrosin 
and  decrease  of  the  cell  counts  ending  with  the  death  of  the  entire 
population.  The  rate  of  this  progression  was  proportional  to  the 
concentration  of  the  drug  in  the  media,  the  mean  survival  time  being 
47  and  14  days  for  the  .50  and  l.OmM  morphine  levels,  respectively. 


1276 


It  may  be  seen  that  if  the  daily  factorial  increase  of  the  cell  popu¬ 
lation  is  plotted  as  a  function  of  the  concentration  of  morphine  as 
in  Fig.  lf  a  typical  log  dose-response  curve  is  obtained. 


Figure  1  -  Effect  of  morphine 
on  the  growth  of  low  density 
suspension  cultures  of  WRL-10A 
cells.  The  factorial  incre¬ 
ase  of  the  cell  populations 
was  determined  daily  as  de¬ 
scribed  in  the  text  and  aver¬ 
aged  over  the  time  intervals 
indicated  in  parentheses  .  In 
the  case  of  the  .50  and  l.OmM 
concentrations  these  intervals 
represent  also  total  survival 
time  of  the  cultures . 


When  the  curve  is  extrapolated  below  the  .25mM  concentration,  it  in¬ 
tersects  the  factorial  increase  ordinate  at  a  point  between  2.0  and 
2.5  which  corresponds  to  a  generation  time  cf  18  -  24  hours  and  is 
characteristic  of  low  density  WRL-10A  cultures  growing  exponentially 
in  the  absence  of  morphine.  This  typical  quantitative  relationship 
between  drug  cone  mtration  and  growth  indicates  that  the  cell  cul¬ 
ture  system  used  is  well  suited  for  studying  effects  of  opiates  at 
the  cellular  level  and  that  changes  in  the  sensitivity  of  the  cells 
to  these  drugs  may  be  readily  detected  by  using  the  daily  factorial 
increase  of  the  population  as  an  indicator. 

Based  on  these  findings  a  long-term  linear  r,cudy  of  low  density  sus¬ 
pension  cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells  exposed  to  progressively  increasing 
concentrations  of  morphine  sulfate  was  undertaken.  To  protect 


1277 


against  accidental  losses  cell  cultures  were  set  up  in  duplicate,  incu¬ 
bated  separately  and  treated  by  different  individuals.  To  initiate  the 
study,  cells  exposed  to  .  25raM  morphine  for  104  days  were  subcultured  at 
a  concentration  of  .50raM  morphine  and  factorial  increase,  cell  mor¬ 
phology  and  cell  viability  determined  daily  and  compared  with  similar 
data  obtained  from  cultures  continuing  at  the  .25mM  level.  After 
exposure  to  the  .50mM  level  for  183  days  the  cells  were  subcultured 
again  in  media  containing  l.OmM  morphine.  To  determine  the  growth  re¬ 
sponse  of  the  cells  after  a  drug  concentration  shift  up,  the  daily  fac¬ 
torial  increase  of  the  population  was  averaged  for  a  period  of  one 
month  beginning  immediately  after  the  shift  up  and  again  at  a  desired 
later  time  interval.  The  cytopathology  considered  to  be  associated 
with  the  factorial  increase  means  thus  obtained  was  the  highest  grade 
observed  within  the  corresponding  time  intervals.  The  results  ob¬ 
tained  as  of  the  writing  of  this  report  are  shown  in  Table  1. 

Table  1  -  Development  of  tolerance  to  the  toxic  effects  of  morphine 
in  low  density  suspension  cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells. 


Dose 

Exposure 

Daily 

Cytopathology 

(mM  Morphine 

Sulfate)  (days) 

Fact.  Increase 

Grade 

120 

1.76 

. 

.25 

330 

2.03 

- 

60 

1.74 

+ 

(+104  at  .25raM) 

.50 

230 

1.98 

. 

(+104  at  .25mM) 

40 

1.5 

-H- 

(+183  at  . 50mM 
+104  at  . 25mM) 

1.00 

No  data  available 
beyond  40  days . 

Figures  in  parentheses  indicate  times  of  pre-exposure  at  the  indi¬ 
cated  molar  concentrations  of  morphine.  Factorial  increase 
figures  were  obtained  by  averaging  the  daily  determinations  over 
a  period  of  at  least  one  month.  Cytopathology  graded  as  des¬ 
cribed  in  the  text. 

Consideration  of  the  data  in  the  table  in  conjunction  with  the  findings 
obtained  in  the  first  series  of  experiments  and  summarized  in  Fig.  1 

1278 


indicates  tha:  a)  after  prolonged  exposure  ol  the  cells  to  a  given 
drug  concentration  the  growth  rate  of  the  cells  returns  to  control 
levels;  b)  the  depression  o,!.  the  daily  factorial  increase  and  cytopath- 
ology  characteristic  for  a  given  drug  level  are  considerably  attenu¬ 
ated  if  the  cells  have  been  pre-exposed  to  n  lower  concentration  of 
the  drug;  and  c)  at  lethal  concentrations  of  morphine,  survival  time 
is  markedly  increased  if  the  cells  have  been  pre-exposed  to  a  non- 
lethal  drug  level.  These  findings  indicate  that  cultures  of  WRL-10A 
cells  exposed  continuously  to  morphine  sulfate  develop  tolerance  to 
the  toxic  effects  of  the  drug.  As  these  cultures  involved  low  density 
exponentially  growing  populations  there  are  no  indications  as  to 
whether  the  development  of  tolerance  was  due  to  functional  adaptation 
or  to  selective  propagation  of  a  small  drug  resistant  fraction  of  the 
original  cell  population.  This  question  will  be  answered  through  fu¬ 
ture  experimentation  involving  high  density  growth  inhibited  popula¬ 
tions  with  well  defined  metabolic  characteristics8 >9 > 1  0  . 

Regardless  of  the  evolutionary  process  involved,  the  fact  that 
tolerance  to  morphine  did  develop  (Table  1)  and  that  the  dose-response 
relationship  follows  first  order  kinetics  (Fig.  1)  is  most  suggestive 
from  the  viewpoint  of  the  actual  metabolic  interactions  underlying  the 
effects  of  the  drug.  Because  of  these  findings,  it  appeared  of  the 
utmost  importance  to  investigate  whether  WRL-10A  cells,  although  of 
fibroblastic  origin,  contain  metabolic  components  which  normally  would 
be  expected  to  be  related  to  the  morphine  receptor  in  neuronal  cells. 
Acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  appeared  to  be  a  good  candidate  in  this 
respect  for  the  following  reasons:  1)  recent  findings  suggest  that  the 
morphine  receptor  in  vivo  is  very  likely  associated  with  the  choliner¬ 
gic  system1 2)  as  previously  mentioned,  the  evidence  regarding  the 
behavior  of  AChE  in  cultures  of  neuronal  cells  treated  with  morphine  is 
entirely  inconsistent2 • 3  * 4 ;  and  3)  AChE  activity  in  neuronal  cells  is 
growth  regulated,  increasing  approximately  30X  in  dense  cultures  of 
neuroblastoma  where  DNA  replication,  mitosis  and  total  protein  syn¬ 
thesis  are  markedly  inhibited12.  This  last  feature  provides  an  ex¬ 
cellent  test  for  any  possible  similarity  in  regard  to  AChE  between 
WRL-10A  cells  and  neuroblastoma  because  DNA  replication,  mitosis  and 
total  protein  synthesis  in  the  former  are  density  inhibited  precisely 
as  in  the  latter.  Accordingly,  high  density,  growth  inhibited  popula¬ 
tions  of  WRL-10A  cells  were  produced  by  omitting  cell  dilution  at  the 
time  of  daily  medium  renewal.  Cultures  treated  in  this  manner  in¬ 
creased  to  characteristic  population  densities  of  6  -  10  X  10^  cells/ml 
within  10  days,  and  therafter  maintained  a  relatively  stable  high  cell 
population.  At  desired  times  and  depending  on  cell  density, samples 
with  the  desired  number  of  cells  were  obtained  from  the  cultures  and 
centrifuged  at  300  X  g  for  15  min.  The  cell  pellets  were  subsequently 
washed  three  times  in  Earle’s  balanced  saline  and  resuspended  in  1.5  ml 
of  phosphate  buffer  (50  mM  potassium  phosphate  buffer,  ph  6.8;  ImM 
EDTA,  potassium  salt).  The  samples  were  then  either  stored  at  -80°  or 
sonicated  (Sonifier  Cell  Disruptor,  Heat  Systems  Ultrasonics,  Inc.)  for 

1279 


10  sec  an4  assayed.  All  procedures  during  preparation  of  the  samples 
were  carried  out  at  5°;  there  were  no  differences  In  the  activities  of 
samples  sonicated  and  assayed  Immediately  and  of  those  stored  prior  to 
assay. 

Samples  were  assayed  for  AChE  as  described  by  Wilson  et  al.13  using 
14c  acetylcholine  Iodide  (4.54  mCl  per  mmole;  New  England  Nuclear)  as 
substrate  and  Incubating  the  reactions  for  30  minutes  at  37°.  Each 
sample  was  assayed  at  4  concentrations  and  the  values  obtained  were 
considered  valid  only  If  proportional  to  sample  concentration.  The 
specificity  of  the  reaction  was  evaluated  by  the  activity  remaining 
after  adding  BW284C51  dibromide,  a  powerful  inhibitor  of  AChE. 


The  protein  content  of  the  samples  was  determined  through  conventional 
methods.  One  unit  of  AChE  activity  was  defined  as  1.0  nmol  l^C  acetate 
per  mg  protein. 


z 

U 

H 

o 

CE 

Q. 

O 

2 

\ 

Z 

5 


o 

UJ 

2 

a: 

O 

IL. 


UJ 

K 

< 


UJ 

o 

< 

2 


UJ 

.c 

o 

< 


Figure  2  -  Cell  population  kinetics  and  AChE  specific  activity  dur¬ 
ing  the  establishment  of  high  density  WRL-10A  cell  suspension  cul¬ 
tures,  The  data  shown  represent  mean  values  obtained  from  5  dif¬ 
ferent  cultures  grown  for  30  days.  Cell  counts  have  been  plotted 
daily  during  the  exponential  and  near  exponential  growth  phase  and 
as  5-day  averages  for  the  high  density  population.  AChE  specific 
activity  has  been  determined  daily  for  the  first  5  days.  After 
this  time  the  cultures  were  sampled  at  variable  and  mutually  com¬ 
plementary  times,  the  AChE  specific  activity  determined  and  2,  3 
and  5-day  averages  calculated  and  plotted  as  shown. 

1280 


The  specific  activity  of  AChE  in  exponentially  growing  cultures  kept 
at  low  density  through  daily  dilution  and  sampled  for  3  consecutive 
days  ranged  from  0.016  to  0.032  with  a  mean  value  of  .025  units.  When 
the  cells  were  not  diluted  and  the  density  of  the  cultures  started  to 
increase  as  shown  in  Fig.  2,  the  specific  activity  of  the  enzyme  re¬ 
mained  within  this  range  for  the  first  3  days  of  exponential  growth. 
During  the  fourth  and  fifth  days*  however*  when  the  growth  rate  began 
to  decline  the  mean  specific  activity  of  the  enzyme  increased  to  .063 
with  a  range  of  .035  to  .118  units.  As  these  values  are  all  in  the 
vicinity  of  the  lower  limit  of  the  sensitivity  of  the  assay  the  activ¬ 
ity  of  exponentially  and  near  exponentially  growing  cultures  has  been 
indicated  on  the  graph  simply  as  a  stable  baseline  level  of  approxi¬ 
mately  .05  units. 

There  was  a  significant  rise  of  enzyme  activity  on  day  6  and  begin¬ 
ning  with  day  7  a  steep  linear  increase  coincidental  with  the  termina¬ 
tion  of  the  growth  phase  of  the  cultures  and  the  establishment  of  the 
high  density  populations.  This  increase  continued  until  day  23  when 
the  specific  activity  of  AChE  leveled  off  at  a  mean  value  of  6.03  and 
a  range  of  2.38  -  13.18  units.  As  reported  earlier8  the  transition 
from  exponential  growth  to  the  high  density  phase  did  not  alter  the 
amount  of  total  protein  per  cell  which  in  the  current  experiments 
averaged  280  pg. 

The  possibility  was  considered  that  the  source  of  AChE  activity  exhi¬ 
bited  by  WRL-10A  cells  in  these  experiments  was  the  horse  serum  in  the 
media.  It  was  found  that  while  the  enzyme  activities  of  freshly  made 
unused  media  and  of  media  obtained  from  low  density  cultures  was 
nearly  identical,  the  activity  of  media  obtained  from  high  densicy 
populations  was  significantly  higher.  This  indicates  release  of  en¬ 
zyme  from  the  cells  into  the  media  comparable  to  the  release  known  to 
occur  from  muscle  cells. 

The  possibility  that  the  observed  differences  between  low  and  high 
density  populations  were  due  to  changes  in  nonspecific  esterases  was 
also  investigated.  After  use  of  BW284C51  as  described  previously 
the  residual  activity  of  homogenates  from  exponentially  growing  cul¬ 
tures  (Fig,  2,  1-3  days)  was  .04  nmol  l^C  acetate  formed/min/mg  pro¬ 
tein,  or  64  percent  of  the  total  activity  prior  to  the  addition  of  the 
inhibitor,  while  the  residual  activity  of  homogenates  from  high  den¬ 
sity  cultures  (Fig.  2*  21-30  days)  was  .12  nmol  l^C  acetate  formed/min 
/mg  protein,  or  2.4  percent  of  the  total.  On  this  basis,  and  pending 
further  identification  of  the  enzyme*  it  appears  most  likely  that 
differences  in  the  ability  of  homogenates  from  high  and  low  density 
cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells  to  catalyze  acetylcholine  hydrolysis  are  due 
to  differences  in  the  activity  of  AChE  (EC  3. 1.1. 7). 

The  possibility  that  the  differences  of  the  AChE  specific  activity 
were  due  to  dissociable  activators  or  inhibitors  of  the  enzyme  was 

1281 


excluded  since  all  mixing  and  dilution  experiments  using  homogenates 
of  exponentially  growing  and  high  density  cultures  gave  the  predicted 
additive  results. 

Finally,  the  possibility  was  considered  that  the  rise  of  the  AChE 
specific  activity  was  merely  an  expression  of  the  lack  of  net  protein 
synthesis  in  the  high  density  cultures.  During  exponential  and  near 
exponential  growth  the  doubling  time  of  the  cells  was  27  hours  (Fig. 
2),  the  phase  approximately  half  this  time,  and  the  specific  activ¬ 
ity  of  the  enzyme  .05  units.  Assuming  that  AChE  is  normally  synthe¬ 
sized  in  the  G,  phase  and  that  and  that  in  high  density  cultures  the 
entire  population  is  arrested  in  that  phase,  it  may  be  calculated  that 
with  no  change  in  either  the  rate  of  synthesis  or  the  rate  constant  of 
degradation  of  the  enzyme,  its  specific  activity  should  increase  with 
a  maximal  rate  of  .08  units  per  day.  The  actual  rate  indicated  by  the 
slope  of  the  linear  portion  of  the  curve  in  Fig.  2  is  .44  units  per 
day.  This  indicates  that  the  increase  of  the  activity  of  AChE  cannot 
be  ascribed  simply  to  extended  G^  phase  synthesis  and  accumulation  of 
the  enzyme  in  the  absence  of  net  protein  increase.  A  more  likely  pos¬ 
sibility  is  that  the  marked  depression  of  protein  synthesis  in  the 
high  density  cultures10  affects  proteins  which  in  actively  growing, 
low  density  cultures  block  the  expression  of  AChE  activity  at  the 
transcriptional  or  post  transcriptional  level;  the  alternative  pos¬ 
sibility  that  these  proteins  participate  in  the  degradative  phase  of 
AChE  turnover  must  also  be  considered. 

It  is  known  that  AChE  activity  is  inversely  related  to  growth  in  ner¬ 
vous  and  muscle  tissue  during  normal  development  and  in  neuroblas¬ 
toma  cells  during  the  transition  from  the  dividing  to  the  nondividing 
state12.  In  contrast,  fibroblasts,  whether  normal  diploid,  trans¬ 
formed  but  contact  inhibited,  or,  derivatives  of  the  L-929  line,  have 
been  found  so  far  to  exhibit  only  minimal  amounts  of  AChE  even  when 
grown  to  high  cell  densities  in  attached  cultures13.  Consequently, 
this  is  the  first  time  that  cells  of  connective  tissue  origin  have 
been  shown  to  exhibit  regulation  of  AChE.  In  fact,  the  increase  of 
AChE  specific  activity  in  high  density  WRL-10A  cell  suspension  cul¬ 
tures  reported  here  is  even  greater  than  that  reported  for  neuro¬ 
blastoma  cells12. 

Although  originating  in  the  subcutaneous  connective  tissue  of  a  new¬ 
born  mouse,  L-929  cells  and  its  derivative  WRL-10A  clone  used  in  these 
experiments,  represent  a  long-established,  transformed  cell  line.  It 
is,  therefore,  most  likely  that  the  regulation  of  AChE  activity 
demonstrated  in  this  report  is  an  expression  of  partial  reprograming 
of  fibroblasts  toward  the  phenotype  of  muscle  cells.  This  finding 
is  currently  exploited  in  investigating  the  possible  role  of  the 
cholinergic  system  in  the  development  of  tolerance  to  morphine  by 
WRL-10A  cells  described  in  the  first  part  of  this  report. 


1282 


Summary  and  Conclusions 


Continuous  exposure  of  WRL-10A  mouse  fibroblasts  to  morphine  sulfate 
elicited  »  d^se  dependent  response  involving  generation  time  (T) ,  cyto- 
pathology  and  viability.  Thus,  with  .25mM  morphine  the  only  effect  was 
a  transient  increase  of  T  from  24  to  28  hrs;  with  .50mM,  T  rose  to  46 
hrs  while  the  cells  exhibited  progressive  granularity,  vacuolation. 
irregular  surface  and  variable  size  and  shape  with  cell  death  occur¬ 
ring  at  47  days;  with  l.OmM,  T  was  extended  almost  indefinitely,  there 
was  pronounced  early  cytopathology  and  cell  death  occurred  at  14  days . 
When  cells  cultured  in  the  presence  of  ,25mM  morphine  for  4  months, 
were  shifted  up  to  .50mM  only  the  transient  increase  of  T  to  28  hrs 
was  noted  and  a  further  shift  up  to  l.OmM  morphine  6  months  later  shows 
the  cells  viable  at  40  days  with  T*»41  hrs  and  only  slight  granularity 
and  vacuolation.  These  results  Indicate  development  of  tolerance  to 
morphine  and  suggest  the  possibility  that  WRL-10A  fibroblasts  contain 
receptors  normally  present  only  in  neuronal  and  related  cells.  It  was 
found  that  acetylcholinesterase  (AChE)  is  present  in  small  amounts  in 
low  density  exponentially  growing  cultures  of  WRL-10A  cells  and  in¬ 
creases  100X  in  high  density  populations  where  DNA  synthesis  and  cell 
division  are  inhibited.  Regulatii of  AChE  in  this  fashion  has  hither¬ 
to  been  described  only  in  nerve  and  muscle  cells;  its  presence  in 
cells  of  fibroblastic  origin  indicates  phenotypic  reprograming.  This 
finding  is  currently  exploited  in  investigating  the  possible  role  of 
the  cholinergic  system  in  the  development  of  tolerance  to  morphine. 


1283 


Project  3A062110A833  BIOMEDICAL  FACTORS  IN  DRUG  ABUSE 
Task  00  Biomedical  Factors  in  Drug  Abuse 

Work  Unit  105  Cellular  aspects  >f  the  metabolism  of  drugs  of  abuse 
Literature  Cited. 


References : 

1  Sasaki,  M. :  Studies  on  phenomena  of  morphine  abstinence  of 
cultures  in  vitro  of  fibroblasts  and  on  curative  effect  of  morphine 
and  its  derivatives  on  them.  Arch.  Exp.  Zellforsch.  21:  289,  1938. 

2  Hiller,  J  M.  and  Simon,  E.J.:  Effect  of  levorphanol  on  the 
induction  of  actetylcholinesterase  in  a  mouse  neuroblastoma  cell 
line.  Fed.  Froc.  31 :  757,  1973. 

8  Manner,  G.,  Foldes,  F.F. ,  Kuleba,  M.  and  Derry,  A.M.:  Cho¬ 
line  acetyl transferase  and  acetylcholinesterase  levels  in  morphine- 
dependent  human  neuroblastoma  cultures.  Fed.  Proc.  32:  757,  1973. 

**  Peterson,  G.R.  and  Shuster,  L.:  Effects  of  narcotic  anal¬ 
gesics  on  enzymes  of  acetylcholine  metabolism  in  cultured  chick  brain 
cells.  Fed.  Proc.  32^:  757,  1973. 

5  Corssen,  G.  and  Skora,  I. A.:  "Addiction"  reactions  in  cul¬ 
tured  human  cells.  J.  Amer.  Med.  Assoc.  187:  328,  1964. 

6  Ruffin,  N.E.,  Reed,  B.L.  and  Finnin,  B.C.:  Effects  of 
morphine  withdrawal  on  cells  in  continuous  culture.  Life  Sciences. 
8(11):  671,  1969. 

7  Glinos,  A.D.  and  Hargrove,  D.D.:  Interrelations  among  chromo¬ 
some  number  type,  and  size  in  L  strain  cells?  Their  significance  for 
the  process  of  transformation.  Exptl.  Cell  Res.  39_:  249,  1965. 

8  Glinos,  A.D. ,  Werrlein,  R.J.  and  Papadopoulos ,  N.M.:  Constitu¬ 
tion,  viability  and  lactate  dehydrogenase  activity  in  stationary  phase 
L  cell  suspension  cultures.  Science  150 :  350,  1965. 

y  Glinos,  A.D.  and  Werrlein,  R.J. :  Density  dependent  regula¬ 
tion  of  growth  in  suspension  cultures  of  L-929  cells.  J.  Cell.  Phys. 
79:  79,  1972. 

Glinos,  A.D.,  Vail,  J.M.  and  Taylor,  B.:  Density  dependent 
regulation  of  growth  in  L  cell  suspension  cultures  II:  Synthesis  of 
total  protein  and  collagen  in  the  presence  of  rapidly  declining  oxy¬ 
gen  tensions.  Exptl.  Cell.  Res.  _7£:  319,  1973. 

1284 


11 Pert,  C.B.  and  Snyder,  S.H.:  Opiate  receptor;  Demonstration 
in  Nervous  Tissue.  Science  179;  1011,  1973. 


12Blume,  A.,  Gilbert,  F.,  Wilson,  S.,  Farber,  J.  ,  Rosenberg,  R. 
and  Nirenberg,  M. :  Regulation  of  acetylcholinesterase  in  neuroblastoma 
cells.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.  USA  67;  786,  1970. 

13Wilson,  S.H.,  Schrier,  B.K.,  Farber,  J.L.,  Thompson,  E.J., 
Rosenberg,  R.N.,  Blume,  A.J.  and  Nirenberg,  M.W.:  Markers  for  gene 
expression  in  cultured  cells  from  the  nervous  system.  J.  Biol.  Chem. 
247:  3159,  1972. 

Publications : 


1.  Bartos,  E.M.  and  Glinos,  A.D.:  Regulation  of  acetylcholines¬ 
terase  in  suspension  cultures  of  L-929  fibroblasts.  Fed.  Proc.  32: 
505,  1973. 


