Project 3A762758A824 RADIATION INJURY AND PROTECTION 

Task 01 Radiation Injury and Protection 

Work Unit 057 Biological effects and hazards of microwave radiation 
Investigators . 

Principal: Joseph C. Sharp, Ph.D. 

Associate: H. Mark Grove, M.Sc.; Sandra H. Githens, B.S.; 

T. Daryl Hawkins, M. A. ; MAJ Stuart E. Hirsch, MC; 

John H. Jacobi, M.Sc.; John F. Schrot, M.A.; 

Peter Brown, B.S. 

Our efforts to systematize the behavioral and biological effects 
of microwave irradiation produced considerable gains in FY 74. Earlier 
observations of frequency-dependent behavioral effects were corrobor- 
ated and expanded. Using indices of lethality and seizure, with 
several types of animal subjects, we have greatly extended the bio- 
logical generality and implications of microwave exposure effects. The 
order of presentation below is roughly chronological. 

Lethal effects of 2.45 GHz as a function of power density level in mice. 

Our earlier work with rats showed that indices of lethality [de- 
termined by video monitoring, such as time elapsed to convulsion and 
time elapsed to final movement] could be varied systematically by 
manipulating power level. This work was extended to mice. Groups of 
eleven mice were exposed to one of five different power levels, 100, 

150, 200, 300 or 400 mW/cm2. Curves relat ng time to convulsion and 
time to final movement showed similar decreasing trends as a function 
of increasing power level, with average times to final movement being 
slightly longer than average times to convulsion. [Since all of our 
work indicates that these two measures show similar trends, statements 
of differential lethality in this report will be based on only the 
time to convulsion index to avoid unnecessary redundancies.] At all 
power levels the mice were consistently more vulnerable than the rats 
examined in FY 73, strongly suggesting that mice are generally more 
sensitive to 2.45 GHz than rats. 

Differential lethal effects of 1.7 GHz and 2.45 GHz. 

Using a power level of 100 mW/cm2, twelve 150 g rats were exposed 
to 1.7 GHz and twelve were exposed to 2.45 GHz. The data showed an 
unequivocal frequency difference. Median time to convulsion at 2.45 
GHz was 1260 sec, while the median time to convulsion at 1.7 GHz was 
801 sec. In addition, there was no overlap in the range of scores 


i 

l 


obtained for each frequency, providing a strong indication that 1.7 
GHz is more lethal than 2.45 GHz in 150 g rats. These data provided 
the first indication that the frequency-dependent performance decre- 
ments observed in prior years with rats were a reflection of a 
general frequency-dependent biological phenomenon, thus mitigating 
our concern that the performance effects observed earlier were due 
to some uncontrolled artifact. 

Lethality as a function of body orientation relative to E and H 
vectors. 


The lethal effects of Ell a and H il a_ (when a represents the major 
or long axis of the body) were compared at 1.7 GHz with a power level 
of 150 mW/cm2 using rats (100-120 g) . For one group of rats, the E 
vector was parallel to a and for another H was parallel to a. A 
small but significant difference indicated greater lethality with 
E || a. 


Microwave absorption data collected by Dr. Om P. Gandhi during a 
three-month visit to our laboratory suggested the possibility that 
larger lethality differences due to E-field orientation might be 
obtained with rats at frequencies lower than 1.7 GHz. In fact, his 
data provide the first known opportunity to scale from animals to 
mein the resonant frequencies for maximum absorption (^ 40 to ^ 55 
MHz) . There appeared to be larger orientation differences in power 
which Gandhi had made with mice at lower frequencies. Lethality data 
obcained with rats at 0.985 GHz confirmed this prediction. As in 
the 1.7 GHz study, rats (100-120 g) convulsed sooner with E !l a than 
H || a; the difference in time to convulsion, produced by changing the 
E-field at 0.985 GHz, was quite large. Average time to convulsion 
with E || a^ was only 269 sec, or about one-third the average time to 
convulsion with the H || a (865 sec) . 

Lethality in mice (25-30 g) and rats (100-120 g) was compared 
at 1.7 GHz using a power level of 150 mW/cm2. Consistently, the 
mice convulsed earlier than the rats. The median times were 331 sec 
and 498 sec, respectively. These observations in conjunction with 
similar differences found at 2.45 GHz suggested that mice are gener- 
ally more vulnerable than rats to microwave exposure, at least in 
the range of 1.7 to 2.45 GHz. 

Systematic interrelationships of microwave frequency E-field 
orientation and size of experimental subject as codeterminants of 
microwave lethality. 

The cumulative process achieved throughout FY 74 on both the 
biological and engineering levels led us to conclude that there were 
a number of important microwave variables which combine in a complex 


984 


but systematic manner to produce the biological effects observed. 

The primary variables are presently considered to be the microwave 
frequency, the orientation of E-field, and the dimensions of the 
experimental subject. The combined and interacting effects of these 
variables are currently being explored in a major lethality study 
which is nearing completion. Three microwave frequencies have been 
examined: 0.985, 1.7, and 2.45 GHz. Work with 3.0 GHz is in progress. 

Work at 0.70 GHz is projected as the last stage. At each completed 
frequency, three types of animals were used: mice (25-30 g) , small 

rats (100-120 g) , and large rats (380-400 g) . For each type of animal 
there were two groups: one group exposed with H II a and another group 
exposed with E II Each subject was exposed to 150 mW/cm2 and the 
time to convulsion and time to final movement were recorded. Data 
collected from this study have corroborated our earlier lethality 
findings and extended their generality. 

Within the range of frequencies we have explored in the current 
lethality study, coupled with the absorption data collected by 
Gandhi, a number of tentative generalizations can be made: 

(1) General Effect of Microwave Frequency. 

For a particular animal, there is a frequency (or frequency 
range) to which the animal is more sensitive than it is to higher 
or lower frequencies. Given the general bitonic nature of the fre- 
quency sensitivity curve, the frequency at which maximum sensitivity 
obtains for a particular animal is dependent on both the dimensions 
of the animal and the E veo or orientation. Larger animals show 
peak sensitivity at lower frequencies than smaller animals. This 
size/frequency relationship holds generally for both H and E 
parallel to a. However, for a given size animal, the maximally 
effective frequency with the E li a is lower than the maximally effec- 
tive frequency with H II £. 

(2) General Difference Between E vector orientations. 

The magnitude of the differential effect produced by 
exposures with H II a as opposed to exposures with E II £ is a function 
of the microwave frequency employed. At higher frequencies there 
is very little differential effect. At progressively lower fre- 
quencies, the difference increases with E II a being consistently 
more effective than H „ a. 

(?) General Effect of Size. 

As frequencies increase, e.g., up to 2.45 and 3.0 GHz, the 
data suggest that the larger the animal, the less is the vulnerability 
to the adverse effects of the radiation. This may be a simple function 
of the total mass of the subject. At lower frequencies, the effects 
are less regular, but current data are consistent with the statement 
that larger animals (100 and 400 g rats) are more vulnerable than 


985 


very small ones (mice) . This relation is probably due to frequency 
dependent power absorption resulting from the interaction of differ- 
ential penetration and the specific dimensions of the animal, and 
coupling with both E and H vectors of the electromagnetic energy. 

Modulated microwave signals. 

An initial series of studies designed to better understand the 
so-called hearing effect produced by extremely low average power levels 
have been completed. Two observations have led to a temporary cessation 
of this work. These were (al the observation that non-biologic material 
could serve as a transducer of the energy to acoustic signals which can 
be used as a model without exposing biological material and (b) the 
report that signals similar to those used in the auditory study may 
cause changes in the blood brain barrier of experimental animals. This 
latter observation has been investigated during the latter half of the 
reporting period and, to date, not been replicated. However, the 
implications of these observations are of such great importance that 
further work is in progress. 

Determination of dielectric properties of tissue. 

To better understand and confirm earlier work, a series of measure- 
ments on the dielectric properties of various tissues was completed. 

This work took fat, brain, muscle, liver and lung from different 
species, including man, and, utilizing unique equipment in the labora- 
tory, determined the dielectric constants at physiological temperatures. 
The findings resolved some ambiguities in the literature and, more 
importantly, showed that tissues from different species were similar. 

On this variable, human tissues are not significantly different from 
animal tissues which will now allow for detailed determinations in 
model systems. 

Microwave bioeffects current-awareness digest. 

During FY 74, a multiple-agency sponsored project to produce and 
publish a quarterly digest of the literature on biological effects of 
nonionizing radiation was initiated. This effort will be carried out 
by the Franklin Institute Research Laboratories under ARO Grant No. 
DAHCO4-74-G-0132 . Funding has been provided by the Army, Air Force, 

Navy and FDA/BRH . The EPA is also cooperating in the activity. The 
first issue was readied for publication in June 1974. The quarterly 
publication will be distributed, without charge, to scientists and 
other workers in this discipline as a means of bringing together 
citations and abstracts of the diverse literature and is providing 
a method of informal communication. 


986 


Ocular effects of microwaves. 

During FY 74 microwave ocular effects surveys continue in coopera- 
tion with the Army environmental hygiene agency. Populations within 
Army installations whose missions allow for the potential of exposure 
to microwave irradiation were examined. A detailed opthalmic examina- 
tion including visual acuity, fundus examination and detailed slit 
lamp examination were done with particular emphasis on the lens. 
Photography was performed where indicated. Non-exposed personnel 
served as controls. Preliminary results have not shown a higher in- 
cidence of lenticular changes in the group with potential for micro- 
wave exposure. 

The exposure of albino rabbits to microwave irradiation continue. 
Utilizing a focusing dish antenna, rabbits were exposed to varying 
power densities from low level to sub-lethal higher levels for periods 
of 15 minutes daily for 30 consecutive days. Both CW and pulsed duty 
cycles were used. Cataracts were produced only at power levels of 
400 mW or above. The animals have now been followed for one year and 
to date have exhibited no lenticular changes or cataracts at power 
levels below 300 mW/cm?. 


Histology and electromicroscopy of rabbit lenses of exposed 
animals has progressed. A histologic correlated between posterior 
subcapsular irridescence, a slit lamp sign, and its electron micro- 
scopic counterpart has been demonstrated. 


937 


Project 3A762758A824 RADIATION INJURY AND PROTECTION 
Task 01 Radiation Injury and Protection 

Work Unit 057 Biological effects and hazards of microwave radiation 
Literature Cited. 


Reference : 


1. Schrot, J. , and Hawkins, T.D.: Lethal effects of 3000 MHz 

radiation on the rat. Radiation Research. (In press) 

Publications : 


1. Sharp, J.C., Grove, H.M., and Gandhi, O.P.: Generation of 

acoustic signals of pulsed microwaves. IEEE Transactions on Microwave 
Theory and Techniques. May 1974, 583-584. 

2. Gandhi, O.P., Sharp, J.C. , and Grove, H.M.s Strong dependence 
of whole animal absorption on polarization and frequency of RF energy. 
Proc. NYAS . Feb 1974. 

3. Gandhi, O.P.: Polarization and frequency effects on whole 

animal absorption of RF energy. Proc. of IEEE. 62^, Aug 1974. 

4. Lenox, R.H., Gandhi, O.P., Meyerhoff, J.L. , and Brown, P.V. : 
Modifications of in-vivo rapid microwave inactivation of enzymes in 
the central nervous system. Proc. International Microwave Power Inst. 
May 1974. 

5. Larsen, L.E. , Moore, R.A., and Acevedo, J.: A microwave 

decoupled brain-temperature transducer. IEEE Transactions on Micro- 
wave Theory and Techniques. April 1974, 438-444. 

6. Lin, J.C. , Grove, H.M. , and Sharp, J.C. : Comparative measure- 

ment of dielectric properties of fresh mammalian tissues. Proc. CPEM. 
July 1974. 


98K 


m 


mm 


immmm 


RESEARCH AMD TECHNOLOGY WORK UNIT SUMMARY 


1 AOSMCV ACCESSION* 

DA OB 6533 

I ASBAAOINO* 

NA 


I. DAT* Of MHMAIt* 

7l4 06 30 


ftipoirr cmiwu intaoi 

DD-DR*E(AR)636 


L DATE A* «V SUM*AV 

NIS 


A KINO or SUMMAMV 

H. Term. 


I IUMMAAV tcrr 

u 


I *OAK MCUMTY1 

U 


I* Mr* INITA*N 

NL 


•fc SPECIFIC OATA- 
COW TBACTOA ACC cm 

Qtti Duo 


• LEVEL Of CUM 
A. fOMUNT 


<0 MO /COOES:* 


PAOOAAM IlIMnT 


PROJECT NUMMR 

3A762758A824 


TASK AACA NUMBEA 


•OAK UNIT NUMMIt 


62758A 


01 


058 


0. COATKiagriNfi 


c. CONTAIBUTlNO 


TITLE vial |MaM^ ClMliftuiiai C*Ar 

(U) Biological Evalaation of Anti-irradiation Druga 

tr ICItWTInC AND VECHMOLOOICAL AACAf* 

01^100 Radiobiology 003^00 Chemical, Biological and Radiological Warfare 

1 lit. Cft+MIATIO COM# LET ION OATB |1* “ — ' ' ' " *- L- 


tt irurgTfi 
59 05 


It fUMDIMO AOCMCV 

m. 


It PC AFOAMAnCB ME t MOO 

C. In-House 


IT COMTNACT OAAHT 
A OATEI/Cf fCCTI VE 
t MUM BE A * 

C TYPE 

A MIND or AVAAO’ 


IB MSOUACES ESTIMATE 

A PNOPEMION AL MAN VAS 

fc FUN OS ri" SnmmA) 

EXPIRATION 

FISCAL 

73 

1 .65 

136 

A AMOUNT: 

VS AA 

f. CUM. AMT. 

71* 

1 .65 

109 ; 

It NEtfOwtIBLC OOO OABAMIIATlON 


BB. ACAfOAtAMOONSANIIATIOM 


,VWaiter Reed Army Institute of Research 


• ••MU • 


Washington, DC 20012 


MLOMtaiC IMOIVtOUAL 

»*«•. Buescher, COL E. L. 
TELEPHONE: 202-576-3551 


Foreign intelligence not considered 


.•.••Walter Reed Army Institute of Research 
Div of Medicinal Chemistry 
*■*«*“• Washington, DC 20012 

ANINCIAAL IM VCt TIB A TO A A MAM tl V %. 4wAal( 

•“«* Kinnamon, K. E. LTC 

Ttc«..o.< 202-576-2292 

SOCIAL BCCUHITt ACCOUNT MUMBCH 
AMOCIATC IM VCtTIO A TOAI 

MAMC: Lolzeaux, P. S., LTC 

»•»■ DA 


ie kevVoao* Each mii 1 TSSHr TO55TJ ISSH? TJX J 

(U) Activity; (U) Chemical; (U) Compound; (111 Protection; (U) Radiation 


I TECHNICAL OBJBC Tl VE • It Af f AO ACM, 21 ABOOACU fPMmlaA IiyAWAmaI pA« I4mtlttr* *r niwtw «•«» •< w«» wf» irtmlty C«M* J 

23. (U) The objective of this research is to develop a militarily useful pill to 
protect personnel against lethal effects of ionizing radiation. Such a drug would 
reduce the initial effect of nuclear radiation as well as provide a margin of safety 
for personnel operating in a contaminated terrain. An efficient antiradiation com- 
pound would also be useful to the Army from a clinical standpoint. 

24. (U) Approach to the objectives is through accepted drug development protocols. 
Test drugs are evaluated for ability to protect mice against lethal doses of ionizing 
radiation. Promising compounds are further evaluated in larger animals. 

25. (U) 73 07 - 74 06 Testing of 300 drugs synthesized specifically to exploit 

known structure-activity relationships identified 100 drugs which protected 50^ cr 
more of mice exposed to lethal doses of ionizing radiation. Of the 100 active oora- 
pounds, 40 gave protection when administered orally. The identification of classes 
of chemicals producing levels of protection as high as 100” in mice following orai 
administration is considered a major breakthrough. Of even greater significance 
was the first successful demonstration of protection of rhesus monkeys from lethal 
irradiation by an orally administered drug. Work is being terminated due to emphasis 
being shifted to other problems of Military significance. For technical report see 
Walter Reed Army Institute of Research Annual Progress Report, 1 July 73 - 30 June 74 


'amIIsM* to contr*cto*a uwow art|A«lw,i approx I 


dd,:°.:“J498 


PAEVIOUS EDITIONS OF THIS FOAM AAE OBSOLETE DO FOAMS 1 40# A 1 NOV 6 6 
AND I ABE- I 1 MAA 61 IFOA ARMY USE) ARE OBSOLETE 


989 


Project 3A762758A824 RADIATION INJURY AND PROTECTION 
Task 01 Radiation Injury and Protection 

